"""

From "Roberts v. United States Jaycees" ==> """
Roberts v. United States Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609 (1984),. was a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States overturning the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit's application of a Minnesota antidiscrimination law. The case established what was at the time the prevailing framework for analyzing claims of associative freedom, holding that the Minneapolis branch of the United States Jaycees could not bar women from becoming voting members.
 Background 
At the time the case was decided, regular membership in the United States Jaycees was available only to men aged 18 to 35.468 U.S. at 613. Women and older men could only join the group as associate members, who could not vote in the group or hold national offices, among other things. When Jaycee charters in Minnesota began admitting women, the national organization threatened to revoke their charter.468 U.S. at 614. The Minnesota charters responded by filing charges with the Minnesota Department of Human Rights, saying the Minnesota Human Rights Act required the local charters to accept women.468 U.S. at 614-15.
The state agency ruled that the Jaycees qualified as a "place of public accommodation" for the law's purposes, meaning they had to accept women and the national charter could not retaliate against the local charters for doing so.468 U.S. at 615-16 The Minnesota Supreme Court agreed, upholding the agency's decision.468 U.S. at 616. The Jaycees next took their claim to the United States District Court for the District of Minnesota, arguing that the Minnesota Supreme Court's interpretation of the phrase "place of public accommodation" was vague and overbroad. The District Court affirmed the Minnesota Supreme Court's decision.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit reversed the District Court. The Eighth Circuit held that the Jaycees could select their members because the Jaycees advocated public causes, bringing their right to select their membership under the First Amendment's protection.468 U.S. at 616-17.
The Court's Decision
 Justice Brennan's Majority Opinion 
Writing for the Majority, Justice Brennan reversed the Eighth Circuit, concluding that the requirement that the Jaycees accept women as regular members did not unduly tread on male members' freedom of association.468 U.S. at 631. Justice Brennan first explained that there are two protected freedoms of association: Freedom of intimate association, which is a component of the Fourteenth Amendment's guarantee of substantive due process, and freedom of expressive association, covered under the First Amendment.468 U.S. at 617-18.
The Court concluded that the Fourteenth Amendment's guarantee of intimate association does not apply to the Jaycees because they are not a sufficiently intimate group.468 U.S. at 620. The Court held that this guarantee - which protects, among other things, the right to marriage, childbirth, and cohabitation with one's relatives - does not extend to the Jaycees because local chapters of the Jaycees are "large and basically unselective groups."468 U.S. at 620-21.
The Court next held that the First Amendment's protection of expressive association also does not apply to the Jaycees.468 U.S. at 628-29. The First Amendment generally protects the right to associate in an expressive context, because many individual First Amendment rights lose their meaning if they cannot be expressed by a group.468 U.S. at 622. However, Supreme Court precedent allows the State to curtail the freedom of expression when the restriction 1) serves compelling state interests, 2) does not relate to the suppression of ideas, and 3) cannot be achieved through means significantly less restrictive of associational freedoms.468 U.S. at 623.  The statute, the Court held, serves compelling state interests because Minnesota sought to regulate access to the economy, and Minnesota could include in that regulatory effort the leadership services that organizations like the Jaycees provide.468 U.S. at 626. The Court concluded that the Minnesota Human Rights Act does not discriminate on the basis of viewpoint, either facially or as applied, meaning it does not relate to the suppression of ideas.468 U.S. at 623-24. The Court also found that the statute used the least restrictive means, as the Jaycees had failed to show that the Act burdens male members' freedom of association to a meaningful degree. The Jaycees argued, and the 8th Circuit agreed, that letting in women could change the group's political positions, but the Supreme Court rejected this claim, noting the lack of any evidence in the record that women would have different positions on issues than the men in the Jaycees.468 U.S. 626-28. The Majority said that the Jaycees, or future parties, have to make a "substantial" showing that the admission of unwelcome members would change the group's message.468 U.S. at 632.
Finally, the Court ruled that the law was not vague or overbroad because Minnesota's Supreme Court concluded that the Act covers the Jaycees based on specific criteria like the organization’s size, selectivity, commercial nature, and use of public facilities.468 U.S. at 629.
 Justice O'Connor's Partial Concurrence 
Justice O'Connor joined the Majority's opinion for Parts I (cataloguing the facts) and III (holding that the law is not vague or overbroad). Justice O'Connor also agreed that the Jaycees could not claim protection in the Fourteenth Amendment's guarantee of expressive association. Justice O'Connor took issue, however, with the Majority's test for when a group may permissibly exclude outsiders who it alleges will change the group's message. Justice O'Connor highlighted the perverse outcomes this rule has: If the Jaycees had historically opposed women's rights, or other causes seen as supported by women, it could exclude women more easily than a men's club that remained neutral on such topics.468 U.S. at 633.
Justice O'Connor also faulted the Majority for failing to determine whether the Jaycees were engaged in protected First Amendment expression, or commercial activity (which receives less protection).468 U.S. at 633-34. Justice O'Connor would consider association commercial only where the activities are not "predominantly of the type protected by the First Amendment."468 U.S. at 635-36. Applying that framework to the facts, Justice O'Connor concluded that the Jaycees were a commercial association, as they call their members "customers," and refer to memberships as goods that they sell.468 U.S. at 638-39. Justice O'Connor admitted that the Jaycees engaged in some protected activity, but said that was not enough to shield the Jaycees from regulation.468 U.S. at 640.
Justice Rehnquist concurred in the judgment without joining either opinion. Justices Burger and Blackmun took no part in deciding the case.468 U.S. at 611.
 Aftermath 
Tommy Todd, President of the Jaycees, said the group was disappointed with the ruling but would comply, citing the Supreme Court's role in the American constitutional framework. Women's groups, who had challenged similar laws in states including New Jersey, New York and Connecticut, celebrated the authoritative quality of the Court's 7-0 ruling.
 Criticism 
The decision has received criticism from both conservative and liberal legal academics. Conservative scholars, including John Inazu, have faulted the decision for unduly restricting the associational rights of groups who promote unpopular messages, or want to create a group that only admits certain types of people. Liberal scholars like Linda McClain have argued that those who praise the decision overestimate the effect that joining business groups like the Jaycees has on women's equality.
See also
 Freedom of association
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People v. Alabama (1958)
Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Group of Boston (1995)
Boy Scouts of America v. Dale (2000)
 Gender equality
 List of gender equality lawsuits
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 468
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States freedom of association case law
Category:Void for vagueness case law
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
Category:Junior Chamber International
Category:History of women in Minnesota
"""

From "Robertson v. United States" ==> """
Robertson v. United States, 343 U.S. 711 (1952), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that cash contest prizes are taxable, and attributable to the most-recent thirty-six months ending with the close of the year in which it was received..
 Background 
The facts of the case involve American composer Leroy Robertson entering a previously composed symphony, Trilogy, into a 1947 contest for musical compositions.  Robertson won $25,000, claimed the prize on his income taxes as income attributable to the three years he wrote it (1937 through 1939), and thereafter claimed a refund that treated his winnings as a gift.
The case is notable, and thus appears in law school casebooks, for the following holdings:
 A cash prize received by the winner of a contest in musical composition is "gross income" within the meaning of § 22(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, and it is not a "gift" excluded from gross income by § 22(b)(3).Robertson, 343 U.S. at 713-714.
 In computing under § 107(b), the tax on such a cash prize for a musical composition, the income should be attributed to the 36 months ending with the close of the year in which it was received—not some earlier period of 36 months during which the taxpayer worked on the composition.Robertson, 343 U.S. at 714-716.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1952 in United States case law
"""

From "Robinson v. California" ==> """
Robinson v. California, 370 U.S. 660 (1962), is the first landmark decision of the United States Supreme Court in which the Eighth Amendment of the Constitution was interpreted to prohibit criminalization of particular acts or conduct, as contrasted with prohibiting the use of a particular form of punishment for a crime. In Robinson, the Court struck down a California law that criminalized being addicted to narcotics. ("We hold that a state law which imprisons a person thus afflicted as a criminal, even though he has never touched any narcotic drug within the State or been guilty of any irregular behavior there, inflicts a cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment.").
Background
Robinson was stopped by a police officer who observed "tracks" on Robinson's arms from heroin use. The officer claimed Robinson admitted that he had occasionally injected narcotics, though Robinson denied admitting this, and also denied being an addict. The police arrested him under California law making it a misdemeanor to "be addicted to the use of narcotics"; Robinson was convicted in the Municipal Court of Los Angeles, and sentenced to 90 days' imprisonment. Robinson appealed his conviction to the Appellate Department of the Los Angeles County Superior Court, which upheld his conviction. He then appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States.
California Health and Safety Code § 11721 provided: "No person shall use, or be under the influence of, or be addicted to the use of narcotics, excepting when administered by or under the direction of a person licensed by the State to prescribe and administer narcotics."
Previous Eighth Amendment rulings
Until the Robinson opinion, some Eighth Amendment decisions addressed whether the method of punishment was cruel and unusual.See generally Anthony F. Granucci, Nor Cruel and Unusual Punishments Inflicted: The Original Meaning, 57  839 (1969). For example:
 In Wilkerson v. State of Utah, the Supreme Court held that it was not a cruel and unusual punishment for the Territory of Utah to execute a criminal by shooting him, rather than the more common use of hanging. The Court said that cruel and unusual punishments include "punishments of torture" and cases "where the prisoner was drawn or dragged to the place of execution, in treason; or where he was emboweled alive, beheaded, and quartered, in high treason," as well as "public dissection in murder, and burning alive in treason committed by a female." But execution by shooting was not in the category..
 In In re Kemmler, the Supreme Court held execution by electrocution not to be a cruel and unusual punishment. The Court said that "if the punishment prescribed for an offense against the laws of the State were manifestly cruel and unusual as burning at the stake, crucifixion, breaking on the wheel, or the like, it would be the duty of the courts to adjudge such penalties to be within the constitutional prohibition.". But electrocution was not in that category.
 In Trop v. Dulles, the Court held (5-4) that it was cruel and unusual to deprive a native-born citizen of his U.S. citizenship by reason of his conviction by court-martial for wartime desertion. The Court recognized that the death penalty would have been permissible, yet it said, "But it is equally plain that the existence of the death penalty is not a license to the Government to devise any punishment short of death within the limit of its imagination.". The Court held that making Trop stateless was a cruel and unusual punishment because: "The punishment strips the citizen of his status in the national and international political community. His very existence is at the sufferance of the country in which he happens to find himself."Trop, 356 U.S. at 101.
 The last in this line of cases before Robinson was Francis v. Resweber. In Francis, the Court considered whether Louisiana could try a second time to electrocute a convicted murderer, after the first attempt failed because of a defect in the State's electric chair. The Court held, 5-4, that re-electrocuting the defendant Francis was not cruel and unusual..
However, in Weems v. United States, 217 U.S. 349 (1910), in which a punishment of twelve years in irons at hard and painful labor was imposed for the crime of falsifying public records, the Court held that the penalty was cruel in its excessiveness and unusual in its character (i.e., its disproportionality).. The Court quoted obiter dicta by Justice Field in dissent in O'Neil v. Vermont, 144 U.S. 323 (1892): "the inhibition was directed not only against punishments which inflict torture, 'but against all punishments which, by their excessive length or severity, are greatly disproportioned to the offenses charged.'".Weems, 217 U.S. at 371. Justices White and Holmes dissented on the grounds that the Eighth Amendment did not prohibit excessive or disproportionate penalties. Weems may have been the earliest "disproportionality" Eighth Amendment holding.
Supreme Court ruling in Robinson
A fragmented Court reversed the state's judgment. The main opinion, by Justice Potter Stewart (joined by Justices Warren, Black and Brennan) in combination with Douglas's concurring opinion, recognized that drug addiction is a disease, and that it is unconstitutional to impose punishment for having a disease.Robinson, 370 U.S. at 667-676  Justice Stewart wrote that even "one day in prison for the 'crime' of having a common cold," would be cruel and unusual.Robinson, 370 U.S. at 667. Additionally, Justice Stewart's opinion, in combination with Justice Harlan's concurring opinion, held that it is unconstitutional to criminalize behavior in the absence of a guilty act, or actus reus.370 U.S. at 664, 678-679. Justice Stewart's opinion focused on the unconstitutionality of punishing a mere status or condition,370 U.S. at 666-667. Justice Harlan's concurring opinion focused, however, on the unconstitutionality of punishing a "bare desire.".370 U.S. at 678-679.
Justice Clark dissented, first, because "[p]roperly construed, the statute provides a treatment, rather than a punishment." Second, "even if interpreted as penal, the sanction of incarceration for 3 to 12 months is not unreasonable when applied to a person who has voluntarily placed himself in a condition posing a serious threat to the State."370 U.S. at 685.
Justice Byron White dissented. He argued, first, that "on this record, it was within the power of the State of California to confine him by criminal proceedings for the use of narcotics or for regular use amounting to habitual use."370 U.S. at 688. Second, the Court "has effectively removed California's power to deal effectively with the recurring case under the statute where there is ample evidence of use but no evidence of the precise location of use. Beyond this, it has cast serious doubt upon the power of any State to forbid the use of narcotics under threat of criminal punishment."370 U.S. at 689. Finally, he said that the Court was using "cruel and unusual punishment" as a disguise of "substantive due process":
 If this case involved economic regulation, the present Court's allergy to substantive due process would surely save the statute and prevent the Court from imposing its own philosophical predilections upon state legislatures or Congress. I fail to see why the Court deems it more appropriate to write into the Constitution its own abstract notions of how best to handle the narcotics problem, for it obviously cannot match either the States or Congress in expert understanding.
Subsequent developments
Robinson's death
By June 25, 1962, the day the Court handed down this decision, Robinson had been dead for more than ten months. In fact, he was dead before his appeal papers were filed in the Supreme Court. The California Attorney General's office discovered this fact upon remand and notified the Court, since this arguably mooted the case long before its decision. The Court, however, did not vacate the Robinson decision as moot.See Robinson v. California, 371 U.S. 905 (1961) (order denying petition for rehearing and abatement of judgment with dissent). Justices Clark, Harlan, and Stewart dissented, arguing that settled precedent required dismissal for mootness.
Later cases in Supreme Court
Following the Robinson decision, the Court upheld a law criminalizing public drunkenness under Powell v. Texas,. despite the argument advanced by some members of the Court that Robinson held that it was not criminal to give in to the irresistible compulsions of a "disease" (alcoholism)
"Disproportionality" cases based on Robinson
The first case in which the Supreme Court applied the expanded "cruel and unusual" principle of Robinson to cases in which the penalty was considered disproportionate or excessive relative to the crime was Coker v. Georgia. The Court held that, because of the disproportionality, it was a violation of the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause to impose capital punishment for rape of an adult woman..
In Rummel v. Estelle, the Court held that it did not constitute cruel and unusual punishment to impose a life sentence, under a recidivist statute, upon a defendant who had been convicted, successively, of fraudulent use of a credit card to obtain $80 worth of goods or services, passing a forged check in the amount of $28.36, and obtaining $120.75 by false pretenses. The Court said that "one could argue without fear of contradiction by any decision of this Court that for crimes concededly classified and classifiable as felonies, that is, as punishable by significant terms of imprisonment in a state penitentiary, the length of the sentence actually imposed is purely a matter of legislative prerogative.". . Despite its unwillingness to find unconstitutional disproportionality, the Court conceded, ""This is not to say that a proportionality principle would not come into play in the extreme example mentioned by the dissent, . . . if a legislature made overtime parking a felony punishable by life imprisonment."445 U.S. at 274, n. 11.
In Solem v. Helm, a 5-4 majority set a conviction aside under the Eighth Amendment, because it was disproportionate—a sentence of life imprisonment without possibility of parole, imposed under a recidivist statute for successive offenses that included three convictions of third-degree burglary, one of obtaining money by false pretenses, one of grand larceny, one of third-offense driving while intoxicated, and one of writing a "no account" check with intent to defraud.. The Court later characterized this decision as "scarcely the expression of clear and well accepted constitutional law.".
In Harmelin v. Michigan, the Court examined the historical basis for the Eighth Amendment, found it based on the "cruel and unusual Punishments" provision of the English Declaration of Rights of 1689, and suggested that it is "most unlikely that the English Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause was meant to forbid 'disproportionate' punishments."Harmelin, 501 U.S. at 975. The judgment of the Court was that life imprisonment without parole for the crime of possession of more than 650 grams of cocaine did not violate the Eighth Amendment.
Later cases in lower courts
In State v. Margo,40 N.J. 188, 191 A.2d 43 (1963). the Supreme Court of New Jersey first distinguished Robinson by stating, "In Robinson it was held that a statute of California which made it a criminal offense to 'be addicted to the use of narcotics' inflicted cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments. But Margo "was convicted of being under the influence of a narcotic drug, heroin." Margo's conviction was not for addiction, as was Robinson's. The court then declared:
We see no reason why, if a person may constitutionally be punished for using a drug, he may not be punished for being under its `influence,' for realistically the use of a drug offends society's interests precisely because of its baleful influence upon the person and the harm to which that influence may lead. In other words, being under the influence of a drug is itself antisocial behavior. It is not some latent or passive proclivity; it is an active state, voluntarily induced and laden with a present capacity for further injury to society. We think society may use the criminal process to protect itself against that harm. Robinson is not to the contrary.40 N.J. at 190, 191 A.2d at 45.
The court therefore unanimously affirmed the conviction.
In Salas v. State,365 S.W.2d 174 (Tex. Crim. App. 1963) the defendant was convicted of being "unlawfully under the influence of a narcotic drug."365 S.W.2d at 175. The court affirmed the conviction because it considered the Robinson holding limited to addiction. Salas appealed to the Supreme Court, but the appeal was dismissed "for want of substantial Federal question."Appeal dismissed sub nom. Salas v. Texas, 375 U.S. 15 (1963),
In State v. Brown,103 Ariz. 289, 440 P.2d 909 (1968) (en banc). the Arizona Supreme Court (en banc) refused to hold the state without power to criminalize drug use. It said Robinson applied only to criminalizing addiction, not use or being under the influence. Here, "Brown was convicted of being 'under the influence of" a narcotic drug.'"
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 370
References
External links
Category:1962 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause case law
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:Incorporation case law
Category:1962 in California
Category:Legal history of California
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Crime in Los Angeles
"""

From "Robinson v. Florida" ==> """
Robinson v. Florida, 378 U.S. 153 (1964), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States reversed the convictions of several white and African American persons who were refused service at a restaurant based upon a prior Court decision, holding that a Florida regulation requiring a restaurant that employed or served persons of both races to have separate lavatory rooms resulted in the state becoming entangled in racial discriminatory activity in violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.. 
Background
Eighteen white and African American persons went to a restaurant in Shell's Department Store in Miami, Florida. Consistent with the restaurant's policy of refusing service to blacks, the restaurant manager requested the persons to leave. When they refused, they were arrested for violation of a statute allowing a restaurant to have a right to remove any person that it considered detrimental to serve. At trial the defendants their arrest, prosecution, and conviction by the state for requesting service at a restaurant that refused service to African Americans would violate the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The trial court stayed the adjudication of guilt and, consistent with state law, placed them on probation. On appeal, the Supreme Court of Florida affirmed, holding that the statute under which the convictions were made was nondiscriminatory and thus did not violate equal protection.
Court's Decision
The majority opinion by Justice Black did not reach the broad question posed by the defendants as to "whether the Fourteenth Amendment of its own force forbids a State to arrest and prosecute those who, having been asked to leave a restaurant because of their color, refuse to do so."378 U.S. at 155. Instead, the Court considered its prior ruling in Peterson v. Greenville, 373 U.S. 244 (1963), which ruled that a state law making it unlawful for restaurants to serve black and white persons in the same room or at the same table or counter constituted state acton in violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Florida had a regulation requiring any restaurant to have separate toilet and lavatory rooms for each race or sex served or employed. While this regulation did not directly and expressly forbid restaurants from serving both whites and blacks together, it burdened any restaurant serving both races, a state action in violation of the Equal Protection Clause as stated in Peterson.
The concurring opinion of Justice Douglas simply stated that he would reverse based upon his opinions in Bell v. Maryland, 378 U.S. 226 (1964), another case involving a sit-in demonstration by African American students that was announced the same day as the Robinson decision. Justice Harlan stated that he was bound by the decision of Peterson and acquiesced in the judgment of the majority.
Critical response
Robinson v. Florida was one of five cases involving segregation protests decided on June 22, 1964. The other four cases were Griffin v. Maryland, 378 U.S. 130 (1964), Barr v. City of Columbia, 378 U.S. 146 (1964), Bouie v. City of Columbia, 378 U.S. 347 (1964), and Bell v. Maryland. In none of these cases did the Supreme Court reach the merits of any argument addressing whether private actions of segregation which are enforced by state courts constituted a state action which violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. These decisions were announced two days after the Senate ended a filibuster and passed the bill which would become the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which outlawed segregation in public accommodations. It has been suggested that the Supreme Court refrained from reaching the merits in these cases in consideration of the Act, because had it done so it would have eliminated the basis for passage of the Act.
See also
Civil Rights Movement
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 378
 References 
External links
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:History of Miami
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Civil rights movement case law
"""

From "Robinson v. Shell Oil Co." ==> """
Robinson v. Shell Oil Company, 519 U.S. 337 (1997), is US labor law case in the United States Supreme Court in which the Court unanimously held that under federal law, U.S. employers must not engage in workplace discrimination such as writing bad job references, or otherwise retaliating against former employees as a punishment for filing job discrimination complaints.
Facts
The case involved a former Shell employee, Charles T. Robinson, who claimed Shell Oil Company fired him from his sales job because he is black. While his race discrimination lawsuit was pending, Robinson applied for a job with another company who contacted Shell seeking a reference. Shell gave Robinson an unfavourable rating and said it would not rehire him. The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission submitted a "friend of the court" brief, saying that if former employees were not protected, they "would be chilled from taking action to report or oppose discrimination."Biscupic, J.  Court Protects Ex-Employees From Retaliation; Decision in Maryland Case Affects Firms Subjected to Job Discrimination Complaints. The Washington Post, February 19, 1997, p. A6. Under §704(a) of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 it is unlawful "for an employer to discriminate against any of his employees or applicants for employment" who have availed themselves of Title VII's protections. The company claimed that because Robinson was now a former employee, because they fired him, he was no longer protected.
Judgment
The Court agreed with the view expressed by the EEOC. Thomas J wrote for the court, "EEOC quite persuasively maintains that it would be destructive to [the purposes of anti-bias law] for an employer to be able to retaliate with impunity."
Significance
Robinson eventually lost his original race discrimination case against Shell Oil Company.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 United States labor law
Notes
External links
Category:United States employment discrimination case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1997 in United States case law
Category:Royal Dutch Shell litigation
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Rochin v. California" ==> """
Rochin v. California, 342 U.S. 165 (1952), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States that added behavior that "shocks the conscience" into tests of what violates due process clause of the 14th Amendment.  This balancing test is often criticized as having subsequently been used in a particularly subjective manner.
Background
On July 1, 1949, three Los Angeles County deputy sheriffs entered the Rochins' residence without a search warrant and forcibly entered Rochin's room on the second floor.
Upon entering the room, the deputies noticed two capsules on the night stand. Rochin immediately swallowed the capsules after Deputy Jack Jones asked him, "Whose stuff is this?" Jones then grabbed and squeezed Rochin by the neck, as well as shoving his fingers in Rochin's mouth as he attempted to eject the capsules.People v. Rochin (1950) 101 CA2d 140 The deputies, unable to obtain the capsules, handcuffed and took Rochin to Angeles Emergency Hospital where he was strapped to an operating table and had a tube forcibly placed in his mouth and into his stomach and given an emetic solution, whereupon he vomited the capsules into a bucket. The deputies then retrieved the capsules and tested them to be morphine. Subsequently, this was submitted as evidence, and Rochin was found guilty of violating California Health and Safety Code § 11500 as having an unlawful possession of morphine.
Rochin appealed his case on the basis that his rights, guaranteed to him by Amendments V and XIV of the United States Constitution and by Article I(1)(13)(19) of the California Constitution rendered the evidence inadmissible, and that the forced stomach pumping was unconstitutionally compelled self-incrimination. The appeals court denied his defense arguing that the evidence was admissible, despite the egregious behavior of the officers, as it was "competent evidence," and the courts are not allowed to question the means in which it was obtained. As the court wrote, "illegally obtained evidence is admissible on a criminal charge in this state."
Decision
The court voted in an 8-0 decision (Minton abstained) to overturn the decision. Justice Frankfurter wrote the majority opinion which struck down the prior conviction, arguing that the brutality of the means used to extract the evidence from Rochin "shocks the conscience," and it clearly violates the due process of law as guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment. Frankfurter also admitted the term "due process" was nebulous but asserted that it existed to preserve the fairness and integrity of the system and that society expects judges to act impartially and to take into account precedence and social context.Rochin v. California, pages 5–6
The court quoted from the decision of the California Supreme Court, in which two justices dissented, saying, 
Justice Douglas and Black both wrote concurring opinions in which they argued that the lower court's decision should have been overturned based on the Fifth Amendment liberty from self incrimination. Both justices believed that the 14th Amendment's guarantee of "due process" incorporated that right. The justices' opinions also offered much criticism of Frankfurter's opinion for the court.
Douglas rebuked the court for suddenly declaring that the exclusion of illegally obtained evidence, which had not been an issue up until then, suddenly violated the "decencies of civilized conduct."Ibid, page 8 Black disagreed with the logic in the majority as being contradictory. He argued the opinion enabled the court to nullify the California state law of using illegal evidence based on due process because its application, "shocks the conscience," but then admonishes judges to be impartial and use the society's standards in judgment.
References
Further reading
External links
Category:1952 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:1952 in California
Category:Legal history of California
"""

From "Rock v. Arkansas" ==> """
Rock v. Arkansas, 483 U.S. 44 (1987), was a Supreme Court of the United States case in which the Court held that criminal defendants have a constitutional right to testify on their own behalf..
The right of a person to represent oneself in a court of law had been recognized for a very long time prior to this case. This right has been established by both legislative enactments and judicial rulings alike. An 1864 appropriations act allowed defendants to testify for themselves. The right of a criminal defendant to represent oneself had already been recognized by courts prior to this case. In Faretta v. California,. the United States Supreme Court held that criminal defendants are constitutionally free to decline or reject professional lawyers as legal representation in state-level courts as well as to serve as their own legal counsels in such trials. In that case, the Court noted the lengthy history of the right by stating:
The movement in favor of allowing defendants to testify for themselves was popular, but its critics worried that it would destroy the presumption of innocence because of the perception that someone who is innocent of a crime would certainly speak to defend themselves and a person who is guilty of a crime would certainly not do so. This perception is inaccurate because a defendant's past becomes broadly admissible as evidence when they take the stand, so testifying may be against their interests. For example, when an individual with a criminal record testifies in their own trial, that past record can be presented to persuade the jury that they are the kind of person who would have done what they are accused of in the present. In a sense, the critics' worries have come to pass because relevant scholarship indicates that there is a measurable difference between the conviction rates of factually-innocent people whenever they do testify or they do not testify. Juries tend to convict criminal defendants who choose to testify for themselves at higher rates; likewise, juries tend to acquit criminal defendants who decline to testify for themselves.
See also
Johnson v. Zerbst (1938)
Betts v. Brady (1942)
Hoyt v. Florida (1961)
Gideon v. Wainwright (1963)
Sheppard v. Maxwell (1966)
Bruton v. United States (1968)
Apodaca v. Oregon (1972)
Johnson v. Louisiana (1972)
Argersinger v. Hamlin (1972)
Barker v. Wingo (1972)
Taylor v. Louisiana (1975)
Faretta v. California (1975)
Bounds v. Smith (1977)
Scott v. Illinois (1979)
Godinez v. Moran (1993)
Apprendi v. New Jersey (2000)
Martinez v. Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District (2000)
Alabama v. Shelton (2002)
Crawford v. Washington (2004)
Blakely v. Washington (2004)
Davis v. Washington (2006)
Indiana v. Edwards (2008)
Melendez-Diaz v. Massachusetts (2009)
Michigan v. Bryant (2011)
Bullcoming v. New Mexico (2011)
Alleyne v. United States (2013)
Peña-Rodriguez v. Colorado (2017)
Ramos v. Louisiana (2020)
 References 
External links
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:United States Fourteenth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Rockwell International Corp. v. United States" ==> """
Rockwell International Corp. v. United States, 549 U.S. 457 (2007), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court examined the "original source" exception to the "public-disclosure" bar of the False Claims Act.  The Court held that (1) the original source  requirement of the FCA provision setting for the original-source exception to the public-disclosure bar on federal-court jurisdiction is jurisdictional; (2) the statutory phrase "information on which the allegations are based" refers to the relator's allegations and not the publicly disclosed allegations; the terms "allegations" is not limited to the allegations in the original complaint, but includes, at a minimum, the allegations in the original complaint as amended; (3) relator's knowledge with respect to the pondcrete fell short of the direct and independent knowledge of the information on which the allegations are based required for him to qualify as an original source; and (4) the government's intervention did not provide an independent basis of jurisdiction with respect to the relator.
 Background 
Qui tam relator James Stone brought an action against government contractor, Rockwell International Corporation, alleging that it violated the False Claims Act while operating a nuclear weapons plant.  In the course of defending against the relator's action, Rockwell filed a motion to dismiss for lack of subject-matter jurisdiction based on the relator's alleged failure to qualify as an original source under the FCA.  Rockwell's motion was denied by the district court.
The U.S. Government intervened, pursuant to the intervention provisions of the FCA, and together with the relator, filed a joint amended complaint alleging, among other things, that Rockwell committed environmental violations by storing leaky blocks of pondcrete--a form of processed toxic waste.  Following a jury trial, the United States District Court for the District of Colorado entered judgment in favor of the United States and relator Stone.  As a result, the district court awarded statutorily-provided treble damages to the plaintiffs.
Rockwell appealed the judgment, and the Tenth Circuit affirmed in relevant part, but remanded for a determination of whether the relator had satisfied a statutory requirement of disclosing information underlying his claims to the government prior to bringing suit.  On remand, the district court found that the relator had not made an adequate disclosure, and appeal was taken.  The Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals held that the relator was an original source.
 Opinion of the Court 
The United States Supreme Court granted certiorari on the limited original source issue.
Justice Breyer took no part in consideration or decision of this case.
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Rodriguez de Quijas v. Shearson/American Express Inc." ==> """
Rodriguez de Quijas v. Shearson/American Express Inc., 490 U.S. 477 (1989), is a United States Supreme Court decision concerning the arbitration of securities fraud claims. It was originally brought by a group of Texas investors against their brokerage house. By a 5–4 margin the Court affirmed the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals and ruled that their claims under the Securities Act of 1933, which regulates trading in the primary market, must be arbitrated as stipulated in their customer agreements.
The decision overruled a 1953 case, Wilko v. Swan. Justice Anthony Kennedy's majority opinion found that arbitration procedures offered more adequate protection for investors than they had when that case was decided. John Paul Stevens's short dissent criticized the majority for taking it upon itself to overturn a precedent that, he argued, Congress had purposely left intact during a major overhaul of the securities laws in the mid-1970s. Both criticized the Fifth Circuit for having overruled Wilko before the Court itself did, reminding lower courts that only the Supreme Court could overrule itself, an aspect of the decision that has come in for some criticism.
Many courts besides the Fifth Circuit had chosen to disregard Wilko after the Supreme Court's own decision in Shearson/American Express Inc. v. McMahon that claims under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, which applies to the secondary market, were also arbitrable if a contract so provided cast serious doubt on the logic of the older case. As a result of Rodriguez de Quijas, many more securities fraud claims were heard in arbitration instead of the courts, an intended outcome that has supporters and critics and led to long-term changes in how the securities industry conducts arbitration. The decision was the last in the Mitsubishi trilogy, which expanded the use of arbitration from contractual disputes to statutory claims during the 1980s.
Underlying dispute
In the early 1980s several small first-time investors in Brownsville, Texas, opened accounts with Shearson/American Express agent Jon Grady Deaton. They included minors, widows, and terminally ill people; some could not understand English. Their investments with him totaled about $400,000 ($ in modern dollars).
They later alleged that Deaton had mismanaged some of the money and churned the accounts, making trades solely to generate commissions for himself. They brought suit in federal court for the Southern District of Texas alleging securities fraud under the applicable state and federal laws. Shearson moved to compel arbitration, as the plaintiffs' customer agreements committed them to using that method of dispute resolution. The district court granted it on all but claims under the Securities Act of 1933 (known in securities law as the "1933 Act"), which regulates trading in the primary market; they were the only ones that the Supreme Court had not ruled arbitrable during recent terms.Rodriguez de Quijas et al v. Shearson/American Express, Inc. et al (hereafter Rodriguez de Quijas I), 845 F. 2d 1296 (5th Cir., 1989)
Shearson appealed to the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals, asking that the 1933 Act claims be arbitrated as well. In 1953 the Supreme Court had explicitly held otherwise in Wilko v. Swan.Wilko v. Swan, . But in 1987, it had held in Shearson/American Express Inc. v. McMahon that claims under the similar Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the "1934 Act"), which regulates the secondary market where the vast majority of securities are traded, were arbitrable,Shearson/American Express Inc. v. McMahon,  overruling several appeals court precedents that had extended the Wilko holding to the 1934 Act.
McMahons logic, Shearson argued, meant that Wilko was no longer applicable even if the Supreme Court had not yet overruled it. In the two years since that case, many district court judges had taken it upon themselves to overrule it,>Staiman v. Merrill Lynch, 673 F.Supp. 1009 (C.D.Cal., 1987); Rosenblum v. Drexel Burnham Lambert, 700 F.Supp. 874 (E.D.La., 1987) and Aronson v. Dean Witter Reynolds, 675 F.Supp. 1324 (S.D.Fla., 1987) and while no appeals court had yet upheld those decisions, the Fifth Circuit, in Noble v. Drexel Burnham Lambert, had expressed doubts as to its continuing viability.Noble v. Drexel Burnham Lambert, 823 F. 2d 849, 850n3 (5th Cir., 1987). "McMahon undercuts every aspect of [Wilko]; a formal overruling of Wilko appears inevitable—or, perhaps, superfluous." The plaintiffs argued that Wilko was still good law because it reflected congressional intent to protect investors by guaranteeing them recourse to the courts. Even if it were not, they allowed, the contract still did not clearly establish the parties' intent to arbitrate all claims.
Appeals court
Judges William Homer Thornberry,  Jerre Stockton Williams and W. Eugene Davis were empaneled to hear the case. They heard oral arguments in the case and handed down its decision in May 1988. Unanimously, in a decision written by Williams, they found for Shearson and held Wilko inapplicable.
Williams considered the case in light of McMahon and other recent arbitration jurisprudence. While in that case Wilko'''s protections had not been before the Court, the similarities between the 1933 and 1934 acts was close enough that it was hard to see why a holding that applied to one would not also apply to the other. "The reasoning in McMahon completely undermined Wilko ... As McMahon makes clear, the Supreme Court no longer considers arbitration inadequate to protect substantive rights," wrote Williams.Rodriguez I, at 1298.
The plaintiffs argued, as Justice Harry Blackmun had in his McMahon dissent, that since Congress had implied a stated attempt to leave Wilkos holding alone during a 1975 revamp of securities laws, it had given its assent and wished 1933 Act claims to be nonarbitrable while 1934 Act claims were. "We find it implausible that Congress intended to prohibit arbitration of Securities Act claims but intended to allow courts to determine the arbitrability of Exchange Act claims," he wrote. While there were, indeed, fine distinctions between the two statutes, "... McMahon, which binds us here, turns solely on the adequacy of arbitration to resolve securities disputes." Since circuit precedent held that the similarities between the two were more significant for interpretation purposes than the differences, "'[w]e thus follow the reasoning of the Supreme Court in McMahon and our own decision in Noble which lead directly to the obsolescence of Wilko and the arbitrability of Securities Act § 12(2) claims." And because McMahon had been handed down before they filed suit, the plaintiffs could not argue that they did not intend to arbitrate a 1933 Act claim since the possibility that they might have to already existed.Rodriguez I, at 1299.
Supreme Court
A request for an en banc rehearing of the case was denied a month later. The plaintiffs petitioned the Supreme Court for certiorari. It was granted in November.. Oral arguments were heard in March of 1989.
Oral arguments
Denis Downey, who had represented the plaintiffs from the district court onwards, argued for them. Theodore Krebsbach, who had argued McMahon before the Court, argued again for Shearson. Downey was permitted a short time for rebuttal after Krebsbach finished.
Petitioners
"In the petitioners' view," Downey told the justices, "the Federal Arbitration Act has been read much too broadly." It had been intended, as its language indicated, to put arbitration agreements on an equal footing with other contracts, but courts had more recently been reading it as superseding all other statutes when the two conflicted. "We do not see an elevated federal policy in the Federal Arbitration Act."
Adopting that view, he admitted, would require the Court to reconsider many of its recent decisions on the subject of arbitration. "Our purpose here is, rather than in the absolute sense, to try to create a better comparative balance," Downey said. "We see the Federal Arbitration Act as involving federal policies of considerably less importance than that of the 1933 Securities Act."
The justices asked him to distinguish the two acts. Downey answered that the 1934 Act might have been meant to protect sellers less. He added that the 1933 Act's legislative history was relevant to the present case. "[It] would seem to show that Congress realized that it was important that private enforcement would be used to effectuate the goals [of the act]."
One justice wanted to know about the adhesion issue. Could it be used to defeat the contracts even if they were held arbitrable? It hadn't been discussed in the lower courts, "and that's a major problem in this whole arbitration area," Downey claimed, since it could only have been brought up if the contract was challenged as fraudulently induced. "[D]istrict courts really don't get to review these things until after arbitration," he commented. Leaving such issues to the enforcement stage needlessly delayed dispute resolution, since it was necessary sometimes to rearbitrate the case. "I think if there's a fundamental claim like that, the district court ought to decide it up front."
Downey returned to Wilko and how it was applicable to the facts of the case. "[W]e think it's very clear, based on 36 years of what legal commentators said and based on every decision of this Court with the exception of McMahon, that Wilko said that the waiver of the choices in Section 22 amounted to an attempted waiver of the provision." It was not always possible, he added, to appeal an arbitrators' decision.
In conclusion, Downey told the justices, "our basic position is also that this is the worst possible choice we're being given." He believed any arbitrators would favor the industry, and that the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) could not be trusted to look out for the interests of small investors in arbitration. "[T]he Court should give some consideration to protecting the unsophisticated investor." He felt it was ironic to be in this position:
Shearson
Krebsbach began by assuring the justices that arbitration could vindicate the petitioners' rights as well as a trial. The SEC, he said, had already suggested Wilko should be overruled in its McMahon amicus curiae brief. The justices wanted to know if, as they suggested, their claims should still be litigated even if the Court overruled Wilko because they had signed their agreements before McMahon. He believed they could be arbitrated since it would not be found prejudicial.
Sandra Day O'Connor asked Krebsbach where the cases would be arbitrated. "It would take place usually in the venue closest to where the plaintiff resides" notwithstanding the absence of contractual language to that effect. "That has been the practice for as long as I can recall."
Krebsbach returned to his argument. "[T]he Court has articulated time and time again over the past 15 years that a plaintiff does not waive substantive rights in arbitration," he said. "There is nothing in the Securities Act of 1933, any more than there is in the Exchange Act of 1934, which expresses a Congressional intent to prohibit arbitration of Securities Act claims." While the anti-waiver provisions could have been read that way, McMahon rendered them both moot.
Petitioners were wrong to claim that a sentence in a report on the 1975 amendments indicated Congressional support of Wilko. "Congress never said in this single sentence in 1975 what it thought that the Wilko law was" and McMahon had already rejected that argument. Nor had Congress, in securities law amendments since McMahon, enacted any affecting arbitration.
Krebsbach touted at length the changes to securities arbitration rules since McMahon. Arbitrators would have to disclose more about their background, and those who were recently retired from the industry would no longer be considered members of the public. A transcript of the proceedings would also be required. He conceded, however, that none of these rules would apply to the plaintiffs' case.
Should the Court, Krebsbach was asked, overrule a case that had depended on statutory interpretation simply because it was wrong, rather than leaving it to Congress? If it did, then there were many other such cases that it would have to overrule. He said that there was no practical difference between the two acts, and that if the Court declined to overrule Wilko it would not be undermining McMahon. "I think it would also cause a lot of confusion with respect to the arbitration of other statutory disputes," he said. "Wilko really stands alone with respect to this Court's arbitration jurisprudence, in that it's really the only case where it in the first instance presumed that the arbitration forum was inadequate."
"I believe that the Court in McMahon also said that Congress has left this issue to the courts because they believe in the first instance it would make no sense for Congress to have to conduct an inquiry on each occasion whether a particular arbitration forum was inadequate," he elaborated. " Prodded on why Congress itself might not have acted, he said "I believe that they think that the [current securities] arbitration system is adequate."
Krebsbach admitted that his argument was ultimately that the arbitration system was now adequate to protect investors' rights, and that by doing so it would reduce the burden on the federal courts. "It's not necessarily the reason, but that would be one of the results." Again he touted the rule changes: Attorneys would now have subpoena power, there would be prehearing conferences to resolve any side disputes, and arbitrators could refer to the securities industry's self-regulatory organizations any action that they believed merited disciplinary proceedings.
"Respondents believe that the stare decisis doctrine is best served by the Court ruling that [Wilko] is no longer good law," Krebsbach argued again, addressing concerns about Wilko having been settled law for so many years. "If [it] is overruled, there will be a consistent interpretation and application by this Court of the Federal Arbitration Act in numerous decisions over the past 15 years."
Rebuttal
It had been two years since McMahon, Downey noted, none of the changes Krebsbach promised had been made. Nor were two that he felt very important even proposed. Arbitrators would not be required to give legal reasons for their decisions, making appeals more difficult, nor had the selection process been reformed. "The truth is that we think the industry cheats."
In response to O'Connor, Downey said Krebsbach had not indicated that the arbitrations were scheduled to take place in Dallas, approximately  from Brownsville. "We don't trust securities arbitration," Downey repeated. "If Mr. Krebsbach were to go outside in the hall and offer to enter into an agreement to arbitrate that wasn't an [industry] arbitration, we'd be much more inclined to do so."
Decision
The Court handed down its decision in May, almost two months later. By a 5–4 margin it had sided with Shearson, ruling that the claims must be arbitrated and overruling Wilko. Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote for the majority. John Paul Stevens dissented, joined by William Brennan, Thurgood Marshall and Harry Blackmun.
Majority
"To the extent that Wilko rested on suspicion of arbitration as a method of weakening the protections afforded in the substantive law to would-be complainants," Kennedy wrote, "it has fallen far out of step with our current strong endorsement of the federal statutes favoring this method of resolving disputes." The three aspects of the 1933 Act that the Wilko Court had found to bar the waiver of the right to litigate were purly procedural and did not confer any substantive protections. Specifically, the provision that allowed claims to be filed in state court under the act without the possibility of removal to federal court amounted to a waiver of the procedural protections federal civil procedure might grant to a plaintiff. In other recent cases, the Court had found that neither the similar provisions of the 1934 Act nor the Sherman Act prevented claims under them from being resolved in arbitration. And the FAA allowed for an arbitration agreement to be voided just like any other contract.Rodriguez de Quijas v. Shearson/American Express, Inc. (hereafter Rodriguez de Quijas II), , at 480–484, Kennedy, J.
Kennedy rebuked the Fifth Circuit for "renouncing" Wilko. "If a precedent of this Court has direct application in a case, yet appears to rest on reasons rejected in some other line of decisions, the Court of Appeals should follow the case which directly controls, leaving to this Court the prerogative of overruling its own decisions." He confirmed that the Court was overruling Wilko as "inconsistent with the prevailing uniform construction of other federal statutes governing arbitration agreements in the setting of business transactions." In this specific instance there was a further reason:
Having established that Wilko was overruled, Kennedy considered the petitioners' request that if the Court did so it should nevertheless not apply it to their case or any other pending litigation. "We disagree," he wrote. "The general rule of long standing is that the law announced in the Court's decision controls the case at bar." There had been exceptions, such as Chevron Oil Co. v. Huson,Chevron Oil Co. v. Huson, . but the logic of that case dicated a retroactive application of the decision here. "Although our decision to overrule Wilko establishes a new principle of law for arbitration agreements under the Securities Act, this ruling furthers the purposes and effect of the Arbitration Act without undermining those of the Securities Act" since the plaintiffs had not agreed to arbitrate based in whole or part on Wilko not being overruled."Rodriguez de Quijas II, at 485–486.
Dissent
Stevens joined Kennedy in criticizing the Fifth Circuit's decision to go against Wilko, calling it "an indefensible brand of judicial activism." He extended that criticism to the Court itself. "When our earlier opinion gives a statutory provision concrete meaning, which Congress elects not to amend during the ensuing 3½ decades," he wrote, "our duty to respect Congress' work product is strikingly similar to the duty of other federal courts to respect our work product."Rodriguez de Quijas II, at 486, Stevens, J., dissenting.
As a judge of the Seventh Circuit, Stevens reminded his colleagues, he had dissented from that court's holding in the case that eventually reached the Supreme Court as Scherk v. Alberto-Culver Co., a key arbitration precedent where Potter Stewart had made a "colorable argument" that the 1933 and 1934 acts were dissimilar enough that Wilko might not apply to the latter. "There are valid policy and textual arguments on both sides regarding the interrelation of federal securities and arbitration Acts," he wrote. "None of these arguments, however, carries sufficient weight to tip the balance between judicial and legislative authority and overturn an interpretation of an Act of Congress that has been settled for many years."
Analysis and commentary
Since the decision made almost all securities fraud claims brought by investors against their brokerages arbitrable as almost every customer agreement had a clause mandating it, its practical effect has been to increase the use of arbitration in that context. As such Rodriguez de Quijas was criticized and championed in its aftermath. Another commentator has criticized the Court for its stance against "anticipatory overruling."
The year after the decision, 1990, Indiana University law professor William Hermann summed up where the decision left investors. While his paper was mostly devoted to pending and proposed securities arbitration reforms, he had some comments on the case itself. "To the Rodriguez majority, the policies behind the Arbitration Act, a less significant piece of legislation both in terms of size and scope than the landmark securities statutes, apparently outweighed any other policy considerations," he observed.Hermann, William; ; Vol. 65: Iss. 3, Article 7, 697–722, 705–06; Indiana University Maurer School of Law. Retrieved May 4, 2012.
Hermann noted that the SEC's enforcement powers were, at the time, "extremely limited". Kennedy's refusal to go into them, instead referring the reader to O'Connor's majority opinion in McMahon, "completely ignored Justice Blackmun's concerns in McMahon, and the realities of the current environment." He concluded that "The Supreme Court, in what may be seen as a blatant attempt to reduce the federal docket, has made itself undeniably clear: Wilko is dead and arbitration is king."
Loyola Law School professor Lydia Hervatin offered an extended critique of the majority opinion in a 1991 paper. "[N]either the majority's questioning of Wilko, nor the Court's grounds for overruling Wilko can be logically justified," she wrote. On the first ground, the Court had "failed to elucidate why a statute
prohibiting waiver of 'any provision' should be read as prohibiting only waivers of any substantive provision," since previous decisions had recognized that procedural issues could affect the outcome of a case.Hervatin, Lydia; , 24 Loy. L.A. L. Rev. 757, 777–78 (1991); Loyola Law School. Retrieved May 4, 2012.
Hervatin had more to say about the majority's judgement that arbitration was now more suitable for dispute resolution than it had been in 1953. "Having dismissed the Wilko Court's holding as the result of an outdated bias," she wrote,
"Viewing Rodriguez de Quijas in its historical context" Hervatin continued, "raises more basic issues as to the intellectual honesty of the opinion." If, as the Court contended, the decision was necessitated by the need to ensure that the 1933 and 1934 Acts were interpreted harmoniously and consistently, then it should have acknowledged that it had itself created the inconsistency. "The process leading the Court to Rodriguez de Quijas resembles that of a doctor seeking to euthanize a patient whose ill health arose from the physician's neglect," she wrote. "If Wilko and McMahon are so fatally inconsistent, perhaps the Court should have considered the matter in writing McMahon."
The majority had also failed to consider what the differences between the two acts demonstrated about Congressional intent, Hervatin argued. The 1933 Act's grant of the investor's choice of any state or federal jurisdiction was intended to allow the customer the choice to litigate or arbitrate at the outset, while the limitation to federal jurisdiction in the 1934 Act was meant only to speed litigation by eliminating the requirement to prove diversity of citizenship at the outset. By holding predispute arbitration agreements enforceable, the Court had effectively limited the customer's choice of forum and broadened the broker's, since "[t]he customer usually has a right to compel the broker to arbitrate regardless of the existence of a predispute agreement."
Hervatin reiterated aspects of Blackmun's McMahon dissent, pointing out that the Rodriguez de Quijas majority had ignored Wilko's public-policy justifications entirely. Stevens's dissent in Rodriguez de Quijas pointing to Congress's silence on the issue, she added, made the "majority's reliance on federal pro-arbitration policy appear all the more misplaced." She chastised the majority for saying that the petitioners had failed to meet their burden of proof without suggesting how they might have done so, and concluded that "The majority's reasoning thus displays a marked asymmetry in the Court's openness to assumptions beyond the record and suggests that the majority's defense of its decision was more of an after-the-fact rationalization than an explanation of the basis for its opinion."Hervatin, at 781–82.
Defending Rodriguez de Quijas later that same year was Gregory Malson, a student at Golden Gate University School of Law. "[T]he investor today is fully protected in an arbitral forum, " he wrote, "and ... the advantages to the investor who arbitrates a claim against their broker are expansive." He touted both the reforms to the procedure and a recent decision by the New York Court of Appeals, the highest court in that state, allowing investors to choose to arbitrate before the American Arbitration Association even where their contracts specified the internal panels of the NASD or the exchanges,Cowen & Co. v. Anderson, 76 N.Y.2d 318, (New York Court of Appeals, 1990) as boding well for the many investors who would now have to arbitrate their claims.Malson, Gregory; , 21 Golden Gate U. L. Rev. 405-423, 405–06 (1991); Golden Gate University School of Law. Retrieved May 4, 2012.
Nebraska law professor C. Steven Bradford criticized Rodriguez de Quijas for an entirely different reason: its rejection of the anticipatory overruling of Wilko by the Fifth Circuit and the other lower courts. While there had been two lines of jurisprudence on the issue of whether the lower courts should feel bound by precedent the Supreme Court seemed reasonably likely to overrule, in Rodriguez de Quijas "the Court finally spoke in favor of blind obedience to precedent." It was long overdue, he wrote, but:
While Kennedy had criticized the majority opinion quite strongly, he had used even harsher language to join Kennedy in reprimanding the Fifth Circuit. "Thus, all of the justices summarily rejected anticipatory overruling, without considering its possible benefits," Bradford wrote. But the majority's Rodriguez de Quijas arguments themselves contradicted McMahon's reading of Wilko. Where O'Connor in the earlier case had held that Wilko rejected arbitration only as inadequate to protect an investor's substantive rights, Kennedy read Wilko as inherently inapplicable to the substantive provisions.Bradford, at 67–68.
The Court had tolerated anticipatory overruling in the wake of Brown v. Board of Education and at the end of the Lochner era, Bradford observed. This had broad social benefits:
Bradford called Rodriguez de Quijas "a knee-jerk reaction by the Supreme Court to the refusal
of the lower courts to accept an iron-clad rule of stare decisis''." He called for reconsideration.
See also
Arbitration case law in the United States
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 490
References
External links
Category:1989 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States arbitration case law
Category:United States securities case law
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:American Express
"""

From "Rodriguez v. FDIC" ==> """
Rodriguez v. FDIC was a United States Supreme Court case (589 U.S. ____ (2020)) in which the court held that the precedent established as the Bob Richards Rule did not count as a legitimate exercise of federal lawmaking and thus that the rule is not to be used in decisions by federal judges.
Background
The case itself is borne out of a dispute over to whom a tax return belongs. After United Western Bank entered receivership, it was managed by the FDIC. The bank's parent company, United Western Bancorp entered into chapter 7 bankruptcy, Simon Rodriguez – the plaintiff – was named as the trustee. The dispute arose between shareholder of United Western Bancorp and Simon Rodriguez or the customers of United Western Bank and the FDIC would receive the $4.8 million tax refund issued by the IRS. In 2015, the IRS paid the income tax return filed by United Western Bancorp in 2011 to the bankruptcy court, handing the court the mandate to figure out to whom the refund is due.
Judicial Process
With the bankruptcy court given the responsibility of finding out to whom the money should be paid out, the court used a previous agreement between United Western Bancorp and United Western Bank to hold that the money should be paid to United Western Bancorp; however, this was appealed by the FDIC to a United States district court. The district court overturned the decision of the previous court with the rationale that the Bob Richard Rule which had been determined in a previous case in an appellate court, gave the money to United Western Bank as they were the entity that suffered monetary loss. Dissatisfied with the district court's ruling, Rodriguez appealed its ruling to the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit, who upheld the district court's ruling. The plaintiff then filed a petition for a Writ of Certiorari, which was subsequently granted by the Supreme Court.
Decision
The previous judgment was vacated and the case was remanded to the Tenth Circuit to decide without considering the Bob Richards rule. The Supreme Court found that the Bob Richards rule was "not a legitimate exercise of federal common lawmaking", which went beyond the ability permitted of federal judges to "appropriately craft the rule of decision". On remand from the Supreme Court, the Tenth Circuit decided that the refund belonged to the FDIC as the Western United Bank and not Western United Bancorp. The judgment was then remanded to the bankruptcy court.
References
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Rodríguez v. Popular Democratic Party" ==> """
Rodríguez v. Popular Democratic Party, 457 U.S. 1 (1982), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States heard on appeal from the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico whether Puerto Rico may by statute vest in a political party the power to fill an interim vacancy in the Puerto Rico Legislature. The Supreme Court of Puerto Rico held that such a procedure did not violate the United States Constitution, and the US Supreme Court upheld the decision of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico.. The case was of some interest to close followers of the Court as it featured the one and only return of former associate justice, Abe Fortas, now in private practice, at oral argument on behalf of the appellee.
 Background 
A member of appellee Popular Democratic Party (hereafter "appellee") who was elected in the November, 1980, general election to the Puerto Rico House of Representatives from District 31, died in 1981. The Governor of Puerto Rico subsequently called for a "by-election" — open to all qualified voters in District 31 — to fill the vacancy. Appellee then filed suit in the Superior Court of Puerto Rico, alleging that the Puerto Rico statutes under which the Governor purported to act authorized only candidates and electors affiliated with appellee to participate in the by-election. Appellants, qualified electors in District 31 who are not affiliated with appellee, intervened as defendants. The court entered judgment for appellee. The Puerto Rico Supreme Court modified the Superior Court's judgment, holding, inter alia, that the pertinent statute, as properly construed, requires a by-election only if the party of the legislator vacating the seat fails to designate a replacement within 60 days after the vacancy occurs, and that, if the party selects a single candidate within such period, that candidate is declared "automatically elected to fill the vacancy." The court rejected appellants' contention that this procedure violated the Federal Constitution. While the case was pending before the Puerto Rico Supreme Court, appellee held a primary election in which only its members were permitted to participate, and which resulted in the selection of a person who, pursuant to the Supreme Court's mandate, was sworn in as the new representative from District 31.
See also
 Plyler v. Doe, 
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1982 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Puerto Rico
Category:Popular Democratic Party (Puerto Rico)
Category:1982 in Puerto Rico
"""

From "Rodriguez v. United States" ==> """
Rodriguez v. United States, 575 U.S. 348 (2015), was a United States Supreme Court case which analyzed whether police officers may extend the length of a traffic stop to conduct a search with a trained detection dog.Rodriguez v. United States, No. 13–9972, 575 U.S. 348 (2015), slip op. at 2–4. In a 6–3 opinion, the Court held that officers may not extend the length of a traffic stop to conduct a dog sniff unrelated to the original purpose of the stop.Rodriguez v. United States, slip op. at 1. However, the Court remanded the case to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit to determine whether the officer's extension of the traffic stop was independently justified by reasonable suspicion.Rodriguez v. United States, slip op. at 9. Some analysts have suggested that the Court's decision to limit police authority was influenced by ongoing protests in Ferguson, Missouri.Noah Feldman, , April 21, 2015: The Supreme Court Is Worried About the Police (Accessed July 2, 2015); Mark Joseph Stern, , April 21, 2015: The Ferguson Effect – Chief Justice Roberts Rules Against Police Abuse at the Supreme Court. Maybe He Finally Gets It. (Accessed July 2, 2015).
Background
Constitutional guidelines for traffic stops
Criminal detentions generally require probable cause that the suspect is engaged in criminal activity, but an officer may conduct a traffic stop if the officer has a reasonable, articulable suspicion that the driver is engaging in criminal activity.Berkemer v. McCarty, ; Delaware v. Prouse, ; Pennsylvania v. Mimms, ; see also Terry v. Ohio,  (defining standards for investigatory stops). The Supreme Court of the United States has held that investigative detentions, including traffic stops, "must be temporary and last no longer than is necessary to effectuate the purpose of the stop."Florida v. Royer, . Consequently, traffic stops may become unreasonable if they are unnecessarily prolonged.United States v. Sharpe, .
When an officer conducts a traffic stop based on reasonable suspicion that the driver has committed a traffic violation, the Fourth Amendment permits the officer to conduct a number of investigative inquiries before resolving the traffic stop.See, e.g., Arizona v. Johnson, . For example, officers may question the vehicle's occupants about matters unrelated to the traffic violation, and officers may walk a drug detection dog around the outside of the vehicle during the stop.Johnson, 555 U.S. at 333; Illinois v. Caballes,  (holding that officers may conduct a dog sniff incident to a lawful traffic stop). Officers may briefly prolong traffic stops to conduct these inquiries so long as the officer performs his tasks in an amount of time "reasonably needed to effectuate" the law enforcement purpose of the stop.United States v. Sharpe, .
Arrest of Dennys Rodriguez
On the evening of March 27, 2012, Dennys Rodriguez was stopped by a police officer on a highway near Waterloo, Nebraska, after the officer observed him swerve out of his lane of traffic.Joint Appendix, Rodriguez v. United States, 35 S.Ct. 1609 (U.S. 2015) at 16–19. When the officer approached the vehicle, he reported an "overwhelming" scent of air-fresheners emanating from the car.Joint Appendix, Rodriguez v. United States, 35 S.Ct. 1609 (U.S. 2015) at 20. After questioning Rodriguez and another passenger in the car, the officer placed a call for backup and conducted a records check on the vehicle's passenger.Joint Appendix, Rodriguez v. United States, 35 S.Ct. 1609 (U.S. 2015) at 23–27. The officer handed a warning ticket to Rodriguez, and then proceeded to walk Floyd, his drug detection dog, around the outside of Rodriguez's vehicle.Joint Appendix, Rodriguez v. United States, 35 S.Ct. 1609 (U.S. 2015) at 28–29. When the dog indicated the presence of drugs, the officer searched the car and discovered methamphetamine inside the vehicle.Joint Appendix, Rodriguez v. United States, 35 S.Ct. 1609 (U.S. 2015) at 33–34. The officer reported that approximately seven or eight minutes passed between the time he issued the warning ticket to the time at which the dog indicated the presence of drugs.Joint Appendix, Rodriguez v. United States, 35 S.Ct. 1609 (U.S. 2015) at 34.
thumb|right|Dennys Rodriguez was arrested on a highway near Waterloo, Nebraska (pictured).
Trial and appeal to Eighth Circuit
On May 22, 2012, Rodriguez was indicted in the United States District Court for the District of Nebraska for possession with intent to distribute methamphetamine.Joint Appendix, Rodriguez v. United States, 35 S.Ct. 1609 (U.S. 2015) at 114. Rodriguez filed a motion to suppress evidence discovered by the drug detection dog, arguing that an officer may not extend an already completed traffic stop to conduct a canine sniff without reasonable suspicion or other lawful justification.Joint Appendix, Rodriguez v. United States, 35 S.Ct. 1609 (U.S. 2015) at 6, 12. However, the district court denied the motion.Joint Appendix, Rodriguez v. United States, 35 S.Ct. 1609 (U.S. 2015) at 112. On January 17, 2013, Rodriguez filed an appeal in the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit to review the denial of his motion to suppress.Joint Appendix, Rodriguez v. United States, 35 S.Ct. 1609 (U.S. 2015) at 11. On January 31, 2014, the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the district court's decision to deny Rodriguez's motion to suppress the evidence.United States v. Rodriguez, 741 F.3d 905, 908 (8th Cir. 2014). The Eighth Circuit held that a seven- to eight-minute detention was de minimis and reasonable in order to ensure officer safety.United States v. Rodriguez, 741 F.3d 905, 907–08 (8th Cir. 2014). Rodriguez appealed this decision to the Supreme Court of the United States, which granted certiorari on October 2, 2014.Rodriguez v. United States, 135 S.Ct. 43 (2014) (granting certiorari).
Opinion of the Court
thumb|right|upright|In her majority opinion, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg (pictured) held that "a dog sniff is not fairly characterized as part of the officer’s traffic mission."Rodriguez v. United States, slip op. at 7.
Writing for a majority of the Court, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg held that "a police stop exceeding the time needed to handle the matter for which the stop was made violates the Constitution’s shield against unreasonable seizures." Consequently, a traffic stop becomes unlawful if "it is prolonged beyond the time reasonably required to complete the mission of issuing a ticket for the violation."Rodriguez v. United States, slip op. at 1 (internal quotations and citations omitted). Justice Ginsburg wrote that the purpose of the initial stop in this case was to investigate why Rodriguez swerved out of his lane of traffic.Rodriguez v. United States, slip op. at 5. Therefore, the officer's authority to continue the stop ended once he completed his investigation of that infraction. Because the dog sniff was unrelated to the investigation of the original traffic infraction, the officer should not have extended the stop absent "independently supported reasonable suspicion" for the dog sniff.Rodriguez v. United States, slip op. at 7–9. The Court then remanded the case to the Eighth Circuit to determine whether the officer did, in fact, have an independent basis for conducting the dog sniff.
Dissenting opinions
Justice Anthony Kennedy, Justice Clarence Thomas, and Justice Samuel Alito each wrote a dissenting opinion. Justice Thomas argued that the brief extension to conduct a dog sniff was reasonable and that "conducting a dog sniff does not change the character of a traffic stop that is lawful at its inception and otherwise executed in a reasonable manner."Rodriguez v. United States, slip op. at 1, 9–10 (Thomas, J., dissenting) (citing Illinois v. Caballes,  (internal quotation marks omitted). He also argued that the dog sniff was independently justified by the officer's reasonable suspicion that Rodriguez and his passenger were engaged in criminal activity.Rodriguez v. United States, slip op. at 10–12 (Thomas, J., dissenting). In a one-paragraph dissenting opinion, Justice Kennedy wrote that he agreed with all of Justice Thomas' opinion, except his conclusion that the officer had reasonable suspicion.Rodriguez v. United States, slip op. at 1 (Kennedy, J., dissenting). Because the Eighth Circuit did not address the question of whether the officer had reasonable suspicion, he argued "the better course would be to allow that court to do so in the first instance." Justice Alito wrote a dissent in which he characterized the majority opinion as "unnecessary, impractical, and arbitrary."Rodriguez v. United States, slip op. at 1 (Alito, J., dissenting). He argued that the dog sniff was justified because the facts of the case "easily meet our standard for reasonable suspicion."Rodriguez v. United States, slip op. at 1–2 (Alito, J., dissenting) (internal citations and quotations omitted). Justice Alito also criticized Justice Ginsburg's opinion for ignoring concerns of officer safety, and that the occupants of the car may have attacked the officer if he conducted the dog sniff before backup arrived.Rodriguez v. United States, slip op. at 2–3 (Alito, J., dissenting). Additionally, Justice Alito claimed it was "arbitrary" for the court to hold the Fourth Amendment was violated "simply because of the sequence in which Officer Struble chose to perform his tasks."Rodriguez v. United States, slip op. at 3 (Alito, J., dissenting).
Afterward
On remand, the Eighth Circuit ruled that because the police could rely in good faith on binding precedent from the Eighth Circuit, which at the time of the stop held that briefly prolonging a stop was legal, Rodriguez was entitled to no relief.United States v. Rodriguez, 799 F.3d 1222, 1223-24 (8th Cir. 2015). The United States Supreme Court declined to hear an appeal of that decision.Rodriguez v. United States, 136 S.Ct. 1514 (Mem) (2016).
Commentary and analysis
Commentators have observed that Rodriguez represents a significant departure from the Court's prior dog sniff cases and that the Court's "view of the canine sniff investigatory technique is evolving."Leslie Shoebotham, , April 22, 2015: Guest Blog: Leslie Shoebotham, SCOTUS: No Post-“Traffic Mission” Dog Sniffs Without Reasonable Suspicion (Accessed July 2, 2015). One analyst suggested the Court "is quietly distancing itself from its decision three decades ago in United States v. Place,"United States v. Place, . where the Court held that a dog sniff is not a search under the Fourth Amendment. Other commentators praised the case for "strengthening" and "reinvigorating" constitutional protections against unreasonable searches and seizures. However, Nina Totenberg of National Public Radio observed that despite the Supreme Court's favorable ruling, Rodriguez "is not free of legal trouble yet" because the Eighth Circuit may, and ultimately did, rule the dog sniff was permissible.Nina Totenberg, , April 21, 2015: Supreme Court: Police May Not Detain Traffic Violators Longer Than Necessary (Accessed July 2, 2015).Rordriguez, 799 F.3d 1222, 1223-24.
Some analysts have also suggested that the Court's opinion was influenced by ongoing protests in Ferguson, Missouri. One commentator suggested the court's decision may have been shaped, in part, by recent high-profile "killings of black men by police" and that the Court's opinion was "affected by changing social attitudes" about the role of police in society.Noah Feldman, , April 21, 2015: The Supreme Court Is Worried About the Police (Accessed July 2, 2015). Another suggested that Chief Justice John Roberts may have been influenced by the shooting of Michael Brown and that he "learned the lessons of Ferguson and is trading in his logical abstractions for some much-needed legal realism."Mark Joseph Stern, , April 21, 2015: The Ferguson Effect – Chief Justice Roberts Rules Against Police Abuse at the Supreme Court. Maybe He Finally Gets It. (Accessed July 2, 2015).
 See also 
 Consent search
 Driving while black
 Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 575
Florida v. Harris (2013)
Florida v. Jardines (2013)
Illinois v. Caballes (2005)
 Stop-and-frisk in New York City
 Terry stop
 Terry v. Ohio
 Virginia v. Moore
United States v. Place (1983)
References
Further reading
External links
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:Searches and seizures
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Roe v. Wade" ==> """
Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973),. was a landmark decision of the U.S. Supreme Court in which the Court ruled that the Constitution of the United States generally protects a pregnant woman's "liberty" to choose to have an abortion. The decision struck down many federal and state abortion laws, and it caused an ongoing abortion debate in the United States about whether, or to what extent, abortion should be legal, who should decide the legality of abortion, and what the role of moral and religious views in the political sphere should be. The decision also shaped debate concerning which methods the Supreme Court should use in constitutional adjudication.
The case was brought by Norma McCorveyunder the legal pseudonym "Jane Roe"who, in 1969, became pregnant with her third child. McCorvey wanted an abortion but lived in Texas, where abortion was illegal except when necessary to save the mother's life. Her lawyers, Sarah Weddington and Linda Coffee, filed a lawsuit on her behalf in U.S. federal court against her local district attorney, Henry Wade, alleging that Texas's abortion laws were unconstitutional. A special three-judge court of the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Texas heard the case and ruled in her favor. The parties appealed this ruling to the Supreme Court.
In January 1973, the Supreme Court issued a 7–2 decision in McCorvey's favor holding that the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides a fundamental "right to privacy", which protects a pregnant woman's right to an abortion. The Court also held that the right to abortion is not absolute and must be balanced against the government's interests in protecting women's health and prenatal life. The Court resolved these competing interests by announcing a pregnancy trimester timetable to govern all abortion regulations in the United States. The Court also classified the right to abortion as "fundamental", which required courts to evaluate challenged abortion laws under the "strict scrutiny" standard, the most stringent level of judicial review in the United States.
The Supreme Court's decision in Roe was among the most controversial in U.S. history.: "Few decisions in Supreme Court history have provoked the intense controversy that has surrounded the abortion rulings." In addition to the dissent, Roe was criticized by some in the legal community, including some in support of abortion rights who thought that Roe reached the correct result but went about it the wrong way, and some called the decision a form of judicial activism. Others argued that Roe did not go far enough, as it was placed within the framework of civil rights rather than the broader human rights. Anti-abortion politicians and activists sought for decades to restrict abortion or overrule the decision; polls into the 21st century showed that a plurality and a majority, especially into the late 2010s to early 2020s, opposed overruling Roe. Despite criticism of the decision, the Supreme Court reaffirmed Roe in its 1992 decision, Planned Parenthood v. Casey. Casey overruled Roe trimester framework and abandoned its "strict scrutiny" standard in favor of an "undue burden" test.
In June 2022, the Supreme Court overruled Roe in Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization on the grounds that the substantive right to abortion was not "deeply rooted in this Nation's history or tradition", nor considered a right when the Due Process Clause was ratified in 1868, and was unknown in U.S. law until Roe. This view was disputed by some legal historians and criticized by the dissenting opinion, which argued that many other rights—contraception, interracial marriage, and same-sex marriage—did not exist when the Due Process Clause was ratified in 1868, and thus, by the Dobbs majority's logic, were not constitutionally protected. The decision was supported and opposed by the anti-abortion and abortion-rights movements in the United States, respectively, and was generally condemned by international observers and foreign leaders.
Background
History of abortion laws in the United States
thumb|350x350px|State abortion laws at the time of Roe v. Wade were predominately loosest in the Southern United States. Since, demographic support for legality has radically shifted.
According to historian James C. Mohr, there was an earlier acceptance of abortion, and opposition to abortion, including anti-abortion laws, only came into being in the 19th century.Mohr, James C. (1978). Abortion in America: The Origins and Evolution of National Policy, 1800–1900. New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 3–4. It was not always a crime and was generally not illegal until quickening, which occurred between the fourth and sixth month of pregnancy. In 1821, Connecticut passed the first state statute legislating abortion in the United States; it forbade the use of poisons in abortion. After the 1840s, there was an upsurge in abortions. In the 19th century, the medical profession was generally opposed to abortion, which Mohr argues arose due to competition between men with medical degrees and women without one, such as Madame Drunette. The practice of abortion was one of the first medical specialties, and was practiced by unlicensed people; well-off people had abortions and paid well. The press played a key role in rallying support for anti-abortion laws. According to James S. Witherspoon, a former briefing attorney for the Court of Appeals for the Third Supreme Judicial District of Texas, abortion was not legal before quickening in 27 out of all 37 states in 1868;"Reexamining Roe: Nineteenth-Century Abortion Statutes and the Fourteenth Amendment" by James S. Witherspoon, St. Mary's Law Journal, Volume 29, 1985, Part III. Nineteenth-Century Criminal Abortion Statutes, Section B. The Prohibition of Pre-Quickening Attempts and the Elimination of the Quickening Distinction, pages 33–34, (pages 5–6 of the pdf) by the end of 1883, 30 of the 37 states, six of the ten U.S. territories, and the Kingdom of Hawai'i, where abortion had once been common,Population Policy in Hawaii  by Robert C. Schmitt, Hawaiian Journal of History, Volume 8, 1974, page 91 (page 2 of the pdf), also see The Penal Code of the Hawaiian Kingdom, Compiled from the Penal Code of 1850, Chapter XII. Causing Abortion—Concealing the Death of an Infant, Honolulu, Oahu: Government Press, 1869, page 19 (page 63 of the pdf)Historical Ethnography by Marshall Sahlins, Volume 1 of Anahulu: The Anthropology of History in the Kingdom of Hawaii, Part IV: "Kawailoa Society in the Mid-Nineteenth Century", Chapter 9: "Maka'ainana", University of Chicago Press, 1992, page 201; also see "On the Decrease of Population on the Hawaiian Islands" by David Malo, Hawaiian Spectator, Volume 2, April 1839, page 123: "Even the unborn child did not escape, but was put to death for mothers, thinking they should prematurely become old women without having gained property, pierced their unborn, and thus many a child was destroyed before it was born. Others, from the time of conception to the birth of the child made it their business to extinguish its life." had codified laws that restricted abortion before quickening. More than 10 states allowed pre-quickening abortions, before the quickening distinction was eliminated, and every state had anti-abortion laws by 1900.Cole, George; Frankowski, Stanislaw (1987). Abortion and Protection of the Human Fetus: Legal Problems in a Cross-Cultural Perspective. Leiden, the Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p. 20. Retrieved April 8, 2008 – via Google Books. "By 1900 every state in the Union had an anti-abortion prohibition." According to Leslie J. Reagan, a professor of history and law at the University of Illinois, pre-quickening abortions were legal under common law, like in early modern England, and widely accepted in practice in the early United States.
In the United States, before specific statutes were made against it, abortion was sometimes considered a common law offense, such as by William Blackstone and James Wilson.Blackstone, William (1765). "Commentaries". . "Life... begins in contemplation of law as soon as an infant is able to stir in the mother's womb."Wilson, James (1790–1792). "Of the Natural Rights of Individuals". . "In the contemplation of law, life begins when the infant is first able to stir in the womb." In all states throughout the 19th and early 20th century, pre-quickening abortions were always considered to be actions without a lawful purpose. This meant that if the mother died, the individual performing the abortion was guilty of murder. This aspect of common law regarded pre-quickening abortions as a type of inchoate offense.Fact-Checking the Abortion Claims in 'Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health' Oral Arguments by Lauretta Brown, National Catholic Register, December 3, 2021 Negative liberty rights from common law do not apply in situations caused by consensual or voluntary behavior, which allowed for abortions of fetuses conceived in a consensual manner to be common law offenses.Symposium on Anita Bernstein's The Common Law Inside the Female Body by David S. Cohen, Northwestern University Law Review, Volume 114, page 145 (page 6 of the pdf) The majority opinion for Roe v. Wade authored in Justice Harry Blackmun's name would later state that the criminalization of abortion did not have "roots in the English common-law tradition", and was thought to return to the more permissive state of pre-1820s abortion laws. One purpose for banning abortion was to preserve the life of the fetus,The "Right" to an Abortion, the Scope of Fourteenth Amendment Personhood, and the Supreme Court's Birth Requirement by John D. Gorby, Southern Illinois University Law Review, Volume 4, 1979, page 19, (page 20 of the pdf) another was to protect the life of the mother, another was to create deterrence against future abortions, and another was to avoid injuring the mother's ability to have children. Judges did not always distinguish between which purpose was more important.State v. Howard 32 Vt. 399 (Vt. 1859), November 1859 Rather than arresting the women having the abortions, legal officials were more likely to interrogate them to obtain evidence against the individual doing the abortions. This law enforcement strategy was a response to juries which refused to convict women prosecuted for abortion in the 19th century.Caught in the Net by Leslie J. Reagan, Slate September 10, 2021 In 1973, Justice Blackmun's opinion stated that "the restrictive criminal abortion laws in effect in a majority of States today are of relatively recent vintage".Roe, 410 U.S. at 130.
During the 1960s and early 1970s, opposition to abortion was concentrated among members of the political left and the Democratic Party, although feminists within predominately supported legalization. Most liberal Catholics and Mainline Protestants (both of which tended to vote for the Democratic Party) opposed liberalizing laws surrounding abortion while most other Protestants, including evangelicals, supported doing so as a matter of religious liberty, what they saw as a lack of biblical condemnation, and belief in non-intrusive government. 
By 1971, elective abortion on demand was effectively available in Alaska, California, Hawaii, New York, Washington, and Washington, D.C. Some women traveled to jurisdictions where it was legal, although not all could afford to.Blumenthal, Karen (2020). Jane Against the World: Roe v. Wade and the Fight for Reproductive Rights. New York: Roaring Brook Press. In 1971, Shirley Wheeler was charged with manslaughter after Florida hospital staff reported her illegal abortion to the police. Wheeler was one of a few women who were prosecuted by their states for abortion.Dangerous Pregnancies: Mothers, Disabilities, and Abortion in Modern America by Leslie J. Reagan, Berkeley, California: University of California Press, 2010, page 172 She received a sentence of two years probation, and as an option under her probation, chose to move back into her parents' house in North Carolina. The Playboy Foundation donated $3,500 to her defense fund and Playboy denounced her prosecution.Bachelors and Bunnies: The Sexual Politics of Playboy by Carrie Pitzulo, University of Chicago Press, page 2011, page 157 The Boston Women's Abortion Coalition raised money and held a rally where attendees listened to speakers from the Women's National Abortion Action Coalition (WONAAC).  Her conviction was overturned by the Supreme Court of Florida.
History of the case
Sarah Weddington recruited Linda Coffee to help her with abortion litigation. Their first plaintiffs were a married couple; they joined after the woman heard Coffee give a speech.Roe v. Wade: The Untold Story of the Landmark Supreme Court Decision that Made Abortion Legal by Marian Faux, New York City: Cooper Square Press, 2001, page 39, Roe v. Wade: Abortion and a Woman's Right to Privacy by Melissa Higgins, Chapter 5, Constructing and Filing Roe v. Wade, North Mankato, MN: Abdo Publishing, 2012, page 52, and A Question of Choice by Sarah Weddington, New York: Penguin Books, 1993, page 50 The intended suit would state abortions were medically necessary for the woman. The woman had a neurochemical disorder and it was considered medically necessary that she not give birth or raise children, yet they did not want to abstain from sex, and contraception might fail. The attorneys were concerned about standing since the woman was not pregnant. Weddington later wrote that they "needed to find a pregnant Texas woman who wanted an abortion and would be willing to be a plaintiff." They also wanted to increase the likelihood that the panel selection would help them win in court. They wanted to present their case to a three-judge panel which included a judge they thought would be sympathetic, which was a possibility only by filing a case in Dallas.  If either of the two cases they filed in Dallas were assigned favorably, they intended to ask for the other one to be consolidated with it.Roe v. Wade: Abortion and a Woman's Right to Privacy by Melissa Higgins, Chapter 5, Constructing and Filing Roe v. Wade, North Mankato, MN: Abdo Publishing, 2012 page 54 and A Question of Choice by Sarah Weddington, New York: Penguin Books, 1993, page 53
At first, Weddington was unsuccessful in finding a suitable pregnant woman.A Question of Choice by Sarah Weddington, New York: Penguin Books, 1993, pp. 50–51.Roe v. Wade: The Untold Story of the Landmark Supreme Court Decision that Made Abortion Legal by Marian Faux, New York City: Cooper Square Press, 2001, p. 38. In June 1969, 21-year-old Norma McCorvey discovered she was pregnant with her third child.Key Abortion Plaintiff Now Denies She Was Raped by Kenneth B. Noble, The New York Times, September 9, 1987. Retrieved June 26, 2022.The Lawyers Who Made America: From Jamestown to the White House by Anthony Arlidge, Oxford, United Kingdom and Portland, Oregon: Hart Publishing, 2017, p. 176. Ordinarily, lawyers are not allowed to directly solicit clients without any prior relationship, but McCorvey's situation qualified for an exception in the no solicitation rule which allows lawyers to solicit new clients for public interest cases.Revisiting Roe v. Wade: Substance and Process in the Abortion Debate by Margaret G. Farrell and Benjamin N. Cardozo, Indiana Law Journal, Volume 68, Issue 2, spring 1993, section one on Solicitation and Representation", pages 282–283 (pages 15–16 of the pdf) According to a sworn statement made in 2003, McCorvey asked if she had what was needed to be part of Weddington and Coffee's lawsuit. She recounted being told, "Yes. You're white. You're young, pregnant, and you want an abortion."Affidavit of Norma McCorvey, U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Texas, Dallas Division, Norma McCorvey, formerly known as Jane Roe, Plaintiff, vs. Henry Wade, Through His Official Successor in Office, William "Bill" Hill, Dallas County District Attorney, Defendant., Civil Action No. 3—3690-B and No. 3-3691-C, June 11, 2003, paragraph 11 on page 5 of 13, affidavit page 000006.Norma McCorvey, "Jane Roe" Of Roe V. Wade, Is Dead At 69  by Sara Murphy, Yahoo!, February 18, 2017. Retrieved June 26, 2022. Both McCorvey's whiteness and her lower social class were crucial factors in the attorneys' choice to have her as their plaintiff.Jane Roe Gone Rogue: Norma McCorvey's Transformation as a Symbol of the U.S. Abortion Debate by Christianna K. Barnard, MA thesis, Sarah Lawrence College, May 2018, page 14, (page 32 of the pdf)
McCorvey recounted that the lawyers asked if she thought abortion should be legal. McCorvey said she did not know. Weddington told her, "It's just a piece of tissue. You just missed your period." This convinced McCorvey that abortion should be legal.A Woman's Right to an Abortion: Roe v. Wade by D. J. Herda, Berkeley Heights, New Jersey: Enslow Publishing, 2016, page 97 and Affidavit of Norma McCorvey, U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Texas, Dallas Division, Norma McCorvey, formerly known as Jane Roe, Plaintiff, vs. Henry Wade, Through His Official Successor in Office, William "Bill" Hill, Dallas County District Attorney, Defendant., Civil Action No. 3—3690-B and No. 3-3691-C, June 11, 2003, paragraph 9 on pages 4–5 of 13, affidavit pages 000005–000006 She agreed to let them represent her under the impression that she would be able to eventually get a legal abortion.Jane Roe Gone Rogue: Norma McCorvey's Transformation as a Symbol of the U.S. Abortceion Debate by Christianna K. Barnard, MA thesis, Sarah Lawrence College, May 2018, page 22, (page 40 of the pdf) and I Am Roe: My Life, Roe v. Wade, and Freedom of Choice by Norma McCorvey and Andy Meisler, New York City: HarperCollins, 1994, page 124 She smoked an illegal drug and drank wine so she would not have to think about her pregnancy.Jane Roe Gone Rogue: Norma McCorvey's Transformation as a Symbol of the U.S. Abortion Debate by Christianna K. Barnard, MA thesis, Sarah Lawrence College, May 2018, page 22, (page 40 of the pdf) and I Am Roe: My Life, Roe v. Wade, and Freedom of Choice by Norma McCorvey and Andy Meisler, New York City: HarperCollins, 1994, page 125 McCorvey gave birth to a daughter at Dallas Osteopathic Hospital on June 2, 1970; the baby, Shelley Lynn Thornton, was adopted by a couple in Texas.Jane Roe's Baby Tells Her Story by Joshua Prager, The Atlantic, September 9, 2021
In 1970, Coffee and Weddington filed Roe v. Wade as a lawsuit in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Texas on behalf of McCorvey under the legal pseudonym "Jane Roe", and they also filed Does v. Wade on behalf of the married couple.Roe v. Wade: The Untold Story of the Landmark Supreme Court Decision that Made Abortion Legal by Marian Faux, New York City: Cooper Square Press, 2001, page 85 The defendant for both cases was Dallas County District Attorney, Henry Wade, who represented the State of Texas. Weddington later stated that she "saw Roe as part of a much larger effort by many attorneys" whose collective interests she represented.A Question of Choice by Sarah Weddington, New York: Penguin Books, 1993, page 154 and Roe Reconsidered by Nina Butts, The Texas Observer, November 13, 1992, page 15 James H. Hallford was a physician who was in the process of being prosecuted for performing two abortions.Roe v. Wade: The Untold Story of the Landmark Supreme Court Decision that Made Abortion Legal by Marian Faux, New York City: Cooper Square Press, 2001, page 93 The Court allowed him to join the suit as a physician-intervenor on behalf of Jane Roe.What does the original Roe v. Wade really say? by Amanda Robert, American Bar Association Journal, May 3, 2022, and Summary of Roe v. Wade at Lawnix.com (Archived October 22, 2012)
One of the cases was assigned to a panel of judges which included Judge Sarah T. Hughes, who they thought would be sympathetic, and the cases were consolidated.Roe v. Wade: The Untold Story of the Landmark Supreme Court Decision that Made Abortion Legal by Marian Faux, New York City: Cooper Square Press, 2001, page 91 and A Question of Choice by Sarah Weddington, New York: Penguin Books, 1993, page 58 In accordance with the Court's rules, two of the judges hearing the consolidated case were assigned on the basis of their judicial district, and the third judge on the panel was a circuit court judgeRoe v. Wade: Abortion and a Woman's Right to Privacy by Melissa Higgins, Chapter 5, Constructing and Filing Roe v. Wade, North Mankato, MN: Abdo Publishing, 2012, page 55 chosen by the appellate Chief Justice of the United States.Roe v. Wade: The Untold Story of the Landmark Supreme Court Decision that Made Abortion Legal by Marian Faux, New York City: Cooper Square Press, 2001, page 128
The consolidated lawsuit was heard by a three-judge panel consisting of district court judges Sarah T. Hughes and William McLaughlin Taylor Jr. and appellate judge Irving Loeb Goldberg of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit. Hughes knew Coffee, who clerked for her from 1968 to 1969.The Untold Dallas Origins of Roe v. Wade by Joshua Prager, D Magazine, January 11, 2022 Additionally, the backgrounds of two other judges also gave Weddington and Coffee hope they would be successful.Roe v. Wade: The Untold Story of the Landmark Supreme Court Decision that Made Abortion Legal by Marian Faux, New York City: Cooper Square Press, 2001, pages 126–127 On June 17, 1970, the three judges unanimously ruled in McCorvey's favor and declared the Texas law unconstitutional, finding that it violated the right to privacy found in the Ninth Amendment. The court relied on Justice Arthur Goldberg's 1965 concurrence in Griswold v. Connecticut. Yet the Court also declined to grant an injunction against enforcing the law, and ruled against the married couple on the basis that they lacked standing.What does the original Roe v. Wade really say? by Amanda Robert, American Bar Association Journal, May 3, 2022, Summary of Roe v. Wade at Lawnix.com (Archived October 22, 2012), and  Since Wade said he would continue to prosecute people for performing abortions, the lack of an injunction meant that McCorvey could not get an abortion.Roe v. Wade Case (US), by Merle H. Weiner, Oxford Constitutional Law, August 2016, page 4, Part B. The Factual Backdrop: Access to Abortion in the United States Prior to Roe v Wade, item number 14; At this point McCorvey had been now pregnant for six months.
Hearing the case
thumb|Rose Fosco, who before 1968 posed as a woman seeking an abortion during sting operations for the Chicago Police Department. As an undercover officer, she worked to break up illegal abortion rings.Lewis Carroll, even you wouldn't have believed Madison Scene by Keta Steebs, Door County Advocate, Volume 114, Issue 74, November 26, 1975, page 1
Postponement
Roe v. Wade reached the Supreme Court when both sides appealed in 1970. The case continued under the name Roe v. Wade instead of being switched to Wade v. Roe. The justices delayed taking action on Roe and a closely related case, Doe v. Bolton, until they had first decided certain other cases. One case they decided first was Younger v. Harris. The justices felt the appeals raised difficult questions on judicial jurisdiction.
Another case was United States v. Vuitch, in which they considered the constitutionality of a District of Columbia statute which banned abortion except when the mother's life or health was endangered. The Court upheld the statute on the grounds that the word "health" was not unconstitutionally vague and placed the burden of proof concerning dangers to the life or health of the mother on the prosecutor instead of on the person who had performed the abortion.United States v. Vuitch, 402 U.S. 62 (1971), justia.com
Justice William O. Douglas wrote a lengthy dissenting opinion to this case. He argued that the right to marital privacy and the limitation of family size from Griswold v. Connecticut also applied here, although he acknowledged that "on the other side is the belief of many that the fetus, once formed, is a member of the human family and that mere personal inconvenience cannot justify the fetus' destruction." He also challenged the majority opinion with a series of hypothetical questions asking whether "health" might also include the stigma of having an illegitimate child, anxiety from the pregnancy being unwanted, the physical work of raising a child, the financial drain from the added expense of another child, and far off health risks that may never actually materialize in a similar fashion to how risks were warded off with prophylactic appendectomy.United States v. Vuitch (1971), No. 84 Argued: January 12, 1971, Decided: April 21, 1971, findlaw.com Douglas' dissent made a similar legal argument to the one used two years later in Roe v. Wade. The following day after their decision was announced, the court voted to hear both Roe and Doe.
According to Blackmun, Stewart felt the cases were a straightforward application of Younger v. Harris, and enough justices agreed to hear the cases in order to review whether they would be suitable for federal as opposed to only state courts. This sort of review was not about the constitutionality of abortion and would not have required evidence, witnesses, or a record of facts. The oral argument was scheduled by the full Court for December 13, 1971. Before the Court could hear the oral argument, Justices Hugo Black and John Marshall Harlan II retired. Chief Justice Warren Burger asked Justice Potter Stewart and Justice Blackmun to determine whether Roe and Doe, among others, should be heard as scheduled. They recommended that the Court continue on as scheduled.
Oral argument
As she began speaking for the oral argument, Sarah Weddington was unaware that the Court had decided to hear the case in order to decide which courts had jurisdiction to hear it rather than as an attempt to overturn abortion laws in a broad ruling. She began by bringing up constitutional reasons why the Court should overturn Texas's abortion law, but Justice Stewart asked questions directed towards the jurisdiction question instead. Weddington replied that she saw no problem with jurisdiction and continued to talk about a constitutional right to abortion.The Brethren: Inside the Supreme Court by Bob Woodward and Scott Armstrong, New York: Simon and Schuster, page 1979, page 265 Overall, she spent between 20 and 30 minutes discussing jurisdiction and procedure instead of constitutional issues.
In his opening argument in defense of the abortion restrictions, attorney Jay Floyd made what was later described as the "worst joke in legal history".Sant, Geoffrey. "8 horrible courtroom jokes and their ensuing legal calamities", Salon.com (July 27, 2013): "The title of Worst Joke in Legal History belongs to one of history's highest-profile cases. Defending Texas's abortion restrictions before the Supreme Court, attorney Mr. Jay Floyd decided to open oral argument with a sexist joke." Retrieved August 10, 2010. Appearing against two female lawyers, Floyd began, "Mr. Chief Justice and may it please the Court. It's an old joke, but when a man argues against two beautiful ladies like this, they are going to have the last word." His remark was met with cold silence; one observer thought that Chief Justice Burger "was going to come right off the bench at him. He glared him down."
McCorvey did not attend either of the oral arguments along with her two lawyers. After talking McCorvey out of getting an illegal abortion and getting her name signed on an affidavit for the lawsuit, Weddington did not speak again with McCorvey until four months after Roe was decided.Jane Roe Gone Rogue: Norma McCorvey's Transformation as a Symbol of the U.S. Abortion Debate by Christianna K. Barnard, MA thesis, Sarah Lawrence College, May 2018, pages 20–21, (pages 38–39 of the pdf) and Won by Love: Norma McCorvey, Jane Roe of Roe v. Wade, Speaks Out for the Unborn as She Shares Her New Conviction For Life by Norma McCorvey and Gary Thomas, Nashville, Tennessee: Thomas Nelson, 1997, Chapter 5, The Shadow Plaintiff pages 36–37
Initial discussions
thumb|upright=0.8|The judicial replacements
After the first argument session, Burger assigned the task of writing the Court's opinions for both Roe and Doe to Blackmun. Douglas suggested to Blackmun that Burger assigned the opinions to him out of malicious intention, but Blackmun disagreed. He knew that Burger could not write it himself because the abortion was too controversial, and his opinions might get rejected by the majority. He also understood why the other justices could not be assigned to write the opinions: Douglas was too liberal for the public to accept his word. Likewise, he might split the Court's vote by writing something radical. In addition, the quality of his opinions had suffered recently. Brennan was the only Catholic on the Court, and he would have to face Catholic political groups which were against abortion. If Marshall wrote the opinions, the ruling would be perceived as being directed towards African Americans, and he would have to face the displeasure of African American political groups. Stewart would have trouble going far enough in legalizing abortion.The Justices Behind Roe v. Wade: The Inside Story, Adapted from The Brethren by Bob Woodward and Scott Armstrong, New York: Simon and Schuster, 2021, page 96
At this point, Black and Harlan had been replaced by William Rehnquist and Lewis F. Powell Jr., but the first argument had already occurred before they became Supreme Court justices. Justice Blackmun worked on a preliminary opinion for Roe which argued that Texas's law was unconstitutionally vague. This approach accommodated the claims of some doctors who were concerned that prosecutors might disagree with them over what constituted "life". Blackmun thought this approach would be a good way to avoid controversy which would come with saying there was a fundamental right to abortion. Brennan and Douglas disagreed with Blackmun and wrote to him that instead he needed to focus on privacy.Dispatch from the Supreme Court Archives: Vagrancy, Abortion, and What the Links Between Them Reveal About the History of Fundamental Rights by Risa L. Goluboff, Stanford Law Review Volume 62, Issue 5, page 1379 (page 20 of the pdf) After communicating with the other justices, Blackmun felt that his opinion did not adequately reflect his liberal colleagues' views. In March 1972, the court issued a ruling in Eisenstadt v. Baird, a landmark case which applied the earlier marital privacy right now also to unmarried individuals.Defenders of the Unborn: The Pro-life Movement Before Roe v. Wade by Daniel K. Williams, New York: Oxford University Press, page 200
Douglas wrote to  Blackmun in May 1972 that he thought there were four judges who were definitely willing to rule in the majority—himself, Brennan, Stewart, and Marshall.Constitutional Law for a Changing America: Rights, Liberties, and Justice by Lee Epstein, Kevin T. McGuire, and Thomas G. Walker, 11th edition, London: SAGE Publications, Part Two: Civil Liberties, Chapter Ten: Privacy and Personal Liberty, page 354 and A Question of Choice by Sarah Weddington, New York: Penguin Books, 1993, page 132–133 Blackmun at one point thought all seven justices wanted to vote in the majority.
In May 1972, Blackmun proposed that the case be reargued. Justice Douglas threatened to write a dissent from the reargument order because he and the other liberal justices were suspicious that Rehnquist and Powell would vote to uphold the Texas abortion statutes. He was coaxed out of the action by his colleagues, and instead his dissent was merely mentioned in the reargument order without further statement or opinion.The case was reargued on October 11, 1972. Weddington continued to represent the pseudonymous Jane Roe, and Texas Assistant Attorney General Robert C. Flowers replaced Jay Floyd for Texas.
A June 1972 memo written by Douglas to his colleagues discussing the case was leaked to and published in The Washington Post before the decision was published.
Drafting the opinion
thumb|upright=0.8|George Frampton, law clerk to  during the 1971–72 term
Blackmun continued to work on his opinions in both cases over the summer recess, even though there was no guarantee that he would be assigned to write them again. Over the recess, he spent a week researching the history of abortion at the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota, where he had worked in the 1950s. He talked daily on the phone with George Frampton, his 28-year old law clerk who stayed behind in Washington, D.C. Frampton researched the history of abortion using a book authored by Lawrence Lader, the founding chairman of what is now called NARAL Pro-Choice America. Blackmun's papers made available since his death contain at least seven citations for Lader's 1966 book, Abortion. Chapter 16 of his book, "A Blueprint for Changing U.S. Abortion Laws" predicted that if abortion were to be legalized, "the possibility of community opposition is slight".Abortion by Lawrence Lader, Indianapolis: The Bobbs-Merrill Company, 1966, page 151 Lader also predicted that "If such a theoretical case was carried to a high court, perhaps even the U.S. Supreme Court, and the judges confirmed a broad interpretation of the meaning of a threat to life, undoubtedly a landmark in abortion decisions would be reached."Abortion by Lawrence Lader, Indianapolis: The Bobbs-Merrill Company, 1966, page 154
The historical survey for Roe also referenced two articles by Cyril Means,In the Roe v. Wade (justia.com) majority opinion, "Means I" denotes The Law of New York Concerning Abortion and the Status of the Foetus, 1664–1968: A Case of Cessation of Constitutionality, New York Law Forum, Volume 14, Number 3, Fall 1968; "Means II" denotes The Phoenix of Abortional Freedom: Is a Penumbral or Ninth-Amendment Right About to Arise from the Nineteenth-Century Legislative Ashes of a Fourteenth-Century Common-Law Liberty?, New York Law Forum, Volume 17, Number 2, 1971 who served as counsel to NARAL. In the articles, Means misrepresented the common law tradition in ways that were helpful to the Roe side.Abortion Distortion: A Review of Dispelling the Myths of Abortion History by Joseph W. Dellapenna by John A. Keown, The Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics, Volume 35, Issue 2, Summer 2007, page 326; quotes cited to Dispelling the Myths of Abortion History by J. W. Dellapenna, Durham: Carolina Academic Press, 2006, page 684; also cited as footnote 171 on page 30 (page 28 of the pdf) of  Back to the Future of Abortion Law: Roe Rejection of America's History and Traditions by John Keown, Issues in Law and Medicine Volume 22, Issue 1, Summer 2006; footnote 171 cites Liberty and Sexuality: The Right to Privacy and the Making of Roe v. Wade by David J. Garrow, 1994, pages 853–54; in Garrow, the memo is quoted as footnote 41 and cited as "David [Tundermann] to Roy [Lucas], "Legislative Purpose et al.," 5 August 1971, Lucas Box 13." Roy Lucas, the principal attorney assisting Weddington and Coffee, had previously received a memo from his colleague David M. Tundermann about Means's scholarship. The memo stated that the conclusions in Means's articles "sometimes strain credibility." It also stated:
Where the important thing is to win the case no matter how, however, I suppose I agree with Means's technique: begin with a scholarly attempt at historical research; if it doesn't work, fudge it as necessary; write a piece so long that others will read only your introduction and conclusion; then keep citing it until courts begin picking it up. This preserves the guise of impartial scholarship while advancing the proper ideological goals.
After the Court held the second argument session, Powell said he would agree with Blackmun's conclusion but pushed for Roe to be the lead of the two abortion cases being considered. Powell also suggested that the Court strike down the Texas law on privacy grounds. Byron White was unwilling to sign on to Blackmun's opinion, and Justice Rehnquist had already decided to dissent.
During the drafting process, the justices discussed the trimester framework at great length. Powell had suggested that the point where the state could intervene be placed at viability, which Thurgood Marshall supported as well. In an internal memo to the other justices before the majority decision was published, Justice Blackmun wrote: "You will observe that I have concluded that the end of the first trimester is critical. This is arbitrary, but perhaps any other selected point, such as quickening or viability, is equally arbitrary." In the same memo he suggested that the end of the first trimester seemed more likely to get support from other justices and allowed states the ability to adjust their statutes. He was of the impression that doctors were concerned that recovering abortion patients would take up too many hospital beds, and that abortion patients later than the first trimester were more likely to require hospital beds than those whose fetuses were aborted earlier.Revelations on the Road to Roe by David Garrow, American Lawyer, Volume 22, May 2000, page 4 of the pdf Contrary to the justices who preferred viability, Douglas preferred the first-trimester line. Stewart said the lines were "legislative" and wanted more flexibility and consideration paid to state legislatures, though he joined Blackmun's decision.Kmiec, Douglas. "Testimony Before Subcommittee on the Constitution, Judiciary Committee, U.S. House of Representatives" (April 22, 1996), page 97, Archived August 21, 2008 William Brennan proposed abandoning frameworks based on the age of the fetus and instead allowing states to regulate the procedure based on its safety for the mother.
 Supreme Court decision 
On January 22, 1973, the Supreme Court issued a 7–2 decision in favor of "Jane Roe" (Norma McCorvey) holding that women in the United States had a fundamental right to choose whether to have abortions without excessive government restriction and striking down Texas's abortion ban as unconstitutional. The decision was issued together with a decision in Roe companion case, Doe v. Bolton, which involved a similar challenge to Georgia's abortion laws.
Larry Hammond, a law clerk for Powell, gave a Time reporter a copy of the decision "on background", expecting that it would be issued by the court before the next issue of Time was published; however, due to a delay in the decision's release, the text of the decision appeared on newsstands a few hours before it was published by the court. Burger demanded a meeting with Time editors and punishment for the leaker. Powell refused Hammond's resignation, on the grounds that "Hammond had been double-crossed" by the reporter.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|upright=0.8|Justice Harry Blackmun, the author of Roe majority opinion
Justice Harry Blackmun wrote the majority opinion and was joined by Chief Justice Warren Burger and Justices Potter Stewart, William J. Brennan Jr., William O. Douglas, Thurgood Marshall, and Lewis F. Powell Jr.. 
 Mootness 
After reciting the facts of the case, the Court's opinion first addressed procedure and justiciability. This included mootness, a legal doctrine that prevents American federal courts from hearing cases that have ceased to be "live" controversies because of intervening events. Under a normal application of the doctrine, McCorvey's appeal would have been considered moot because she had already given birth to her child and therefore no longer had a pregnancy to abort.
The Court concluded that an established exception to the mootness doctrine allows consideration of cases that are "capable of repetition, yet evading review". Blackmun noted that McCorvey might get pregnant again, and pregnancy would normally conclude more quickly than an appellate process: "If that termination makes a case moot, pregnancy litigation seldom will survive much beyond the trial stage, and appellate review will be effectively denied."Roe, 410 U.S. at 125; see also 
 Abortion and right to privacy 
After dealing with mootness and standing, the Court proceeded to the main issue of the case: the constitutionality of Texas's abortion law. The Court first surveyed abortion's status throughout the history of Roman law and the English and early American common law. It also reviewed the developments of medical procedures and technology used in abortions.
After its historical surveys, the Court introduced the concept of a constitutional "right to privacy" that it said had been intimated in earlier decisions such as Meyer v. Nebraska and Pierce v. Society of Sisters, which involved parental control over childrearing, and Griswold v. Connecticut, which involved the use of contraception. Then, "with virtually no further explanation of the privacy value", the Court ruled that regardless of exactly which provisions were involved, the U.S. Constitution's guarantees of liberty covered a right to privacy that protected a pregnant woman's decision whether to abort a pregnancy.
The Court reasoned that outlawing abortions would infringe a pregnant woman's right to privacy for several reasons: having unwanted children "may force upon the woman a distressful life and future"; it may bring imminent psychological harm; caring for the child may tax the mother's physical and mental health; and because there may be "distress, for all concerned, associated with the unwanted child"., quoting Roe, 410 U.S. at 153. But at the same time, the Court rejected the notion that this right to privacy was absolute. It held instead that women's abortion right must be balanced against other government interests, such as protecting maternal health and protecting the life of the fetus. The Court held that these government interests were sufficiently compelling to permit states to impose some limitations on pregnant women's right to choose to have an abortion.
Texas's lawyers had argued that limiting abortion to situations where the mother's life was in danger was justified because life began at the moment of conception, and therefore the state's governmental interest in protecting prenatal life applied to all pregnancies regardless of their stage. The Court said that there was no indication that the Constitution's uses of the word "person" were meant to include fetuses, and it rejected Texas's argument that a fetus should be considered a "person" with a legal and constitutional right to life. The Court observed that there was still great disagreement over when an unborn fetus becomes a living being.
To balance women's rights to privacy and state governments' interests in protecting mothers' health and prenatal life, the Court created the trimester framework. During the first trimester, when it was believed that the procedure was safer than childbirth, the Court ruled that a state government could place no restrictions on women's ability to choose to abort pregnancies other than imposing minimal medical safeguards, such as requiring abortions to be performed by licensed physicians. From the second trimester on, the Court ruled that evidence of increasing risks to the mother's health gave states a compelling interest that allowed them to enact medical regulations on abortion procedures so long as they were reasonable and "narrowly tailored" to protecting mothers' health. From the beginning of the third trimester on—the point at which a fetus became viable under the medical technology available in the early 1970s—the Court ruled that a state's interest in protecting prenatal life became so compelling that it could legally prohibit all abortions except where necessary to protect the mother's life or health.
Having completed its analysis, the Court concluded that Texas's abortion statutes were unconstitutional and struck them down.
 Concurrences 
Three justices from the majority filed concurring opinions in the case. Justice Potter Stewart wrote a concurring opinion in which he said that even though the Constitution makes no mention of the right to choose to have an abortion without interference, he thought the Court's decision was a permissible interpretation of the doctrine of substantive due process, which says that the Due Process Clause protection of liberty extends beyond simple procedures and protects certain fundamental rights. Justice William O. Douglas's concurring opinion described his view that although the Court was correct to find that the right to choose to have an abortion was a fundamental right, he thought it would have been better to derive it from the Ninth Amendmentwhich states that the fact that a right is not specifically enumerated in the Constitution shall not be construed to mean that American people do not possess itrather than through the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause.
Chief Justice Warren Burger wrote a concurrence in which he wrote that he thought it would be permissible to allow a state to require two physicians to certify an abortion before it could be performed. His concurrence also states:Roe v. Wade, Mr. Chief Justice Burger, concurring , Landmark Cases, C-SPAN, January 22, 1973I do not read the Court's holdings today as having the sweeping consequences attributed to them by the dissenting Justices; the dissenting views discount the reality that the vast majority of physicians observe the standards of their profession, and act only on the basis of carefully deliberated medical judgments relating to life and health. Plainly, the Court today rejects any claim that the Constitution requires abortions on demand.
This has been interpreted as Chief Justice Burger thinking that medical standards and judgment would restrict the number of abortions. Instead of the law restricting abortions to limited circumstances as pre-Roe, now doctors would get to do the restricting.Judges as Medical Decision Makers: Is the Cure Worse than the Disease by Alan A. Stone, Cleveland State Law Review, Volume 33, Issue 4, 1984, page 580 (page 3 of the pdf)
This understanding of Roe appears to be related to several statements in the majority opinion.Judges as Medical Decision Makers: Is the Cure Worse than the Disease by Alan A. Stone, Cleveland State Law Review, Volume 33, Issue 4, 1984, pages 579–580 (pages 2–3 of the pdf) Justice Blackmun's majority opinion states, "the attending physician, in consultation with his patient, is free to determine, without regulation by the state, that, in his medical judgment, the patient's pregnancy should be terminated."Roe, 410 U.S. at 163, justia.com It also states, "For the stage, prior to approximately the end of the first trimester, the abortion decision and its effectuation must be left to the medical judgment of the pregnant woman's attending physician."Roe, 410 U.S. at 164, justia.com Six days prior to January 22, Justice Blackmun prepared "a  transcript of what I shall say, and there should be at least some reason for the press not going all the way off the deep end." The unissued news release stated:
...the Court does not today hold that the Constitution compels abortion on demand. It does not today pronounce that a pregnant woman has an absolute right to abortion. It does, for the first trimester of pregnancy, cast the abortion decision and the responsibility for it upon the attending physician.
These statements appear to indicate that the justices voting in the majority thought that patients had personal physicians. Earlier in American history it was once common for people to have individual doctors, but the nature of doctor-patient relationship had already changed prior to Roe.
 Dissents 
Justices Byron White and William Rehnquist dissented from the Court's decision.  White's dissent, which was issued with Roe companion case, Doe v. Bolton, argued that the Court had no basis for deciding between the competing values of pregnant women and unborn children. 
White also argued that the legality of abortion, "for the most part, should be left with the people and the political processes the people have devised to govern their affairs.", quoting Doe, 410 U.S. at 222 (White, J., dissenting).
Rehnquist's dissent compared the majority's use of substantive due process to the Court's repudiated use of the doctrine in the 1905 case Lochner v. New York. He elaborated on several of White's points and asserted that the Court's historical analysis was flawed.
From this historical record, Rehnquist wrote, "There apparently was no question concerning the validity of this provision or of any of the other state statutes when the Fourteenth Amendment was adopted." He concluded "the drafters did not intend to have the Fourteenth Amendment withdraw from the States the power to legislate with respect to this matter."
 Reception 
There was a strong response to the decision shortly after it was issued. The Catholic Church condemned the ruling. Prominent organized groups that responded to Roe include National Association for the Repeal of Abortion Laws, which became the National Abortion Rights Action League in late 1973 to reflect the Court's repeal of restrictive laws, and the National Right to Life Committee.
The legal scholar Ronald Dworkin described it as "undoubtedly the best-known case the United States Supreme Court has ever decided."
 Support for Roe and abortion rights 
 1960s–1970s 
In the 1960s, there was an alliance between the population control movement and the abortion-rights movement in the United States. Abortion rights were especially supported by younger women within the population control movement. The cooperation was mostly due to feminists who wanted some of the popularity already enjoyed by the population control movement. In addition, population control advocates thought that legalizing abortion would help solve the coming population crisis that demographers had projected.
In 1973, Hugh Moore's Population Crisis Committee and John D. Rockefeller III's Population Council both publicly supported abortion rights following Roe. Previously, public support for abortion rights within the population control movement instead came from less established organizations such as Zero Population Growth. An exception was Planned Parenthood-World Population, which supported repealing all laws against abortion in 1969.In 1969, Planned Parenthood-World Population took a position in favor of repealing all laws against abortion; see Gender and Women's Leadership: A Reference Handbook by Karen O'Connor, London: SAGE Publications, 2010, page 744; the Planned Parenthood organization had merged with the World Population Emergency Campaign organization in 1961 to create Planned Parenthood-World Population; see Population Crisis, Hearings Before the Subcommittee on Foreign Aid Expenditures of the Committee on Government Operations, United States Senate, Eighty-Ninth Congress, First Session on S. 1676, June 29; July 9–24, 1965, Part 2-A, page 916; the merger occurred during a shift within the birth control movement away from individual health and towards population control; see Competitive Problems in the Drug Industry, Hearings before the Subcommittee on Monopoly of the Select Committee on Small Business. United States Senate, Ninety-First Congress, First session on Present Status of Competition in the Pharmaceutical Industry, February 24 – March 4, 1970, Part 16, Oral Contraceptives (Volume Two), page 6742 Together, population control and abortion rights advocates voiced the benefits of legalized abortion such as smaller welfare costs, fewer illegitimate births, and slower population growth. At the same time, the use of these arguments put them at odds with civil-rights movement leaders and Black Power activists who were concerned that abortion would be used to eliminate non-whites. H. Rap Brown denounced abortion as "black genocide", and Dick Gregory said that his "answer to genocide, quite simply, is eight Black kids and another one on the way."
Soon after Roe, the population control movement suffered setbacks, which caused the movement to lose political support and instead appear divisive. On June 27, 1973, a lawsuit was filed concerning the Relf sisters, 14-year old Minnie Lee and her 12-year old sister Alice Lee. A worker at a federally-funded family planning clinic lied to their illiterate mother, saying they would get birth control shots. Instead, the Relf sisters were sterilized without their knowledge or consent.Relf Sisters Sue for Involuntary Sterilization, Moments in the Civil Rights Movement, Voices of the Civil Rights Movement, Comcast/NBC Universal, April 4, 2015 During the next fifteen months, 80 additional women came forward about their forced sterilizations, all belonging to minority races. Concerns rose that abortions would also become compulsory. During the 1974 World Population Conference in Bucharest, Romania, most developing nations argued that the developed nations' focus on population growth was an attempt to avoid solving the deeper causes of underdevelopment, such as the unequal structure of international relations. Instead, they wanted more favorable terms under the New International Economic Order. A draft plan with fertility targets was strongly opposed by the developing countries, which surprised the delegations from the United States, Canada, and Great Britain. The final plan omitted fertility targets and instead stated, "A population policy may have a certain success if it constitutes an integral part of socio-economic development."Translations on Sub-Saharan Africa, United States Joint Publications Research Service circular #72986, issue number 2074 March 13, 1979, page 15
As members questioned the political benefits of population control rhetoric, the abortion-rights movement distanced itself from the population control movement. In October 1973, Robin Elliott circulated a memo to other Planned Parenthood members concerning opposition to "Planned Parenthood's credibility in its reference to the population problem". Instead, she thought they should use Roe inspired rhetoric about "the reaffirmation of commitment to freedom of choice in parenthood." By 1978, a NARAL handbook denounced population control.
 21st century 
thumb|2021 Women's March, where many speakers bemoaned a looming threat to Roe.
Into the 21st century, advocates of Roe describe it as vital to the preservation of women's rights, personal freedom, bodily integrity, and privacy. Advocates have also reasoned that access to safe abortion and reproductive freedom generally are fundamental rights. Supporters of Roe contend that even if abortion rights are also supported by another portion of the constitution, the decision in 1973 accurately founds the right in the Fourteenth Amendment. Others support Roe despite concern that the fundamental right to abortion is found elsewhere in the Constitution but not in the portions referenced in the 1973 decision."Forced Labor: A Thirteenth Amendment Defense of Abortion", Archived February 25, 2009, by Andrew Koppelman, Northwestern Law Review, Vol. 84, p. 480 (1990).What Roe v. Wade Should Have Said; The Nation's Top Legal Experts Rewrite America's Most Controversial decision, Jack Balkin Ed. (NYU Press 2005). Retrieved January 26, 2007 They also tend to believe that the power balance between men and women is unequal, and that issues like access to birth control and political representation affect women's equality.
Opinion polls in late 2021 indicated that while a majority of Americans oppose overturning Roe,Manchester, Julia (December 6, 2021). "Majority oppose overturning Roe v. Wade: poll". The Hill. Retrieved June 26, 2022. a sizable minority opposed overturning Roe but also desired to make abortion illegal in ways that Roe would not permit. This was attributed to poll respondents misunderstanding Roe v. Wade or misinterpreting the poll question.Desanctis, Alexandra (December 7, 2021). "Poll: Americans Continue to Misunderstand Roe". National Review. Retrieved June 26, 2022. 2018–2019 polls showed that while 60 percent of Americans generally support abortion in the first trimester, this drops to 20 percent for the second trimester, even though Roe protects the right to abortion until the last weeks of the second trimester, and at the same time 69 percent said they would not like to see Roe overturned, compared to 29 percent who said they would like to see Roe overturned. Another poll showed that 43 percent of those who said abortion should be illegal in most or all cases opposed overturning Roe, while 26 percent of those who said abortion should be legal in most or all cases supported overturning Roe. Polls also found that men and women have similar views on abortion, which are linked to how people think about motherhood, sex, and women's social roles; supporters of Roe and abortion rights tend to see women's ability to make decisions about their bodies as fundamental to gender equality.
Most polls in the late 2010s and early 2020s showed overwhelming support, at between 85 and 90 percent, among Americans that abortion should be legal in at least some circumstances, which varies or drops depending on the specifics. A January 2022 CNN poll found a 59% majority of Americans want their state to have laws that are "more permissive than restrictive" on abortion if Roe is overturned, 20% want their state to ban abortion entirely, and another 20% want it to be restricted but not banned. In two March 2022 polls, between 61 and 64 percent of Americans said abortion should be legal in most or all cases, while between 35 and 37 percent said abortion should be illegal in most or all cases. A May 2022 Gallup poll showed that 50% of Americans thought abortions should be legal under certain circumstances, with 35% saying it should be legal under any circumstances, and 15% saying it should be illegal in all circumstances, as well as a record number of Americans who identify as pro-choice.
Before Roe was overturned in Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization, a majority of Americans thought that Roe was safe and would not be overturned. Since the draft's leaks showed Roe to be overturned in Dobbs, as happened in June 2022, abortion became a concern and a very important issue for Democrats, who previously lagged behind Republicans on this; some Americans, in particular liberals but also a few conservatives, may have become more aware of the popular support for Roe, which they had previously understated. In June 2022, Gallup reported that a 61% majority of Americans say abortion should be legal in all or most cases, while 37% say abortion should be illegal in all or most cases. It also recorded the highest partisan divide since 1995, compared to the mid-1970s and throughout the 1980s when both Democrats and Republicans were closer on the issue. That same month, the Congregation L'Dor Va-Dor filed a lawsuit against a new law in Florida that would outlaw abortion after 15 weeks of pregnancy, including in cases of rape or incest. Unlike other legal challenges to abortion restrictions in the United States that generally rely on the right to privacy established by Roe, the synagogue argued that Florida's abortion law violates religious freedom, as "Jewish law says that life begins at birth, not at conception."
 Opposition to Roe 
Condemnation by Catholic Bishops
The Catholic Church condemned the ruling by the Supreme Court. Blackmun wrote in his diary, "Abortion flak—3 Cardinals—Vatican—Rochester wires!"
John Cardinal Krol, the archbishop of Philadelphia who was also the president of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops and Terence Cardinal Cooke, the archbishop of New York, both issued statements condemning the ruling. Krol called the ruling "an unspeakable tragedy for this nation" that "sets in motion developments which are terrifying to contemplate." Cooke called the decision a "horrifying action" and added:
How many millions of children prior to their birth will never live to see the light of today because of the shocking action of the majority of the United States Supreme Court today?
 Opposition to Roe but support for abortion rights 
Some supporters of abortion rights oppose Roe v. Wade on the grounds that it laid a foundation for abortion in civil rights rather than in human rights, which are broader and would require government entities to take active measures to ensure every woman has access to abortion. This particular position is indicated by the use of rhetoric concerning "reproductive justice", which replaces earlier rhetoric centered around "choice", such as the "pro-choice" label. Reproductive justice proponents contend that factors permitting choice are unequal, thus perpetuating oppression and serving to divide women. Reproductive justice advocates instead want abortion to be considered an affirmative right that the government would be obligated to guarantee equal access to, even if the women seeking abortions are nonwhite, poor, or live outside major metropolitan areas.Symposium on Anita Bernstein's The Common Law Inside the Female Body by David S. Cohen, Northwestern University Law Review, Volume 114, page 147 (page 8 of the pdf) With a broader interpretation of the right to an abortion, it would be possible to require all new obstetricians to be in favor of abortion rights, lest as professionals they employ conscience clauses and refuse to perform abortions. In the 1989 decision of Webster v. Reproductive Health Services, the Supreme Court ruled against an affirmative right to nontherapeutic abortions and noted that states would not be required to pay for them.
Some in academia have equated the denial of abortion rights to compulsory motherhood, and reason that because of this abortion bans violate the Thirteenth Amendment: "When women are compelled to carry and bear children, they are subjected to 'involuntary servitude' in violation of the Thirteenth Amendment. Even if the woman has stipulated to have consented to the risk of pregnancy, that does not permit the state to force her to remain pregnant." In 1993, a district court rejected an attempt to justify abortion rights apart from Roe and instead upon the basis that pregnancy and childrearing constituted involuntary servitude.
 Opposition to both Roe and abortion rights 
Every year, on the anniversary of the decision, opponents of abortion march up Constitution Avenue to the Supreme Court Building in Washington, D.C., in the March for Life. Around 250,000 people attended the march until 2010. Estimates put the 2011 and 2012 attendances at 400,000 each, and the 2013 March for Life drew an estimated 650,000 people. The march was started in October 1973 by Nellie Gray and the first march took place on January 22, 1974, to mark the first anniversary of Roe v. Wade.
Opponents of Roe say that the decision lacks a valid constitutional foundation. Like the dissenters in Roe, they maintain that the Constitution is silent on the issue, and that proper solutions to the question would best be found via state legislatures and the legislative process, rather than through an all-encompassing ruling from the Supreme Court. Another argument against the Roe decision, as articulated by former president Ronald Reagan, is that, in the absence of consensus about when meaningful life begins, it is best to avoid the risk of doing harm.Reagan, Ronald. Abortion and the Conscience of the Nation, (Nelson 1984): "If you don't know whether a body is alive or dead, you would never bury it. I think this consideration itself should be enough for all of us to insist on protecting the unborn." Retrieved January 26, 2007
In response to Roe v. Wade, most states enacted or attempted to enact laws limiting or regulating abortion, such as laws requiring parental consent or parental notification for minors to obtain abortions; spousal mutual consent laws; spousal notification laws; laws requiring abortions to be performed in hospitals, not clinics; laws barring state funding for abortions; laws banning intact dilation and extraction, also known as partial-birth abortion; laws requiring waiting periods before abortions; and laws mandating that women read certain types of literature and watch a fetal ultrasound before undergoing an abortion.Guttmacher Institute, "State Policies in Brief, An Overview of Abortion Laws (PDF)", published January 1, 2007. Retrieved January 26, 2007. In 1976, Congress passed the Hyde Amendment, barring the federal government from using Medicaid to fund abortions except in cases of rape, incest, or a threat to the life of the mother. The Supreme Court struck down some state restrictions in a long series of cases stretching from the mid-1970s to the late 1980s, but upheld restrictions on funding, including the Hyde Amendment, in the case of Harris v. McRae (1980).. Some opponents of abortion maintain that personhood begins at fertilization or conception, and should therefore be protected by the Constitution; the dissenting justices in Roe instead wrote that decisions about abortion "should be left with the people and to the political processes the people have devised to govern their affairs.".
Responses within the legal profession
Liberal and feminist legal scholars have had various reactions to Roe, not always giving the decision unqualified support. One argument is that Justice Blackmun reached the correct result but went about it the wrong way.Balkin, Jack. Bush v. "Gore and the Boundary Between Law and Politics" , 110 Yale Law Journal 1407 (2001): "Liberal and feminist legal scholars have spent decades showing that the result was correct even if Justice Blackmun's opinion seems to have been taken from the Court's Cubist period." Another is that the end achieved by Roe does not justify its means of judicial fiat.Cohen, Richard. "Support Choice, Not Roe", Washington Post, (October 19, 2005): "If the best we can say for it is that the end justifies the means, then we have not only lost the argument—but a bit of our soul as well." Retrieved January 23, 2007.
David Garrow said that the decision in Roe and also Doe v. Bolton "owed a great amount of their substance and language" to Justice Blackmun's law clerks, George Frampton and Randall Bezanson. He thought the extent of their contributions were remarkable, and that the clerks exhibited an "unusually assertive and forceful manner" in voicing their views to Justice Blackmun. In his research, it was the earliest significant example he found of this behavior pattern, which grew more consistent later on. In Garrow's evaluation, the clerks' contributions were "historically significant and perhaps decisive" in shaping the two decisions.The Brains Behind Blackmun by David J. Garrow, Legal Affairs: The Magazine at the intersection of law and life, May/June 2005
In response to Garrow, Edward Lazarus said that Justice Blackmun's later clerks like himself did not need as much direction on reproductive rights since they had Justice Blackmun's prior opinions to draw from. Lazarus thought that on at least some occasions when legal formulations were created for opinions to be published in Justice Blackmun's name, the justice himself was not engaged in originating every significant thought pattern that they employed. Lazarus agreed that Garrow's depiction of how the trimester framework came about was an example of one of these occasions. He concluded: "The problem of excessive clerk delegation was less serious in Blackmun's chambers than Garrow suggests but is also more commonplace among the justices. The modern Supreme Court has deep problems in its decisional culture and the overuse of law clerks is an aspect of this."Readers Respond: Justice Blackmun, letter by Edward Lazarus, Legal Affairs: The Magazine at the intersection of law and life, May/June 2005
Justice John Paul Stevens, while agreeing with the decision, suggested that it should have been more narrowly focused on the issue of privacy. According to Stevens, if the decision had avoided the trimester framework and simply stated that the right to privacy included a right to choose abortion, "it might have been much more acceptable" from a legal standpoint. Rosen notes that Stevens is "the oldest and arguably most liberal justice". Before joining the Court, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg criticized the decision for venturing "too far in the change it ordered".Some Thoughts on Autonomy and Equality in Relation to Roe v. Wade by Ruth Ginsburg, North Carolina Law Review Volume 63, Number 2, Article 4, 1985, page 381, (page 8 of the pdf) Had the decision been limited in scope to only permit abortion during certain circumstances, "physicians might have been less pleased with the decision, but the legislative trend might have continued in the direction in which it was headed".Some Thoughts on Autonomy and Equality in Relation to Roe v. Wade by Ruth Ginsburg, North Carolina Law Review Volume 63, Number 2, Article 4, 1985, page 382, (page 9 of the pdf); page 385 (page 12 of the pdf) reads: "The political process was moving in the early 1970s, not swiftly enough for advocates of quick, complete change, but majoritarian institutions were listening and acting. Heavy-handed judicial intervention was difficult to justify and appears to have provoked, not resolved, conflict." Retrieved January 23, 2007. After becoming a Supreme Court justice, Ginsburg faulted the Court's approach for being "about a doctor's freedom to practice his profession as he thinks best... It wasn't woman-centered. It was physician-centered." Justice Ginsburg thought that Roe was originally intended to complement Medicaid funding for abortions, but this did not happen. About Harris v. McRae, which upheld restrictions on Medicaid abortion funding, she said:The Place of Women on the Court by Emily Bazelon, New York Times Magazine, July 7, 2009
Yes, the ruling about that surprised me. Frankly I had thought that at the time Roe was decided, there was concern about population growth and particularly growth in populations that we don't want to have too many of. So that Roe was going to be then set up for Medicaid funding for abortion. Which some people felt would risk coercing women into having abortions when they didn't really want them. But when the court decided McRae, the case came out the other way. And then I realized that my perception of it had been altogether wrong.
Watergate prosecutor Archibald Cox thought the "failure to confront the issue in principled terms leaves the opinion to read like a set of hospital rules and regulations whose validity is good enough this week but will be destroyed with new statistics upon the medical risks of child birth and abortion or new advances in providing for the separate existence of a fetus. Neither historian, nor layman, nor lawyer will be persuaded that all the prescriptions of Justice Blackmun are part of the Constitution."Cox, Archibald. The Role of the Supreme Court in American Government, 113–14 (Oxford U. Press 1976), quoted in the statement of Hon. Henry Hyde, A U.S. Representative from the State of Illinois, from the Hearings before the Subcommittee on Separation of Powers of the Committee on the Judiciary, United States Senate, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1982, page 916; Stuart Taylor has argued that "Roe v. Wade was sort of conjured up out of very general phrases and was recorded, even by most liberal scholars like Archibald Cox at the time, John Harvey Link—just to name two Harvard scholars—as kind of made-up constitutional law." Stuart Taylor Jr, Online News Hour, PBS July 13, 2000
In a highly cited Yale Law Journal article published in the months after the decision, the American legal scholar John Hart Ely criticized Roe as a decision that was disconnected from American constitutional law.Ely, John Hart. "The Wages of Crying Wolf ", 82 Yale Law Journal 920 (1973). Retrieved January 23, 2007. Professor Ely "supported the availability of abortion as a matter of policy." See Liptak, Adam. "John Hart Ely, a Constitutional Scholar, Is Dead at 64", The New York Times (October 27, 2003). Ely is generally regarded as having been a "liberal constitutional scholar." Perry, Michael (1999).  
American constitutional law scholar Laurence Tribe said: "One of the most curious things about Roe is that, behind its own verbal smokescreen, the substantive judgment on which it rests is nowhere to be found." Quoted in  Centrist-liberal law professors Alan Dershowitz,Taking the Stand: My Life in the Law by Alan Dershowitz, New York: Broadway Books, 2013, page 433, "Judges have no special competence, qualifications, or mandate to decide between equally compelling moral claims (as in the abortion controversy)...." Cass Sunstein,Sunstein, Cass, quoted in Roe v. Wade an Issue Ahead of Alito Hearing by Brian McGuire, New York Sun (November 15, 2005): "What I think is that it just doesn't have the stable status of Brown or Miranda because it's been under internal and external assault pretty much from the beginning... As a constitutional matter, I think Roe was way overreached." Retrieved January 23, 2007. Sunstein is a "liberal constitutional scholar". See  "Former U of C law prof on everyone's short court list" by Eric Herman, Chicago Sun-Times (Archived December 23, 2007) and Kermit Roosevelt III have also expressed disappointment with Roe v. Wade.Roosevelt, Kermit. "Shaky Basis for a Constitutional 'Right'", Washington Post, (January 22, 2003): "[I]t is time to admit in public that, as an example of the practice of constitutional opinion writing, Roe is a serious disappointment. You will be hard-pressed to find a constitutional law professor, even among those who support the idea of constitutional protection for the right to choose, who will embrace the opinion itself rather than the result.... This is not surprising. As constitutional argument, Roe is barely coherent. The court pulled its fundamental right to choose more or less from the constitutional ether. It supported that right via a lengthy, but purposeless, cross-cultural historical review of abortion restrictions and a tidy but irrelevant refutation of the straw-man argument that a fetus is a constitutional 'person' entitled to the protection of the 14th Amendment.... By declaring an inviolable fundamental right to abortion, Roe short-circuited the democratic deliberation that is the most reliable method of deciding questions of competing values." Retrieved January 23, 2007. ()
Jeffrey Rosen, as well as Michael Kinsley,Kinsley, Michael. "Bad choice", The New Republic (June 13, 2004): "Against all odds (and, I'm afraid, against all logic), the basic holding of Roe v. Wade is secure in the Supreme Court.... [A] freedom of choice law would guarantee abortion rights the correct way, democratically, rather than by constitutional origami." Quoted in Honest pro-choicers admit Roe v. Wade was a horrible decision by Timothy P. Carney, Washington Examiner, January 22, 2011 echo Ginsburg, arguing that a legislative movement would have been the correct way to build a more durable consensus in support of abortion rights. William Saletan wrote, "Blackmun's papers vindicate every indictment of Roe: invention, overreach, arbitrariness, textual indifference."Saletan, William. "Unbecoming Justice Blackmun", Legal Affairs, May/June 2005. Retrieved January 23, 2007. Saletan is a self-described liberal. See Saletan, William. "Rights and Wrongs: Liberals, progressives, and biotechnology", Slate (July 13, 2007). Benjamin Wittes argued that Roe "disenfranchised millions of conservatives on an issue about which they care deeply."Wittes, Benjamin. "Letting Go of Roe", The Atlantic Monthly, Jan/Feb 2005. Retrieved January 23, 2007. Wittes also said, "I generally favor permissive abortion laws." He has elsewhere noted, "In their quieter moments, many liberal scholars recognize that the decision is a mess." See Wittes, Benjamin. "A Little Less Conversation", The New Republic November 29, 2007 Edward Lazarus, a former Blackmun clerk who "loved Roes author like a grandfather", wrote: "As a matter of constitutional interpretation and judicial method, Roe borders on the indefensible.... Justice Blackmun's opinion provides essentially no reasoning in support of its holding. And in the almost 30 years since Roe announcement, no one has produced a convincing defense of Roe on its own terms."Lazarus, Edward. "The Lingering Problems with Roe v. Wade, and Why the Recent Senate Hearings on Michael McConnell's Nomination Only Underlined Them", Findlaw's Writ (October 3, 2002). Retrieved January 23, 2007.
Richard Epstein thought that the majority opinion relied on a book written by William Lloyd Prosser about tort law when it stated that it "is said" recovery of damages was allowed "only if the fetus was viable, or at least quick, when the injuries were sustained".Roe, 410 U.S. at 161 He compared this to what was in fact written in the book,The Law of Torts by William Lloyd Prosser, 4th edition, St Paul, Minnesota: West Publishing, 1971, page 337 which was that "when actually faced with the issue for decision, almost all of the jurisdictions have allowed recovery even though the injury occurred during the early weeks of pregnancy, when the child was neither viable nor quick."Substantive Due Process by any other name: The Abortion Cases by Richard A. Epstein, The Supreme Court Review 1973, University of Chicago Press, 1974, page 174
Matt Bruenig, lawyer and founder of the People's Policy Project, criticized Roe as being "weaker than normal" and observed that similarly broad interpretations of the Constitution could be used to argue the opposite outcome, saying "right now we have a constitutional right to an abortion—you could also constitutionally ban abortion. If you wanted to, someone could bring a case, file it in a district court, hit the appeal button twice, and then if you get five judges together, the opinion would be the easiest thing in the world to write. You would say, 'the Fourteenth Amendment protects the right to life, liberty, and property without due process and all that shit. So we're looking at that, and we think that abortion takes a life and so we think that in fact states may not permit abortion'. So you could constitutionally ban it and say that no state or federal government is allowed to legalize abortion".
The assertion that the Supreme Court was making a legislative decision is often repeated by opponents of the ruling. The "viability" criterion was still in effect, although the point of viability changed as medical science found ways to help premature babies survive.Stith, Irene. Abortion Procedures, CRS Report for Congress (PDF) (November 17, 1997). Retrieved December 21, 2021.
 Later responses by those involved 
 Harry Blackmun 
Justice Blackmun, who authored the Roe decision, subsequently had mixed feelings about his role in the case. During a 1974 television interview, he stated that Roe "will be regarded as one of the worst mistakes in the court's history or one of its great decisions, a turning point."Legalized abortion a decade later, Santa Cruz Sentinel, Volume 127, Number 13, January 16, 1983
In a 1983 interview for a newspaper journalist, he responded that he was "mildly annoyed at those, law professors included, who personalize it" because "it was a decision of the court, not my decision. There were seven votes." As a Methodist, he felt hurt that Methodist pastors wrote condemning letters to him, but as time passed, the letters did not hurt "as much anymore". In defense he responded, "People misunderstand. I am not for abortion. I hope my family never has to face such a decision", noting that "I still think it was a correct decision" because "we were deciding a constitutional issue, not a moral one." He described Roe as "a no-win case" and predicted that, "fifty years from now, depending on the fate of the proposed constitutional amendment, abortion probably will not be as great a legal issue. I think it will continue to be a moral issue, however."
He reflected that his role in the decision meant he was most known as the "author of the abortion decision". His response was that "we all pick up tags. I'll carry this one to my grave" and "so be it".
In 1987, Justice Blackmun explained in a letter to Chief Justice Rehnquist:
I remember that the old Chief appointed a screening committee, chaired by Potter, to select those cases that could (it was assumed) be adequately heard by a Court of seven. I was on that little committee. We did not do a good job. Potter pressed for Roe v. Wade and Doe v. Bolton to be heard and did so in the misapprehension that they involved nothing more than an application of Younger v. Harris. How wrong we were.
In 1991, he regretted how the Court decided to hear Roe and Doe in a televised interview: "It was a serious mistake... We did a poor job. I think the committee should have deferred them until we had a full Court."
In 1992, he stood by the analytical framework he established in Roe during the subsequent Casey case.Casey, 505 U.S. at 930–34 (Blackmun, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) ("In sum, Roe's requirement of strict scrutiny as implemented through a trimester framework should not be disturbed."). He often gave speeches and lectures promoting Roe v. Wade and criticizing Roes critics.
 Norma McCorvey 
Norma McCorvey would later claim that, during the 1970s although some years after Roe, she had a nightmare concerning "little babies lying around with daggers in their hearts". This was the first of a series of recurring nightmares which kept her awake at night.Won by Love: Norma McCorvey, Jane Roe of Roe v. Wade, Speaks Out for the Unborn as She Shares Her New Conviction For Life by Norma McCorvey and Gary Thomas, Nashville, Tennessee: Thomas Nelson, 1997, Chapter 5, The Shadow Plaintiff pages 38–39 She became worried and wondered, "What really, had I done?"Won by Love: Norma McCorvey, Jane Roe of Roe v. Wade, Speaks Out for the Unborn as She Shares Her New Conviction For Life by Norma McCorvey and Gary Thomas, Nashville, Tennessee: Thomas Nelson, 1997, Chapter 5, The Shadow Plaintiff pages 38 and "Well, how do they kill a baby inside a mother's stomach anyway?" McCorvey later reflected:Won by Love: Norma McCorvey, Jane Roe of Roe v. Wade, Speaks Out for the Unborn as She Shares Her New Conviction For Life by Norma McCorvey and Gary Thomas, Nashville, Tennessee: Thomas Nelson, 1997, Chapter 5, The Shadow Plaintiff pages 39
I couldn't get the thought out of my mind. I realize it sounds very naïve, especially for a woman who had already conceived and delivered three children. Though I had seen and experienced more than my share of the world, there were some things about which I still didn't have a clue—and this was one of them. Ironically enough, Jane Roe may have known less about abortion than anyone else.
During the years after Roe, although not immediately, McCorvey joined with and accompanied others in the abortion rights movement. During this time, McCorvey stated that she had publicly lied about being raped and apologized for making the false rape claim.This Woman and This Man Made History by Lloyd Shearer, Parade magazine, May 8, 1983; for a book which relied on Shearer, see Storm center: the Supreme Court in American politics by David M. O'Brien, New York City: W. W. Norton, 1986, pages 22–24The woman whose famous abortion case led to the..., UPI archives, September 8, 1987 Norma McCorvey became part of the movement against abortion from 1995 until shortly before her death in 2017. In 1998, she testified to Congress:
thumb|Judge Edith Jones
In 2002, along with Sandra Cano (Mary Doe) from Doe v. Bolton and Bernard Nathanson, a co-founder of NARAL Pro-Choice America, McCorvey appeared in a television advertisement intended to get the Bush administration to nominate members to the Supreme Court who would oppose abortion.
As a party to the original litigation, she sought to reopen the case in U.S. District Court in Texas to have Roe v. Wade overturned. However, the Fifth Circuit decided that her case was moot, in McCorvey v. Hill. In a concurring opinion, Judge Edith Jones agreed that McCorvey was raising legitimate questions about emotional and other harm suffered by women who have had abortions, about increased resources available for the care of unwanted children, and about new scientific understanding of fetal development. However, Jones said she was compelled to agree that the case was moot. On February 22, 2005, the Supreme Court refused to grant a writ of certiorari, and McCorvey's appeal ended.
In an interview shortly before her death, McCorvey stated that she had taken an anti-abortion position because she had been paid to do so and that her campaign against abortion had been an act. She also stated that it did not matter to her if women wanted to have an abortion and they should be free to choose. Rob Schenck, a Methodist pastor and activist who once had anti-abortion views stated that he and others helped entice McCorvey to claim she changed sides and also stated that what they had done with her was "highly unethical" and he had "profound regret" over the matter.Lozano, Alicia Victoria. "Anti-abortion rights movement paid 'Jane Roe' thousands to switch sides, documentary reveals" NBC News (May 19, 2020).
Frank Pavone, a priest with whom McCorvey talked to after the interview, reflected after her death that "There was no indication whatsoever, at the end of her life" that she had given up her pro-life positions. Pavone stated that following the interview, McCorvey talked positively with him about a message she wanted him to convey at the next March for Life. The message concerned encouraging young people to oppose abortion.The 'painful journey' of Jane Roe and the pro-life movement by J.D.Flynn, Catholic News Agency, May 19, 2020 (Archived December 6, 2021)
 Sarah Weddington 
After arguing in Roe v. Wade at the age of 26, Sarah Weddington was elected to the Texas House of Representatives for three terms. Weddington also was general counsel for the U.S. Department of Agriculture, an assistant to President Jimmy Carter,Sarah Weddington Exit Interview by Emily Soapes, Carter Presidential Library, January 2, 1981 lecturer at the Texas Wesleyan University School of Law, and speaker and adjunct professor at the University of Texas at Austin.Winning Roe v. Wade: Q&A with Sarah Weddington by Valerie Lapinski, Time  (January 22, 2013)
In a 1993 speech for the Institute for Educational Ethics in Oklahoma, Weddington discussed her conduct during Roe and stated, "My conduct may not have been totally ethical. But I did it for what I thought were good reasons."Tulsa World, May 24, 1993, selection reprinted in The Coyote Chronicle, California State University, San Bernardino, Volume 30, Issue 14, May 29, 1996, page four of the Human Life Alliance Advertising Supplement, (page 21 of the pdf)
In 1998, she said that the lack of doctors to abort fetuses could undermine Roe: "When I look back on the decision, I thought these words had been written in granite. But I've learned it was not granite. It was more like sandstone. The immediate problem is, where will the doctors come from?"Consistently Opposing Killing: From Abortion to Assisted Suicide, the Death Penalty, and War by Rachel MacNair and Stephen Zunes, April 2008, Westport, Connecticut: Praeger, page 4, quoted from the February 15, 1998 Milwaukee Journal Sentinel Weddington died on December 26, 2021.Sarah Weddington, lawyer in Roe v. Wade case, dies at 76 by Kate McGee, Texas Tribune, December 26, 2021 (Archived December 26, 2021)
 Subsequent judicial developments 
Roe is embedded in a long line of cases concerning personal liberty in the realm of privacy, since Roe was based on individual liberty cases concerning privacy like Meyer v. Nebraska (1923), Griswold v. Connecticut (1965), Loving v. Virginia (1967) and Eisenstadt v. Baird (1972) and became a foundation for individual liberty cases concerning privacy like Lawrence v. Texas (2003) and Obergefell v. Hodges (2015).
thumb|Two of the cases Justice Marshall discussed in his Rodriguez dissent
Two months after the decision in Roe, the Court issued a ruling about school funding in San Antonio Independent School District v. Rodriguez.San Antonio Independent School District v. Rodriguez and Its Aftermath by Jeffrey S. Sutton, Virginia Law Review, Volume 94, Number 8, December 2008, page 1968 (page 6 of the pdf) The majority opinion cited Roe v. Wade to assert that privacy itself was a fundamental right, while procreation implicitly counted as "among the rights of personal privacy protected under the Constitution."San Antonio Independent School District v. Rodriguez 411 U.S. 1 (1973) at 33 and footnote 76, justia.com In his dissenting opinion, Justice Thurgood Marshall stated that Roe v. Wade "reaffirmed its initial decision in Buck v. Bell", and noted where Buck was cited in Roe.San Antonio Independent School District v. Rodriguez 411 U.S. 1 (1973) at 101 (Marshall, J., dissenting), justia.com He found Roe to be a continuation of the Court's practice of granting only a limited stature to the right to procreate,In Search of Human Nature: The Decline and Revival of Darwinism in American Social Thought by Carl N. Degler, New York: Oxford University Press, 1991, page 48, footnote; In 1996, literary scholar Roger Shattuck also observed that Roe v. Wade exploited a preexisting lack of protection for procreation in American jurisprudence. See Forbidden Knowledge: From Prometheus to Pornography by Roger Shattuck, San Diego, California: Harcourt Brace and Company, 1996, page 197, footnote since the Court's decision treated procreation as less important than the right to privacy. He observed that although past decisions showed strong concern against the state discriminating against certain groups concerning procreation and certain other rights, the "Court has never said or indicated that these are interests which independently enjoy full-blown constitutional protection."San Antonio Independent School District v. Rodriguez 411 U.S. 1 (1973) at 100 (Marshall, J., dissenting), justia.com Instead, in Roe, "the importance of procreation has indeed been explained on the basis of its intimate relationship with the constitutional right of privacy..." Justice Marshall thought that the method used in Rodriguez for determining which rights were more fundamental was wrong, and proposed a different method which would result in procreation receiving greater legal protection.San Antonio Independent School District v. Rodriguez 411 U.S. 1 (1973) at 102–103 (Marshall, J., dissenting), justia.com
The legal interaction between Roe v Wade, the Fourteenth Amendment as understood post-Roe, and changing medical technology and standards caused the development of civil suits for wrongful birth and wrongful life claims.Perfection: The Perfection: The Fatality of Down Syndrome by Mallory Baucom, Undergraduate honors thesis, Gardner-Webb University, December 2018, page 11 (page 12 of the pdf) Not all states permit a parent to sue for wrongful birthPrenatal Tort Slippage Health Matrix: The Journal of Law-Medicine, Volume 31, Issue 1, 2001, page 222 (page 3 of the pdf) or a child to sue for wrongful life. The constitutionality of wrongful life claims is controversial within the legal profession, even for states which currently allow them.What's Unconstitutional About Wrongful Life Claims? Ask Jane Roe... by Bruce R. Parker, Scott C. Armstrong, and Thomasina Poirot, Defense Counsel Journal, Volume 87, Number 3, July 2020, page 2 Pre-Roe, a state court dismissed a lawsuit making both a wrongful birth and life claim, which was unsuccessfully appealed to the Supreme Court of New Jersey.Gleitman v. Cosgrove 49 N.J. 22 (1967), 227 A.2d 689, justia.com
Prior to Roe, the Chancery Division of the Superior Court of New Jersey found that a pregnant Jehovah's Witness woman could be ordered to submit to lifesaving blood transfusions due to the state's compelling interest "to save her life and the life of her unborn child."Raleigh Fitkin-Paul Morgan Mem. Hosp. v. Anderson 42 N.J. 421 (1964), justia.com. The Court appointed a legal guardian to represent the unborn child, and ordered the guardian to consent to blood transfusions and to "seek such other relief as may be necessary to preserve the lives of the mother and the child". After Roe, the Fifth District Appellate Court in Illinois ruled that medical professionals had wrongly transfused blood into a pregnant Jehovah's Witness woman on the basis from Roe that the "state's important and legitimate interest becomes compelling at viability" and her fetus was not yet viable.In re Brown, Fifth Division, December 31, 1997 No. 1-96-2316, justia.comWhen a Parent's Religious Belief Endangers Her Unborn Child by Faith Lagay, Virtual Mentor, Volume 7, Issue 5, May 2005, pages 375–378; for general context see Jehovah's Witnesses and blood transfusions
President Reagan, who supported legislative restrictions on abortion, began making federal judicial appointments in 1981. Reagan denied that there was any litmus test: "I have never given a litmus test to anyone that I have appointed to the bench... . I feel very strongly about those social issues, but I also place my confidence in the fact that the one thing that I do seek are judges that will interpret the law and not write the law. We've had too many examples in recent years of courts and judges legislating."Reagan, Ronald. Interview With Eleanor Clift, Jack Nelson, and Joel Havemann of the Los Angeles Times (June 23, 1986). Retrieved January 23, 2007. (Archived December 21, 2021)
In addition to Justices White and Rehnquist, Reagan-appointee Justice Sandra Day O'Connor began dissenting from the Court's abortion cases, arguing in 1983 that the trimester-based analysis devised by the Roe Court was "unworkable.". Shortly before his retirement, Chief Justice Warren Burger suggested in 1986 that Roe be "reexamined";. the associate justice who filled Burger's place on the Court—Justice Antonin Scalia—vigorously opposed Roe. Concern about overturning Roe played a major role in the defeat of Robert Bork's nomination to the Court in 1987; the man eventually appointed to replace Roe-supporter Justice Lewis Powell was Justice Anthony Kennedy.
thumb|left|Oral hearing for the German Constitutional Court's abortion decision, November 18, 1974
The justices voting in the majority on the Federal Constitutional Court in pre-unification West Germany rejected the trimester framework in the German Constitutional Court abortion decision, 1975 on the basis that development during pregnancy is a continuous whole rather than made up of three trimesters. The Court found that the right to life extends also to the unborn and that life begins on the fourteenth day after conception.Abortion and Constitution: United States and West Germany by Donald P. Kommers,  1977, page 267 (page 14 of the pdf) It also found that the liberties of pregnant mothers were qualified by the existence of another life inside them. The Court found that "A compromise which guarantees the protection of the life of the one about to be born and permits the pregnant woman the freedom of abortion is not possible since the interruption of pregnancy always means the destruction of the unborn life." It ruled that the fetus must be protected, and the first responsibility for this lies with the mother, with a second responsibility in the hands of the legislature.Abortion and Constitution: United States and West Germany by Donald P. Kommers,  1977, page 268 (page 15 of the pdf) The Court allowed for a balancing of rights between the mother and unborn child, but required that the rights of each be considered within a framework which acknowledged the supreme, fundamental value of human life. Legislation allowing abortion could be constitutional if the rights of the unborn persons were acknowledged in this manner.Abortion and Constitution: United States and West Germany by Donald P. Kommers,  1977, page 269 (page 16 of the pdf)
Two minority justices in the ruling for the German Constitutional Court abortion decision in 1975 remarked that "the Supreme Court of the United States has even regarded punishment for the interruption of pregnancy, performed by a physician with the consent of the pregnant woman in the first third of pregnancy, as a violation of fundamental rights. This would, according to German constitutional law, go too far indeed."
In 1988, the Supreme Court of Canada used the rulings in both Roe and Doe v. Bolton as grounds to find Canada's federal law limiting abortions to certified hospitals unconstitutional in R. v. Morgentaler.R. v. Morgentaler, 1 S.C.R. 30 (1988), V/lex
 Planned Parenthood v. Danforth 
thumb|Burger Court in 1976
In Planned Parenthood v. Danforth, 428 U.S. 52 (1976),. the plaintiffs challenged a Missouri statute which regulated abortion. In the regulations for abortions on demand, the state required prior written consent from a parent if the patient was a minor or a spouse if the patient was married. For pregnancies at 12 weeks and later, the statute also banned saline abortions, in which chemicals are injected into the amniotic sac to burn the fetus.'I survived an abortion attempt' by Jane Elliott, December 6, 2005, BBC News The portions of the statute involving parental or spousal consent and prohibiting saline abortions were struck down.
 Floyd v. Anders 
In Floyd v. Anders, 440 F. Supp. 535 (D.S.C. 1977), South Carolina attempted to prosecute a doctor for illegal abortion and murder after he attempted to abort an African American boy at 25 weeks. During the abortion, the boy was born alive and survived for 20 days before dying.The Root and Branch of Roe v. Wade by John T. Noonan Jr., Nebraska Law Review, Volume 63, Issue 4, Article 4, 1984, page 674, (page 8 of the pdf) His prosecution was blocked by Judge Clement Haynsworth, and shortly afterwards by a unanimous three judge panel for the U.S. District Court for the District of South Carolina. Judge Haynsworth, writing for the panel, stated "Indeed, the Supreme Court declared the fetus in the womb is neither alive nor a person within the meaning of the Fourteenth Amendment."Floyd v. Anders, 440 F. Supp. 535 (D.S.C. 1977) at 539, justia.com John T. Noonan criticized this from an anti-abortion perspective, stating that "Judge Haynsworth had replaced the Supreme Court's test of potential ability to live with a new test of actual ability to live indefinitely. He also had spelled out what was implied in Roe v. Wade but never actually stated there. For the American legal systems the fetus in the womb was not alive."The Abortion Liberty by John T. Noonan Jr., Human Life Review, Summer 1979, Volume 5, Number 3, page 74 The standard in Roe for viability outside the womb required a "capability of meaningful life".Roe, 410 U.S. at 163; "Early death as a management option" became a medical practice for disabled infants; the practice was legally defended under the right to privacy. Early death for infants was considered "a late abortion" but became regulated by the Baby Doe Law. See To be liberal and pro-life; Nat Hentoff, Champion of 'Inconvenient Life' by Cathryn Donohoe, Washington Times, November 6, 1989, which discusses the journalism of Nat Hentoff. Without this capability, the state had no compelling "important and legitimate interest in potential life".
 Webster v. Reproductive Health Services 
In a 5–4 decision in 1989's Webster v. Reproductive Health Services, Chief Justice Rehnquist, writing for the Court, declined to explicitly overrule Roe, because "none of the challenged provisions of the Missouri Act properly before us conflict with the Constitution." In particular, the Court found that the ability to have a nontherapeutic abortion was not an affirmative right of the sort that required the state to pay for it.. In this case, the Court upheld several abortion restrictions, and modified the Roe trimester framework.
In concurring opinions, Justice O'Connor refused to reconsider Roe, and Justice Antonin Scalia criticized the Court and Justice O'Connor for not overruling Roe. Justice Blackmun stated in his dissent that Justices White, Kennedy and Rehnquist were "callous" and "deceptive," that they deserved to be charged with "cowardice and illegitimacy," and that their plurality opinion "foments disregard for the law." White had recently opined that the majority reasoning in Roe v. Wade was "warped."
 Planned Parenthood v. Casey 
thumb|1991–1993 Rehnquist Court
During initial deliberations for Planned Parenthood v. Casey (1992), an initial majority of five justices (Rehnquist, White, Scalia, Kennedy, and Thomas) were willing to effectively overturn Roe. Justice Kennedy changed his mind after the initial conference, and Justices O'Connor, Kennedy, and Souter joined Justices Blackmun and Stevens to reaffirm the central holding of Roe, but instead of justifying the liberty to abort as being based on privacy as in Roe, it justified the liberty in a broader manner. The opinion asserted an individual's liberty to choose concerning family life and also protection from legal enforcement intended to maintain traditional sex roles, writing,Before Roe v. Wade by Linda Greenhouse and Reva B. Siegel, Yale Law School, 2012, pages 260–261 (pages 276–277 of the pdf) "Our law affords constitutional protection to personal decisions relating to marriage, procreation, contraception, family relationships, child rearing, and education...."Casey, 505 U.S. at 55. and against the state insisting "upon its own vision of the woman's role, however dominant that vision has been in the course of our history and our culture. The destiny of the woman must be shaped to a large extent on her own conception of her spiritual imperatives and her place in society."Casey, 505 U.S. at 56.
The plurality of justices stated that abortion-related legislation should be reviewed based on the undue burden standard instead of the strict scrutiny standard from Roe.The Casey Undue Burden Standard: Problems Predicted and Encountered, and the Split over the Salerno Test by Ruth Burdick, Hastings Constitutional Law Quarterly, Volume 23, Issue 3, Article 8, pages 830–832, (pages 7–9 of the pdf)
The plurality also found that a fetus was now viable at 23 or 24 weeks rather than at the 28 week line from 1973.Casey, 505 U.S. at 6. They also felt that fetal viability was "more workable" than the trimester framework.Casey, 505 U.S. at 95. They abandoned the trimester framework due to two basic flaws: "in its formulation it misconceives the nature of the pregnant woman's interest; and in practice it undervalues the State's interest in potential life, as recognized in Roe."Casey, 505 U.S. at 102. Only Justice Blackmun wanted to retain Roe entirely and issue a decision completely in favor of Planned Parenthood. Prior to this, he had considered a Pennsylvania viability-based law to be unconstitutionally vague in his majority opinion for Colautti v. Franklin.Colautti v. Franklin, 439 U.S. 379 (1979), justia.com, "The viability determination requirement of § 5(a) is void for vagueness."
Justice Scalia's dissent asserted that abortion is not a liberty protected by the Constitution for the same reason bigamy was not protected either: because the Constitution does not mention it, and because longstanding traditions have permitted it to be legally proscribed.Casey, 505 U.S. at 393–394 (Scalia, J., dissenting). He also asked:Casey, 505 U.S. at 989 n.5 (Scalia, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).
Precisely why is it that, at the magical second when machines currently in use (though not necessarily available to the particular woman) are able to keep an unborn child alive apart from its mother, the creature is suddenly able (under our Constitution) to be protected by law, whereas before that magical second it was not? That makes no more sense than according infants legal protection only after the point when they can feed themselves.
 Stenberg v. Carhart 
thumb|The Rehnquist Court in 1994; the members pictured are the ones who decided Stenberg v. Carhart. Justice Ginsburg replaced Justice White.
During the 1990s, Nebraska enacted a law banning partial-birth abortion. The law allowed another second-trimester abortion procedure known as dilation and evacuation. In 2000, the Supreme Court struck down the law by a 5–4 vote in Stenberg v. Carhart, with Justice Stephen Breyer writing for the majority that sometimes partial-birth abortion "would be the safest procedure".Stenberg v. Carhart (99–830) 530 U.S. 914 (2000), Opinion of the Court, law.cornell.edu Justice O'Connor wrote a concurrence stating Nebraska was actually banning both abortion methods."and it proscribes not only the D&X procedure but also the D&E procedure" Stenberg v. Carhart (99–830) 530 U.S. 914 (2000), O'Connor, J., concurring, law.cornell.edu Justices Ginsburg and Stevens joined each other's concurrences. Justice Stevens stated that "the notion that either of these two equally gruesome procedures performed at this late stage of gestation is more akin to infanticide than the other... is simply irrational."Stenberg v. Carhart (99–830) 530 U.S. 914 (2000), Stevens, J., concurring, law.cornell.edu Justice Ginsburg stated that the "law does not save any fetus from destruction, for it targets only 'a method of performing abortion'."Stenberg v. Carhart (99–830) 530 U.S. 914 (2000), Ginsburg, J., concurring, law.cornell.edu
Justice Thomas's dissent stated, "The 'partial birth' gives the fetus an autonomy which separates it from the right of the woman to choose treatments for her own body."Stenberg v. Carhart (99–830) 530 U.S. 914 (2000), Thomas, J., dissenting, law.cornell.edu Justice Scalia joined Justice Thomas's dissent and also wrote his own, stating that partial-birth abortion is "so horrible that the most clinical description of it evokes a shudder of revulsion" and that this case proved Casey was "unworkable".Stenberg v. Carhart (99–830) 530 U.S. 914 (2000), Scalia, J., dissenting, law.cornell.edu Chief Justice Rehnquist joined the two dissents by Justices Scalia and Thomas.Stenberg v. Carhart (99–830) 530 U.S. 914 (2000), Rehnquist, C. J., dissenting, law.cornell.edu
Justice Kennedy, who had co-authored Casey, dissented in Stenberg. He described in graphic detail exactly how a fetus dies while being dismembered during a dilation and evacuation procedure. He reasoned that since Nebraska was not seeking to prohibit it, the state was free to ban partial-birth abortion. ("The fetus, in many cases, dies just as a human adult or child would: It bleeds to death as it is torn from limb from limb. The fetus can be alive at the beginning of the dismemberment process and can survive for a time while its limbs are being torn off.").
 Gonzales v. Carhart 
In 2003, Congress passed the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act, which led to a lawsuit in the case of Gonzales v. Carhart. The Court previously ruled in Stenberg v. Carhart that a state's ban on partial-birth abortion was unconstitutional because such a ban did not have an exception for the health of the woman. The membership of the Court changed after Stenberg, with Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Samuel Alito replacing Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justice O'Connor. The ban at issue in Gonzales v. Carhart was similar to the one in Stenberg, but had been adjusted to comply with the Court's ruling.Gonzales v. Carhart, 550 U.S. 124 (2007), justia.com, "Congress, it is apparent, responded to these concerns because the Act departs in material ways from the statute in Stenberg."
On April 18, 2007, a 5 to 4 decision upheld the constitutionality of the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act. Justice Kennedy wrote the majority opinion that Congress was within its power to ban partial-birth abortion. The Court left the door open for as-applied challenges.Gonzales v. Carhart, 550 U.S. 124 (2007), justia.com, "While it found that it was not facially unconstitutional, it did not reject the possibility of an as-applied challenge." The opinion did not address whether Casey remained valid. Instead it only assumed Casey was valid "for the purposes of this opinion".Gonzales v. Carhart, 550 U.S. 124 (2007), justia.com, "We assume the following principles for the purposes of this opinion. Before viability... Casey, in short, struck a balance. The balance was central to its holding. We now apply its standard to the cases at bar."
Chief Justice John Roberts and Justices Scalia, Thomas, and Alito joined the majority. Justice Thomas filed a concurring opinion, joined by Justice Scalia, contending that the Court's prior decisions in Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood v. Casey should be reversed. Concurrence (Thomas), Gonzales v. Carhart, 550 U.S. 124 (2007), justia.com, They also noted that the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act may have exceeded the powers of Congress under the Commerce Clause but that the question was not raised.
Justice Ginsburg, joined by Justices Stevens, Souter, and Breyer, dissented, contending that the ruling ignored precedent and that abortion rights should instead be justified by equality.
 Dubay v. Wells 
thumb|upright=0.65|Judge David Lawson
Dubay v. Wells was a 2006 paternity case where a man argued he should not have to pay child support for a child he did not want to parent. The case was billed as "Roe v. Wade for men".The National Center For Men, p.7 .
On March 9, 2006, Dubay filed a lawsuit before the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan. Michigan's Attorney General, Joel D. McGormley, made a motion to have the case dismissed. On July 17, 2006, District Court Judge David Lawson agreed and dismissed Dubay's lawsuit.Dubay v. Wells  442 F.Supp.2d 404 (E. D. Mich., 2006) He appealed it once, to the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, which also dismissed it, and stated:
Dubay's claim that a man's right to disclaim fatherhood would be analogous to a woman's right to abortion rests upon a false analogy. In the case of a father seeking to opt out of fatherhood and thereby avoid child support obligations, the child is already in existence and the state therefore has an important interest in providing for his or her support.
 Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt 
thumb|The Roberts Court in 2010; eight of the nine members pictured are the ones who decided Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt. Justice Scalia (front row, second left) died before the oral argument.
In 2013, the Texas legislature enacted restrictions which required abortion doctors to have admitting privileges at a local hospital and required abortion clinics to have facilities equivalent to others which conducted outpatient surgery. On June 27, 2016, the Supreme Court in a 5–3 decision for Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt struck down these restrictions.Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt, 579 U.S. ___ (2016), justia.com
The majority opinion by Justice Breyer struck down these two provisions of Texas law in a facial manner—that is, the very words of the provisions were invalid, no matter how they might be applied in any practical situation. The ruling also stated that the task of judging whether a law puts an undue burden on a woman's right to abortion belongs with the courts and not the legislatures.
 Box v. Planned Parenthood 
In 2016, Indiana passed House Bill 1337, enacting a law which regulated what is done with fetal remains and banning abortion for sexist, racist, or ableist purposes.A contractarian approach to the ethics of genetic-selective abortion by Thomas Berry, Journal of Law and the Biosciences, Volume 3, Issue 2, May 4, 2016, page 395, (page 1 of the pdf) In its unsigned 2019 ruling for Box v. Planned Parenthood of Indiana and Kentucky, Inc., the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the regulations about fetal remains, but declined to hear the remainder of the law, which had been blocked by lower courts.Box v. Planned Parenthood of Indiana and Kentucky, Inc., oyez.org, accessed January 13, 2022 Justice Ginsburg dissented from the part of the ruling about fetal remains on the basis that the regulations violated Casey.18-483 Box v. Planned Parenthood of Indiana and Kentucky, Inc., May 28. 2019, Opinion of Ginsburg, J. concurring in part and dissenting in part, pages 1–2 (pages 25–26 of the pdf) She also criticized Justice Thomas over his use of the word "mother" in his concurrance.What It Means to Be Human: The Case for the Body in Public Bioethics by O. Carter Snead, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, 2020, footnote 146 on pages 294–295
Justice Sotomayor stated that she wished the Court would not have heard the case at all.18-483 Box v. Planned Parenthood of Indiana and Kentucky, Inc., May 28. 2019, Sotomayor, per curiam, page 4, (page 4 of the pdf) Justice Thomas wrote a concurring opinion which expressed concern that the theory presented in Freakonomics echoed the views of the eugenics movement.18-483 Box v. Planned Parenthood of Indiana and Kentucky, Inc., May 28. 2019, Opinion of Thomas, J., concurring, page 18 (page 22) He warned that "a constitutional right to an abortion based solely on the race, sex, or disability of an unborn child, as Planned Parenthood advocates, would constitutionalize the views of the 20th-century eugenics movement". He predicted, "Although the Court declines to wade into these issues today, we cannot avoid them forever."18-483 Box v. Planned Parenthood of Indiana and Kentucky, Inc., May 28. 2019, Opinion of Thomas, J., concurring, pages 20–21 (pages 24–25)
Whole Woman's Health v. Jackson
In 2021, the state of Texas devised a legal workaround to Roe that allowed it to successfully outlaw abortion at six weeks of pregnancy despite the continued existence of Roe and Casey. In the Texas Heartbeat Act, the legislature created a novel enforcement mechanism that bars state officials from enforcing the statute and authorizes private individuals to sue anyone who performs or assists an illegal abortion. Because the Act is enforced by private citizens rather than government officials, there are no state officials that abortion providers can sue to stop the enforcement of the law, and they cannot obtain judicial relief that will stop private lawsuits from being initiated against them. This has produced an end-run around Roe because the threat of private civil-enforcement lawsuits has forced abortion providers to comply with the Act despite its incompatibility with the Supreme Court's abortion pronouncements. Other states have copied this enforcement mechanism to sidestep Roe and immunize their anti-abortion statutes from judicial review. This maneuver has weakened Roe and undercut the federal judiciary's ability to protect abortion rights from state legislation.
 Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization 
Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization is a case that was a legal challenge to Mississippi's 2018 Gestational Age Act, which had banned abortions after 15 weeks with exceptions only for medical emergencies or fetal abnormalities. Federal courts had enjoined the state from enforcing the law after the state's only abortion clinic, Jackson Women's Health Organization, filed suit immediately after passage; the federal courts stated that the law violated the previously established 24-week point of viability. Mississippi asked the Supreme Court to hear the case on June 15, 2020, and the Court certified the petition on May 17, 2021, limited to the question, "Whether all pre-viability prohibitions on elective abortions are unconstitutional." The Court chose not to take up two other questions that Mississippi wanted to bring before the Court.
On May 2, 2022, Politico released a leaked first draft of a majority opinion written by Justice Samuel Alito, which had been circulated among the court in February 2022. Alito's draft wrote, "We hold that Roe and Casey must be overruled. It is time to heed the Constitution and return the issue of abortion to the people's elected representatives." The release of a draft opinion for a pending case was unprecedented in recent Supreme Court history. The document was not a final decision, and the justices were still able to change their votes. The document was thought to reflect both the justices' preliminary voting and the outcome of the internal Court procedure for deciding who is assigned to write the majority opinion. A press release from the Supreme Court confirmed the leaked document's authenticity, and Chief Justice John Roberts in a statement described its release as a "betrayal of the confidences of the Court". The leaked draft regarding the decision sparked protests.
On June 24, 2022, the Supreme Court ruled 6–3 to uphold Mississippi's Gestational Age Act, and 5–4 to overrule Roe and Casey. Similar to the leaked draft opinion, the opinion of the court written by Justice Alito stated that Roe was "egregiously wrong from the start" and its reasoning "exceptionally weak". It also stated that Roe has "enflamed debate and deepened division" and that overruling it would "return the issue of abortion to the people's elected representatives". The majority opinion relied on a constitutional historical view of abortion rights, saying, "The Constitution makes no reference to abortion, and no such right is implicitly protected by any constitutional provision." The reasoning was that "abortion couldn't be constitutionally protected. Until the latter part of the 20th century, such a right was entirely unknown in American law. Indeed, when the Fourteenth Amendment was adopted, three quarters of the States made abortion a crime at all stages of pregnancy." Some historians argued that this view is incomplete, with Leslie J. Reagan saying that Alito "speciously claims" the truth of his assertions. In their dissent, Justices Stephen Breyer, Elena Kagan, and Sonia Sotomayor jointly wrote, "The right Roe and Casey recognized does not stand alone. To the contrary, the Court has linked it for decades to other settled freedoms involving bodily integrity, familial relationships, and procreation. Most obviously, the right to terminate a pregnancy arose straight out of the right to purchase and use contraception. In turn, those rights led, more recently, to rights of same-sex intimacy and marriage. Either the mass of the majority's opinion is hypocrisy, or additional constitutional rights are under threat. It is one or the other."
 Role in politics 
 Presidential positions 
Generally, presidential opinions following Roe have been split along major party lines. The decision was opposed by Presidents Gerald Ford, Ronald Reagan, George W. Bush, and Donald Trump. President George H. W. Bush also opposed Roe, though he had supported abortion rights earlier in his career.
President Richard Nixon appointed Justices Burger, Blackmun, and Powell who voted with the majority, and Justice Rehnquist who dissented. President Nixon did not publicly comment about Roe v. Wade.
During his early career, President Jimmy Carter supported legalizing abortion in order to save the life of a woman or in the event of birth defects, or in other extreme circumstances.. As president, he thought abortion was wrong, but stated that he "accepted my obligation to enforce the Roe v. Wade Supreme Court ruling, and at the same time attempted in every way possible to minimize the number of abortions." In 2012 he reflected, "I never have believed that Jesus Christ would approve of abortions and that was one of the problems I had when I was president having to uphold Roe v. Wade..." He urged the Democratic Party to take a position supporting pregnant mothers to minimize economic and social factors driving women to get abortions. He also wanted the party to take stand in favor of banning abortion except for those whose lives "are in danger or who are pregnant as a result of rape or incest."
Roe was supported by Presidents Bill Clinton and Barack Obama. In 1981, then-Senator Joe Biden voted for a constitutional amendment allowing states to overturn Roe v. Wade, which he voted against the following year. In a 2007 memoir, Biden expressed an opinion that although he was "personally opposed to abortion" he did not have the "right to impose" his personal opposition onto others. In 2021, he described himself to reporters as "a strong supporter of Roe v. Wade", and added, "And I under— I respect people who think that—who don't support Roe v. Wade; I respect their views.  I respect them—they—those who believe life begins at the moment of conception and all. I respect that. Don't agree, but I respect that. I'm not going to impose that on people."
 Federal bills or laws regarding Roe 
Federal bills, amendments, or laws regarding Roe include the Women's Health Protection Act, Freedom of Choice Act, Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act, Born-Alive Infants Protection Act, Unborn Victims of Violence Act, Interstate Abortion Bill, No Taxpayer Funding for Abortion Act, Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act, Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act of 1995, Sanctity of Human Life Act, Sanctity of Life Act, Hyde Amendment, Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act, and the Baby Doe Law.
Following the passage of the Texas Heartbeat Act and the Supreme Court's acceptance of the Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization case, and the threat the case poses to Roe in the eyes of Roe supporters, Neal Kumar Katyal, a law professor and former acting solicitor general of the United States, said that instead of abortion regulation by the judicial branch, Congress could "codify the rights two generations have taken as part of American life", and "nullify the threat to reproductive health posed by the Mississippi case." Thomas Jipping of the Heritage Foundation wrote that the Women's Health Protection Act is unconstitutional because it regulates how state legislatures regulate abortion and abortion services rather than directly regulating abortion at the federal level. Views that the WHPA is unconstitutional or should otherwise be opposed were expressed during Senate Judiciary Committee hearings in 2014. also see the Statement of Hon. Marsha Blackburn in 
 State laws regarding Roe 
At the state level, there have been many laws about abortion. In the decade after Roe, most states passed laws protecting medical workers with a conscientious objection to abortion. Nine states which had legalized abortion or loosened abortion restrictions prior to Roe already had statutory protection for those who did not want to participate in or perform an abortion. As of 2011, forty-seven states and the District of Columbia had laws allowing certain people to decline to perform certain actions or provide information related to abortion or reproductive health.The Constitutional Right Not to Kill by Mark L. Rienzi, Emory Law Journal, Volume 62, Issue 1, 2012, pages 148–152 (pages 29–33 of the pdf) At the federal level, the Church Amendment of 1973 was proposed in order to protect private hospitals objecting to abortion from being deprived of funding. It first passed the Senate, 92–1, then a slightly modified version passed the House, 372–1, and the final bill which contained it passed the Senate 94–0.Douglas NeJaime & Reva Siegel, Conscience Wars: Complicity-Based Conscience Claims in Religion and Politics, 124 Yale Law Journal 2516 (2015). Justice Blackmun supported this and other regulations protecting individual physicians and entire hospitals operated by religious denominations.
Some states have passed laws to maintain the legality of abortion if Roe v. Wade is overturned. Those states include California, Connecticut, Hawaii, Maine, Maryland, Nevada, and Washington. Other states have enacted so-called trigger laws that would take effect in the event that Roe v. Wade is overturned, with the effect of outlawing abortions on the state level. Those states include Arkansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Dakota, and South Dakota.Vestal, Christine. "States probe limits of abortion policy", Stateline.org (June 11, 2007). Additionally, many states did not repeal pre-1973 statutes against abortion, and some of those statutes could again be in force if Roe were reversed.Marcus, Frances Frank. "Louisiana Moves Against Abortion", The New York Times (July 8, 1989).
On April 16, 2012, Mississippi House Bill 1390 was signed into law.Governor Phil Bryant signs House Bill 1390, governorbryant.com, April 16, 2012 (Archived April 20, 2012) and Gov. Phil Bryant signs House Bill 1390 by Lacey Russell, The Daily Mississippian, April 17, 2012, posted to the newspaper archive on September 30, 2012, (Archived December 21, 2021) The law attempted to make abortion unfeasible without having to overturn Roe v. Wade.LZ Granderson "Mississippi's end run around abortion", CNN (July 12, 2012). Judge Daniel Porter Jordan III of the United States District Court for the Southern District of Mississippi granted an injunction against the law on July 13, 2012.878 F.Supp.2d 714 (S.D.Miss. 2012), C. A. 3:12cv436-DPJ-FKB, Jackson Women's Health Organization v. Currier, case-law.vlex.com, July 13, 2012 On April 15, 2013, he issued another injunction which only applied to a part of the law which required the individual performing the abortions to have hospital admitting privileges.Jackson Women's Health v. Currier, Civil Action No. 3:12cv436-DPJ-FKB, leagle.com, April 15, 2013 (Archived December 10, 2019) On July 29, 2014, a three-judge panel from the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit upheld the injunction against part of the law, with Judge Emilio M. Garza dissenting. The ruling especially relied on a case unrelated to Roe which was decided "nearly fifty years before the right to an abortion was found in the penumbras of the Constitution".No. 13-60599 in the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, July 29, 2014, cases.justia.com and Court rules in favor of Miss. abortion clinic by Emily Le Coz, The Clarion-Ledger, July 29, 2014 On February 18, 2015, Mississippi asked the Supreme Court to hear the case, but they declined to hear it on June 28, 2016.Currier v. Jackson Women's Health Organization, scotusblog.com, published by Tom Goldstein and edited by James Romoser, (Archived May 6, 2021) and No. 14-997, Docket Files, U.S. Supreme Court (Archived May 11, 2021)
The Human Life Protection Act was signed by Alabama governor Kay Ivey on May 14, 2019, in hopes of challenging Roe v. Wade in the Supreme Court.Governor Ivey Issues Statement After Signing the Alabama Human Life Protection Act, May 15, 2019, Office of Alabama Governor It includes exceptions for a serious health risk to the mother or a lethal fetal anomaly, but otherwise it will make abortion a felony for the abortion doctor if it goes into effect. Women subjected to an abortion will not be criminally culpable or civilly liable under the law.Alabama abortion law passes: Read the bill by Leada Gore, May 16, 2019, Birmingham News On October 29, 2019, Judge Myron Thompson for the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Alabama issued a preliminary injunction against the law.Federal judge blocks Alabama abortion ban by Abbey Crain, October 29, 2019, Birmingham News
In May 2021, Texas lawmakers passed Senate Bill 8, creating the Texas Heartbeat Act, banning abortions except in cases of medical emergency as soon as a fetal heartbeat can be detected.S.B. No. 8, Texas State Senate This is typically as early as six weeks into pregnancy and often before women know they are pregnant. The law established that any Texas resident who is not a state or local government employee or official can sue abortion clinics and doctors who are known to be "aiding and abetting" abortion procedures after six weeks. A clause forbids anyone who impregnated an abortion patient through rape, sexual assault, or incest to sue concerning the patient.S.B. No. 8, Texas State Senate, page 9 The enactment date was September 1, 2021, and the U.S. Supreme Court, in a 5–4 decision, declined a request to block enforcement of the law that day.21A24 Whole Woman's Health v. Jackson 594 U. S. ____ (2021), September 1, 2021, supremecourt.gov On October 22, 2021, the Court again did not block the law's enforcement, and agreed to hear arguments for United States v. Texas on November 1, 2021.Oral Argument – Audio, United States v. Texas, Docket Number: 21-588, supremecourt.gov, November 1, 2021 They limited the question to a review of standing. On December 10, 2021, the Court dismissed the lawsuit on the basis that lower courts should not have accepted it.(Slip Opinion), 595 U. S. United States v. Texas (2021), No. 21–588 (21A85), supremecourt.gov, December 10, 2021 This decision allows lawsuits against the executive directors of Texas's medical, nursing, and pharmacy licensing boards and also against the executive commissioner of the Texas Health and Human Services Commission, but not certain other lawsuits seeking to overturn the law.Supreme Court allows lawsuit challenging Texas abortion ban to continue but keeps law in effect for now by Kevin Breuninger and Dan Mangan, CNBC, December 10, 2021
 Legacy 
 Effects of legalization 
Roe v. Wade caused a 4.5% decline in births in states that had not previously legalized abortion. According to a 2019 study, if Roe v. Wade is reversed and some states prohibit abortion on demand, the increases in travel distance are estimated to prevent at a low estimate of over 90,000 women and at a high estimate of over 140,000 women from having abortions in the year following the ruling's overturning. If Roe were to be overturned by a constitutional amendment which would apply to all the states, fertility could be expected to increase by 11% because then mothers would not travel to states where abortion is legal. Although the legalization of abortion in the United States increased the labor supply of fertile-aged women in the workforce, it decreased the labor supply of older women. This is thought to be due to the fact they now had fewer opportunities to financially support grandchildren. Older women whose labors became less necessary for the family's financial wellbeing either left or stayed out of the workforce. Since Roe, the risk of death due to legal abortion fell considerably due to increased physician skills, improved medical technology, and earlier termination of pregnancy. Various studies have shown that overturning Roe could have adverse socio-economic conditions, higher maternal mortality, and other negative impacts.
The Donohue–Levitt hypothesis about the legalized abortion and crime effect proposed that legalized abortion was responsible for reductions in the crime rate. If there is a relationship between abortion and crime, there are several possibilities that could explain how abortion lowers crime. One possibility is that crime is disproportionally committed by young males, and legalizing abortion reduced the number of young males. Another possibility is that children born in the post-legalization era are less likely to commit crimes. If this is the case, it might be explained in two ways. One way is that the sort of women who have abortions are not representative of pregnant women as a whole; rather they are the sort who are most likely to give birth to children who grow up to be criminals. In this way, abortion serves to shape American family structure. Studies linking demographics to crime have found that children born to American teenagers, unmarried mothers, and mothers with lower incomes are more likely to engage in criminal activity as adolescents.Abortion Legalization and Child Living Circumstances: Who is the "Marginal Child?" by Jonathan Gruber, Phillip Levine, and Douglas Staiger, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 6034, May 1997 Abortion rates are higher for these demographics. A second possible way to explain it is that women use abortion to prevent births until they are most able to provide a stable home environment. Factors involved in stability include the age, education, income, of the mother, her use of drugs and alcohol, the presence of a father, and wanted as opposed to unwanted pregnancies. Also see Freakonomics § The impact of legalized abortion on crime Another hypothesis is the Roe effect, which tries to explain why the practice of abortion would eventually lead to abortion being restricted or outlawed. The hypothesis is that people in favor of abortion rights would not parent as many children when abortion is legal, and since children tend to have similar views to their parents eventually voters would not support abortion rights.Babies Having (Fewer) Babies by James Taranto, wsj.com OpinionJournal, Dow Jones & Company, April 14, 2005
 Opinion polls 
Into the 21st century, polls of Americans' opinions about abortion indicated they are about equally divided. Several organizations, among them Gallup,Saad, Lydia. More Americans "Pro-Life" Than "Pro-Choice" for First Time, Gallup (May 15, 2009). Pew Research Center,"Public Takes Conservative Turn on Gun Control, Abortion Americans Now Divided Over Both Issues", Pew Research Center (April 30, 2009). and Harris Insights & Analytics,Harris Interactive, (November 9, 2007). "Support for Roe v. Wade Increases Significantly, Reaches Highest Level in Nine Years ." Retrieved December 14, 2007.Harris Interactive. 'U.S. Attitudes Toward Roe v. Wade". The Wall Street Journal Online, (May 4, 2006). Retrieved February 3, 2007. conduct abortion or Roe v. Wade-related polls. Regarding the Roe decision as a whole, more Americans supported it than supported overturning it.Results on Roe v. Wade  via Angus Reid Global Monitor (2007). In the 2000s, when pollsters describe various regulations that Roe prevented legislatures from enacting, support for Roe dropped.Gallagher, Maggie. "Pro-Life Voters are Crucial Component of Electability", Realclearpolitics.com (May 23, 2007).
Into the 2010s, poll results relating to abortion indicated nuance and frequently do not directly match up with respondents' self-identified political affiliations. In 2021, an ABC News/Washington Post poll found that 58% of those with children living at home wanted to see Roe v. Wade upheld, compared to 62% of those without children at home. An All In Together poll found that only 36% with children living in their house opposed the Texas Heartbeat Act, compared to 54.9% without children.How Americans Really Feel About Abortion: The Sometimes Surprising Poll Results As Supreme Court Weighs Overturning Roe V. Wade by Alison Durkee, Forbes, November 30, 2021 After the Supreme Court's decision in June 2022 to overturn Roe v. Wade, a new CBC News/YouGov poll showed 59% disapprove of the decision, and of women polled, 67% disapprove. According to the same poll, 52% of the participants called the court's decision a "step backward" for America, 31% said it is a "step forward", and 17% say it was neither.
 See also 
 Abortion law in the United States
 Abortion law in the United States by state
 Feticide § Laws in the United States
 Justifiable homicide § Common excusing conditions, sixth item listed
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 410
 List of United States Supreme Court leaks
 Roe vs. Wade (film), released in 1989
 Roe v. Wade (film), released in 2020
 Shelley Lynn Thornton, the "Roe baby"
 Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization
 References 
Additional references
Further reading
 External links 
Written opinions
 The concurring opinions of Burger and Douglas, as well as White's dissenting opinion, were issued along with Doe v. Bolton and may be found at:
 Cornell LLI
Oral arguments
 Audio of oral arguments, oyez.org, transcripts accompany the audio
 Roe v. Wade Oral Arguments, americanrhetoric.com, first oral argument transcript and audio
 Transcript of First Oral Argument in Roe v. Wade 410 U.S. 113 (1973), aul.org, edited September 2011
 Transcript of Reargument in Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973), aul.org, edited September 2011
Other court documents
 Briefs and other documents
 Docket records, affidavits, briefs, and other documents
Other media
 "Supreme Court Landmark Case Roe v. Wade" from C-SPAN's Landmark Cases: Historic Supreme Court Decisions
 "The Roe Baby", in The Atlantic, September 9, 2021, by Joshua Prager. (Retrieved 9.9.2021)
 To overrule a precedent, May 6, 2022, opinion contribution by Paul W. Kahn in The Hill – purported truth of the law versus the rule of law argued as insufficient to reverse opinion
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:Right to abortion under the United States Constitution
Category:History of women's rights in the United States
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:1973 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States mootness case law
Category:Judicial activism
Category:Medical lawsuits
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:Right to privacy under the United States Constitution
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
"""

From "Rogers v. Bellei" ==> """
Rogers v. Bellei, 401 U.S. 815 (1971), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court, which held that an individual who received an automatic congressional grant of citizenship at birth, but who was born outside the United States, may lose his citizenship for failure to fulfill any reasonable residence requirements which the United States Congress may impose as a condition subsequent to that citizenship..
The case
The appellee, Aldo Mario Bellei, was born in Italy to an Italian father and an American mother. He acquired U.S. citizenship by virtue of section 1993 of the Revised Statutes of 1874, which conferred citizenship upon any child born outside the United States of only one American parent (known as jus sanguinis). Bellei received several warnings from government officials that failure to fulfill the five-year residency requirement before age 28 could result in loss of his U.S. citizenship. In 1964, he received a letter informing him that his citizenship had been revoked under § 301(b) of the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952. 
Bellei challenged the constitutionality of this act. The three-judge District Court held the section unconstitutional, citing Afroyim v. Rusk, and Schneider v. Rusk. 
The Supreme Court reversed the decision, ruling against Bellei.
Later
The statute under which Bellei was stripped of his citizenship was repealed by the U.S. Congress in 1978.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 401
Afroyim v. Rusk, 
References
Further reading
.
.
.
External links
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:History of immigration to the United States
"""

From "Rogers v. Lodge" ==> """
Rogers v. Lodge, 458 U.S. 613 (1982), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that an at-large election system for a large rural county with a large black population violated the Equal Protection Clause..
Background
Burke County, Ga., a large, predominantly rural county, had an at-large system for electing members of its governing Board of Commissioners. No black person had ever been elected to the Board. Eight black citizens of Burke County, Georgia, brought a class action in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Georgia, alleging that the county's system of at-large election of the five county commissioners violated the constitutional and statutory rights of the county's black citizens (inter alia, plaintiffs' Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendment rights) by diluting their voting power.
Procedural history
District court
The District Court found that the at-large system was being maintained for discriminatory purposes, and it ordered that the county be divided into five districts for the purpose of electing county commissioners.
Finding that blacks have always made up a substantial majority of the county's population but that they are a minority of the registered voters, that there had been bloc voting along racial lines, and that past discrimination had restricted the present opportunity of blacks to participate effectively in the political process, the District Court held that although the state policy behind the at-large electoral system was "neutral in origin," the policy was being maintained for invidious purposes in violation of plaintiffs' Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendment rights.
The court then ordered the county to be divided into districts for purposes of electing County Commissioners.
Fifth Circuit
The Court of Appeals affirmed, holding that the District Court properly required appellees to prove that the at-large system was maintained for a discriminatory purpose, that the District Court's findings were not clearly erroneous, and that its conclusion that the at-large system was maintained for invidious purposes was "virtually mandated by the overwhelming proof."
Burke County then appealed to the Supreme Court, which granted certiorari; the Court heard oral arguments on February 23, 1982.
Opinion of the Court
Justice White wrote the opinion of the Court.
The Court affirmed and held that the system of elections violated the African-American citizens' Fourteenth Amendment rights because it diluted their voting power and that the system was maintained for invidious purposes. The Court affirmed the decision of the lower court, which determined that the county's at-large system of elections violated the constitutional rights of its African-American citizens. The Court held that the system of elections diluted appellees' voting power and excluded them from the election process.
The Court held that the lower court's determination was not clearly erroneous. The Court held that there was sufficient evidence to support a finding that the African-American citizens had been invidiously excluded from the political process by the county's system of elections. The Court found that the sheer geographic size of the county made it difficult for the African-American citizens to get to polling places or to campaign for office. The Court held that the elections system submerged the will of the African-American citizens and thus denied their access to the system. The Court found that the requirement that candidates run for specific seats enhanced the African-American citizens' lack of access because it prevented a cohesive political group from concentrating on a single candidate.
Held:
1. The Court of Appeals did not err in concluding that the District Court applied the proper legal standard, where it appears that the District Court demonstrated its understanding of the controlling standard by observing that a determination of discriminatory intent was "a requisite to a finding of unconstitutional vote dilution" under the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments.  
2. Where neither the District Court's ultimate findings of intentional discrimination nor its subsidiary findings of fact appear to be clearly erroneous and such findings were agreed to by the Court of Appeals, this Court will not disturb the findings. 
3. Nor is there any reason to overturn the relief ordered by the District Court, where neither that court nor the Court of Appeals discerned any special circumstances that would militate against utilizing single-member districts. 
Dissenting opinions
Justice Powell, joined by Justice Rehnquist, dissented on the ground that discriminatory intent must be proved primarily by objective evidence.
Justice Stevens dissented on the ground that subjective intent is not a valid criterion for constitutional adjudication.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1982 in United States case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States elections case law
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Rogers v. Peck" ==> """
REDIRECT Mary Rogers (murderer)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1905 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States death penalty case law
"""

From "Rogers v. Tennessee" ==> """
Rogers v. Tennessee, 532 U.S. 451 (2001), was a U.S. Supreme Court case holding that there is no due process violation for lack of fair warning when pre-existing common law limitations on what acts constitute a crime, under a more broadly worded statutory criminal law, are broadened to include additional acts, even when there is no notice to the defendant that the court might undo the common law limitations, so long as the statutory criminal law was made prior to the acts, and so long as the expansion to the newly included acts is expected or defensible in reference to the statutory law. The court wrote, 
In the context of common law doctrines... Strict application of ex post facto principles... would unduly impair the incremental and reasoned development of precedent that is the foundation of the common law system." The decision did not affect the requirement of fair warning placed on statutes passed by legislatures - "The Constitution's Ex Post Facto Clause... 'is a limitation upon the powers of the Legislature, and does not of its own force apply to the Judicial Branch of government'... a judicial alteration of a common law doctrine of criminal law [only] violates the principal of fair warning... where it is 'unexpected and indefensible by reference to the law which had been expressed prior to the conduct in issue.
The case was about a murderer, Rogers, who stabbed his victim in the heart, causing the victim to have cardiac arrest and lapse into a coma. The victim was kept alive for fifteen months using modern medical methods. An ancient common law was that if a victim of a crime died more than a year after a criminal act, that act was not considered to be murder, under a justification that medical science was not capable of establishing causation so far beyond the criminal act, whereby there was reasonable doubt as to the cause of death. This was known as the year and a day rule. The rule dated from as far back as the 12th century, and most modern courts that examined the rule found it to be obsolete given modern medical scientific advances. The court wrote, 
At common law, the year and a day rule provided that no defendant could be convicted of murder unless his victim died by defendant's act within a year and a day of the act... The Supreme Court of Tennessee... had recognized the... rule... 'was part of the common law [in 1907]... however [in the underlying case involving Rogers], the court found that the original reasons for recognizing the rule no longer exist [at the time of the Rogers homicide].
The Tennessee Supreme Court abolished the rule in the Rogers homicide case, without Rogers having any notice that the rule change would occur. The US Supreme Court held that the Tennessee Supreme Court's abolition of the common-law year and a day rule could apply retroactively to crimes committed before the court abolished the rule under the Due Process Clause of the United States Constitution, so long as there was a statutory criminal law passed prior to the criminal act, and the change in common law interpretation of the statutory law was either expected or defensible in reference to that statutory law. Accordingly, the defendant's conviction for murder was sustained on appeal despite the fact that the victim died 15 months after the defendant struck the ultimately fatal blow.
Facts
Rogers stabbed James Bowdery with a butcher knife on May 6, 1994.  One of the stab wounds penetrated Bowdery's heart, and during surgery to repair the wound, Bowdery went into cardiac arrest.  Bowdery survived, but due to cerebral hypoxia Bowdery slipped into a coma.  Eventually Bowdery developed a kidney infection, from which he died on August 7, 1995, 15 months after the stabbing.  The medical examiner ruled the cause of death as cerebral hypoxia "secondary to a stab wound to the heart."
Rogers was convicted of second-degree murder under Tennessee's homicide statute, which does not include the year and a day rule.  Rogers appealed to the Tennessee Court of Criminal Appeals, arguing that the year-and-a-day rule was part of the common law of Tennessee, despite its absence from the Tennessee homicide statute.  The appellate court disagreed, noting that the state's Criminal Sentencing Reform Act had abolished all common-law defenses in criminal cases, including the year-and-a-day rule.
Rogers appealed again to the Tennessee Supreme Court.  The court held that the common-law year-and-a-day rule survived in Tennessee, but was outmoded.  It therefore abolished the rule.  Rogers had also argued that abolishing the rule after he had committed his crime would violate the Ex Post Facto Clause of Article I of the U.S. Constitution.  The Tennessee Supreme Court disagreed, reasoning that although judicial decisions can be ex post facto laws, retroactive abolition in this case would not offend due process principles because the year-and-a-day rule was so outmoded that a reasonable person would not expect it to exist under modern law.  The U.S. Supreme Court agreed to hear the case at Rogers's request.
Majority opinion
The Court evaluated this case under the rubric of due process rather than the limitations on ex post facto lawmaking present in the Constitution.  This is so because the Ex Post Facto Clause limits only legislative actions rather than judicial decisions.  However, limitations on ex post facto judicial decisionmaking are inherent in the notions of due process.  For instance, in Bouie v. City of Columbia, , the Court had held that due process forbade applying a novel interpretation of South Carolina's criminal trespassing statute to a criminal defendant who had no prior warning that the statute might be interpreted in a manner adverse to the defendant.
Bouie and subsequent cases applying Bouie made clear that the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment did not incorporate the Ex Post Facto guarantee against the states in any particular manner.  The rationale of Bouie rested on "core due process concepts of notice, foreseeability, and, in particular, the right to fair warning as those concepts bear on the constitutionality of attaching criminal penalties to what previously had been innocent conduct."  Although the set of interests protected by the Due Process Clause might overlap substantially with the set of interests protected by the Ex Post Facto Clauses, to elide the distinction between the two provisions as set forth in Bouie would be to ignore the textual differences between the clauses as well as the contextual differences between legislative and judicial lawmaking.  Put another way, imposing a strict prohibition against ex post facto lawmaking on common law courts would deprive such courts of the ability to interpret the law in a manner consistent with settled expectations of parties before it who live in the modern world.
Common law courts at the time of the framing undoubtedly believed that they were finding rather than making law.  But, however one characterizes their actions, the fact of the matter is that common law courts then, as now, were deciding cases, and in doing so were fashioning and refining the law as it then existed in light of reason and experience.  Due process clearly did not prohibit this process of judicial evolution at the time of the framing, and it does not do so today.
Rogers should have anticipated that the year-and-a-day rule might no longer exist under modern circumstances.  Thirteenth century medical science was not capable of determining the cause of death beyond a reasonable doubt after a significant amount of time had elapsed following the ultimately fatal blow.  For this reason, the year-and-a-day rule served as a kind of limitation period on murder prosecutions.  However, as medical science has advanced, forensic scientists have been able to determine the cause of a person's death later and later after the fatal event occurs.  "For this reason, the year and a day rule has been legislatively or judicially abolished in the vast majority of jurisdictions recently to have addressed the issue," as the Tennessee Supreme Court observed.  This pervasive change in the law should have put Rogers on notice that, although the rule had not been formally abolished in Tennessee, it was clearly moribund in 1994 in American law generally and Tennessee law specifically.  Accordingly, it was hardly unexpected and indefensible for the Tennessee Supreme Court, while considering an appeal from Rogers's own conviction, to first formally abolish the rule and then to apply that decision retroactively to his own case.
Dissenting opinion
Applying his originalist understanding of the Ex Post Facto Clause, Justice Scalia concluded that the Tennessee Supreme Court's retroactive application of its decision to remove the year-and-a-day rule from its jurisprudence rendered Rogers's conviction for murder invalid.  Scalia began with a different premise than the majority—that the Tennessee Supreme Court had changed that state's law of murder when it abolished the year-and-a-day rule in Rogers's case.  If the legislature had abolished the rule, the Ex Post Facto Clause would not allow that abolishment to apply to Rogers's case.  Why should the fact that it was the state supreme court that abolished the rule make a difference?  The process of lawmaking by common-law courts—applying legal principles to novel fact situations—is not interrupted by forbidding them from applying new legal principles to new factual situations, after all.  Scalia thus believed that there was no reason not to apply the Ex Post Facto Clause to "unelected judges" just as it applied to the "elected representatives of all the people."
What occurred in the present case, then, is precisely what Blackstone said—and the Framers believed—would not suffice [as a rationale of decision by a common-law court].  The Tennessee Supreme Court made no pretense that the year-and-a-day rule was 'bad' from the outset; rather, it asserted the need for the rule, as a means of assuring causality of the death, had disappeared with time.  Blackstone—and the Framers who were formed by Blackstone—would clearly have regarded that change in law as a matter for the legislature, beyond the power of the court....  That explains why the Constitution restricted only the legislature from enacting ex post facto laws.  Under accepted norms of judicial process [that prevailed in the time of the Framers], an ex post facto law... was simply not an option for the courts.
For these historical reasons, Scalia believed, the majority should not have circumvented the strictures of the Ex Post Facto Clause by analyzing what the Tennessee Supreme Court had done under the rubric of due process.  "I find it impossible to believe, as the Court does, that this strong sentiment [against ex post facto lawmaking] attached only to retroactive laws passed by the legislature, and would not apply equally to a court's production of the same result through disregard of the traditional limits on judicial power."
Scalia also disagreed with the conclusion that Rogers had had fair warning that the year-and-a-day rule was so moribund as to have been effectively abolished.  Other common-law crimes had outmoded elements, and certainly a common-law court could not say those elements no longer existed because the ancient rationale for them had changed—asportation, as an element of common-law larceny, or "breaking the close" as an element of burglary, for instance.  (Of course, today this behavior would be subject to punishment under statutory definitions of crimes rather than common-law definitions.)  Rogers might have known that the rule was outmoded, but he could not have known that the rule had ceased to exist until the court or the legislature told him so.  And although the rule might have had dubious status in Tennessee law, the Tennessee Supreme Court had explained that it was the law, and the Court typically takes such statements at face value.  In the absence of any fair warning, as he saw it, Scalia concluded that Rogers's conviction for murder was not valid.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 532
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Romag Fasteners, Inc. v. Fossil, Inc." ==> """
Romag Fasteners, Inc. v. Fossil, Inc., 590 U.S. ___ (2020), was a United States Supreme Court case related to trademark law under the Lanham Act. In the 9–0 decision on judgement, the Court ruled that a plaintiff in a trademark infringement lawsuit is not required to demonstrate that the defendant willfully infringed on their trademark to claim lost profit damages..
Case background
Part of the American Fossil Group's business is their line of clothing accessories including handbags. In 2002, Fossil signed a deal with Romag fasteners to use their magnetic fasteners for their handbags, which were both under Romag's patent and had trademarked elements. Around 2010, Fossil's leadership discovered that their subcontracted Chinese manufacturer had stopped purchasing the Romag fasteners and instead were using imitation ones in Fossil's products. On notifying Romag, Romag sought and obtained a preliminary injunction from Fossil from selling the affected line of handbags just prior to "Black Friday" in November 2010 as they proceeded to file patent and trademark infringement charges against Fossil in the United States District Court for the District of Connecticut, as well as against Macy's, whom Fossil exclusively sold their handbags through.
A jury trial was held and a verdict reached by April 2014 in which Fossil was found to have infringed on both patent and trademark rights. Damages were initially awarded by the jury for patent royalties, and separate awards of  for unjust enrichment and  for deterrence for trademark infringement, with the latter based on the profits Fossil had earned from sales of their handbags. On review by the district court, Judge Janet Bond Arterton determined that while the jury correctly found Fossil had violated Romag's trademarks, they had not willfully disregarded the trademark, and precising case law within the Second Circuit Court of Appeals required willful violation for awards on profit to be justified, and thus vacated that part of the jury's award.
Romag appealed to the Second Circuit Court of Appeals, arguing that the language of the Lanham Act did not require them to have shown Fossil to be willful of the trademark violation to obtain damages based on profits. This has been the subject of a number of cases in the federal court circuit since the Lanham Act had passed, and had created a body of split decisions. The Second Circuit reviewed both their own body of case law as well as from other Circuits and, in their decision in April 2016, upheld the District Court's ruling. Their decision came to interpretation of the provisions of the Lanham Act codified at  of when "willful violation" of trademark, as codified at , could be subject to recovery by damages, considering amendments added to the law in 1999. While Romag had asserted that the 1999 amendments meant that both trademark infringement and trademark dilution were both covered by § 1117 and that they did not have to show any willful violation based on decisions from other Circuits, the Second Circuit relied on their own case history to determine that § 1117 only covered trademark dilution.
Supreme Court
Romag petitioned their case to the Supreme Court in March 2019, asking them to review the question of whether demonstrating willful trademark infringement was a prerequisite for an award of profit under the Lanham Act. The Court granted certiorari in June 2019. Oral arguments were held on January 14, 2020. Court observers saw that most of the Justices appeared to favor Romag's arguments to the structure and intent of the current state of the Lanham Act, following the "principles of equity" that Congress would expect one to be able to recover damages from profit without having to show intent for trademark infringement just as they had intended for trademark dilution despite how the structure of the act was written to potentially exclude that. Due to this, these observers felt that the Court would reverse the lower courts ruling.
The Court's decision was issued on April 23, 2020, with all nine Justices concurring on the judgement to vacate the Second Circuit's decision and remand the case. The majority opinion was written by Justice Neil Gorsuch and joined by all but Justice Sonia Sotomayor, who wrote her own opinion that concurred with the judgement. Gorsuch's opinion focused on the particular language of the Lanham Act to show that a claim of "false or misleading" use of trademark does not require willfulness. Justice Samuel Alito wrote a concurring opinion joined by Justices Stephen Breyer and Elena Kagan that agreed with the majority's conclusion but said that willfulness is "not an absolute precondition" for a profits award but may be informative in awarding damages. In her own opinion, Justice Sotomayor cautioned on the reliance on the majority's use of the mens rea standards, as their decision could cause those truly unaware of infringement of trademark to be deemed willful, though agreed with the application in the specific case for Romag and Fossil.
References
External links
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States trademark case law
Category:Fossil Group
Category:Fasteners
Category:Counterfeit consumer goods
"""

From "Romer v. Evans" ==> """
Romer v. Evans, 517 U.S. 620 (1996), is a landmark United States Supreme Court case dealing with sexual orientation and state laws..  It was the first Supreme Court case to address gay rights since Bowers v. Hardwick (1986),. when the Court had held that laws criminalizing sodomy were constitutional.
The Court ruled in a 6–3 decision that a state constitutional amendment in Colorado preventing protected status based upon homosexuality or bisexuality did not satisfy the Equal Protection Clause. The majority opinion in Romer stated that the amendment lacked "a rational relationship to legitimate state interests", and the dissent stated that the majority "evidently agrees that 'rational basis'—the normal test for compliance with the Equal Protection Clause—is the governing standard".. The state constitutional amendment failed rational basis review.
The decision in Romer set the stage for Lawrence v. Texas (2003),. where the Court overruled its decision in Bowers; for the Supreme Court ruling striking down Section 3 of the Defense of Marriage Act in United States v. Windsor (2013); and for the Court's ruling striking down state bans on same-sex marriage in Obergefell v. Hodges (2015). Justice Anthony Kennedy authored all four opinions, and was joined by Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen Breyer in every one.
Passage of Amendment 2
In 1992, Colorado voters approved by initiative an amendment to the Colorado state constitution (Amendment 2) that would have prevented any city, town, or county in the state from taking any legislative, executive, or judicial action to recognize homosexuals or bisexuals as a protected class. The amendment stated:
Neither the State of Colorado, through any of its branches or departments, nor any of its agencies, political subdivisions, municipalities or school districts, shall enact, adopt or enforce any statute, regulation, ordinance or policy whereby homosexual, lesbian or bisexual orientation, conduct, practices or relationships shall constitute or otherwise be the basis of or entitle any person or class of persons to have or claim any minority status, quota preferences, protected status or claim of discrimination. This Section of the Constitution shall be in all respects self-executing.
That amendment was approved by a vote of 53% to 47%. According to public opinion surveys, Coloradans strongly opposed discrimination based upon sexual orientation, but at the same time they opposed affirmative action based upon sexual orientation, and the latter concern is what led to the adoption of Amendment 2.  The governor of Colorado, Roy Romer, opposed the measure, but also opposed retaliatory boycotts against his state.
Proceedings in state court
Richard G. Evans, a gay man who worked for Denver mayor Wellington Webb, as well as other individuals and three Colorado municipalities, brought suit to enjoin the amendment. A former Colorado Supreme Court justice, Jean Dubofsky, was the lead attorney. A state trial court issued a permanent injunction against the amendment, and upon appeal, the Colorado Supreme Court ruled that the amendment was subject to "strict scrutiny" under the Equal Protection Clause of the federal Constitution. The state trial court, upon remand, concluded that the amendment could not pass strict scrutiny, which the Colorado Supreme Court agreed with upon review. Both times, the Colorado Supreme Court rendered 2–1 decisions.
The state supreme court held that Amendment 2 infringed on the fundamental right of gays to participate equally in the political process.  Regarding the trial court's finding that homosexuals were not a suspect class, the Colorado Supreme Court said: "This ruling has not been appealed and thus, we do not address it."
The majority of the Colorado Supreme Court acknowledged that Amendment 2 would not affect Colorado law that generally protects people from discrimination:
Colorado law currently proscribes discrimination against persons who are not suspect classes. ... Of course Amendment 2 is not intended to have any effect on this legislation, but seeks only to prevent the adoption of anti-discrimination laws intended to protect gays, lesbians, and bisexuals.
The dissenting justice on the Colorado Supreme Court argued that neither a suspect class nor a fundamental right was involved in the case, and thus he would have applied a rational basis test instead of strict scrutiny.
U.S. Supreme Court ruling
The case was argued on October 10, 1995. On May 20, 1996, the court ruled 6–3 that Colorado's Amendment 2 was unconstitutional, though on different reasoning from the Colorado courts. Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote the majority opinion, and was joined by John Paul Stevens, Sandra Day O'Connor, David Souter, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, and Stephen Breyer. The Court majority held that the Colorado constitutional amendment targeting homosexuals based upon animosity lacked a rational relation to any legitimate governmental purpose.
Regarding the state's argument that Amendment 2 blocked homosexuals merely from receiving "special rights", Kennedy wrote:
Amendment 2's reach may not be limited to specific laws passed for the benefit of gays and lesbians. It is a fair, if not necessary, inference from the broad language of the amendment that it deprives gays and lesbians even of the protection of general laws and policies that prohibit arbitrary discrimination in governmental and private settings. ... The state court did not decide whether the amendment has this effect, however, and neither need we.Romer, 517 U.S. at 630.
While leaving that question unresolved by his opinion, Kennedy concluded that the amendment imposed a special disability upon homosexuals by forbidding them to seek safeguards "without constraint". Instead of applying "strict scrutiny" to Amendment 2 (as the Colorado Supreme Court had done), Kennedy wrote that it did not even meet the much lower requirement of having a rational relationship to a legitimate government purpose:Romer, 517 U.S. at 632.
Its sheer breadth is so discontinuous with the reasons offered for it that the amendment seems inexplicable by anything but animus toward the class that it affects; it lacks a rational relationship to legitimate state interests.
And:
[Amendment 2] is at once too narrow and too broad. It identifies persons by a single trait and then denies them protection across the board. The resulting disqualification of a class of persons from the right to seek specific protection from the law is unprecedented in our jurisprudence.
Kennedy did not go into depth in rejecting the claims put forward in support of the law (e.g. protecting the rights of landlords to evict gay tenants if they found homosexuality morally offensive), instead holding that the law was so unique as to "confound this normal process of judicial review" and "defies ... conventional inquiry."  He elaborated:  "It is not within our constitutional tradition to enact laws of this sort."
Finding that "laws of the kind now before us raise the inevitable inference that the disadvantage imposed is born of animosity toward the class of persons affected," the Court inferred that the passage of Amendment 2 was born of a "bare ... desire to harm a politically unpopular group".  The Court added: "[I]f the constitutional conception of 'equal protection of the laws' means anything, it must at the very least mean that a bare ... desire to harm a politically unpopular group cannot constitute a legitimate governmental interest."(emphasis added)Romer, 517 U.S. at 634-35 (citing ). The majority opinion in Romer neither mentioned nor overruled the Court's prior opinion in Bowers v. Hardwick, which allowed outright bans on homosexual activity.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Antonin Scalia wrote the dissent, joined by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justice Clarence Thomas. Scalia asserted that Amendment 2 did not deprive anyone of the "protection [afforded by] general laws and policies that prohibit arbitrary discrimination in governmental and private settings", which he said was confirmed by the Colorado Supreme Court and not disputed by Justice Kennedy's opinion.Romer, 517 U.S. at 637 (Scalia, J., dissenting).  Scalia's dissent said Amendment 2 merely provided that homosexuals "cannot as readily as others obtain preferential treatment under the laws".  His objections also included these:
 Regarding the Court's earlier decision in Bowers v. Hardwick, Scalia wrote:  "If it is rational to criminalize the conduct, surely it is rational to deny special favor and protection to those with a self-avowed tendency or desire to engage in the conduct."
 Davis v. Beason (1890). had held that laws against polygamy were not an "impermissible targeting" of polygamists, and Scalia asked: "Has the Court concluded that the perceived social harm of polygamy is a 'legitimate concern of government,' and the perceived social harm of homosexuality is not?"
 The Court, Scalia said, was engaged in judicial activism; as the Constitution says nothing on the topic, it should be decided by democratic processes.  The dissent added: "it [is] no business of the courts (as opposed to the political branches) to take sides in this culture war. But the Court today has done so, not only by inventing a novel and extravagant constitutional doctrine to take the victory away from traditional forces, but even by verbally disparaging as bigotry adherence to traditional attitudes."
The dissent concluded as follows:
Today's opinion has no foundation in American constitutional law, and barely pretends to. The people of Colorado have adopted an entirely reasonable provision which does not even disfavor homosexuals in any substantive sense, but merely denies them preferential treatment. Amendment 2 is designed to prevent piecemeal deterioration of the sexual morality favored by a majority of Coloradans, and is not only an appropriate means to that legitimate end, but a means that Americans have employed before. Striking it down is an act, not of judicial judgment, but of political will.Romer, 517 U.S. at 653 (Scalia, J., dissenting).
Scholarly commentary
The Court's opinion in Romer did not closely follow established equal protection doctrine (Amendment 2 "defied ... conventional inquiry" wrote Justice Kennedy), and the opinion led to much discussion by scholars and lawyers.  One article that received widespread attention was by Akhil Amar, a prominent law professor at Yale. Amar wrote:
The Constitution does not require that "special" antidiscrimination rights, once extended, irrevocably vest via some magic and antidemocratic one-way ratchet.  And if Denver, Aspen, and Boulder can repeal these ordinances, presumably the Colorado legislature can repeal them by statute; and so too the people of Colorado can repeal them by state constitutional amendment (via initiative or referendum). To think otherwise is terminally silly.
Still, Amar asserted that Amendment 2 violated the Equal Protection Clause (although he preferred an alternative argument based on the Attainder Clause).  Regarding the Equal Protection Clause, Amar wrote:
Under Amendment 2, heterosexuals could win local ordinances and state laws protecting themselves from being discriminated against on the basis of their sexual orientation, but nonheteros could not win symmetric ordinances and laws.
Putting aside the odds of discrimination against heterosexuals, Amar suggested that even if Amendment 2 had barred special protection for both heterosexuals and homosexuals, that still would have been unconstitutional because it would single out groups by name for harm, just like a law that says "Akhil Reed Amar shall be ineligible for a private immigration bill or a suspension of deportation".
The "one-way ratchet" mentioned by Amar has been discussed by other authors as well.  For example, law professor John Calvin Jeffries has argued that the Court in Romer was actually relying upon a principle of non-retrogression, whereby "The Constitution becomes a ratchet, allowing change in one direction only." Jeffries and his co-author, Daryl Levinson, conclude: "the revival of non-retrogression as a constitutional principle is symptomatic of a Supreme Court adrift in an age of judicial activism."
Supporters of the decision, such as law professor Louis Michael Seidman, celebrated its "radical" nature, and hailed it as a revival of the Warren Court's activism.  According to law professor Evan Gerstmann, the Court in Romer left unmentioned and unconsidered many purposes of Amendment 2 that the Colorado courts had acknowledged as legitimate. "[T]here are no standards at all to restrict the [US Supreme] Court's discretion. ... But there are important reasons to be concerned about the Court's sloppy reasoning in Romer. While the Supreme Court's decision was widely viewed as a victory for gay and lesbian rights, it is a victory that is narrow and perhaps Pyrrhic. While Romer is something of a breakthrough for gays and lesbians, the case really represents a change in sentiment rather than a change in law. Gays and lesbians are still at the bottom of the equal protection hierarchy." The case, says Gerstmann, "has left the law of equal protection even murkier than before. ... This is not equal protection of the laws. It is the very opposite of equal protection. It is a loose conglomeration of stated legal principles that are, in fact, ignored, and unstated de facto rules that allow courts to apply different standards to different groups at different times based on judicial sentiment rather than judicial reason. The courts can do better than this."
Related cases and events
In 1993, Cincinnati, Ohio, passed Ballot Issue 3, an amendment to the city charter, which forbade the city from adopting or enforcing civil rights ordinances based on sexual orientation, the only municipality in the United States to pass such a restriction. The wording of Cincinnati's amendment was almost identical to that of Colorado's. The amendment was upheld by the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals in 1996. vacated, 116 S. Ct. 2519 (1996).  Later, the case was remanded by the Supreme Court for further consideration in 1997 in the wake of the Romer decision.  The Sixth Circuit upheld the amendment a second time, differentiating it from the state-level amendment on the grounds that it was a local government action of the type that Amendment 2 was designed to preempt. On October 13, 1998, the Supreme Court rejected an appeal, allowing the Sixth Circuit decision and the city amendment to stand. In 2005, Cincinnati voters overturned the amendment.
Since Romer stood in obvious tension with the Court's earlier decision in Bowers v. Hardwick, it laid the groundwork for 2003's Lawrence v. Texas, which overturned Bowers; like the Romer case, Justices Kennedy and Scalia would author the majority and dissenting opinions in Lawrence with all nine justices voting almost the same way as in Romer (Justice O'Connor concurred, but with a different rationale). Romer has been narrowly cited but influential within its niche, being cited in the cases of Lawrence v. Texas and Hollingsworth v. Perry, but the case has not had a much broader impact given the Court's assertion that it was conducting neither a "normal process of judicial review" nor a "conventional inquiry."  In the same niche, Romer was cited in the decision of Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court case Goodridge v. Department of Public Health, wherein the Department's desire to deny marriage licences to same-sex couples was explicitly likened to Amendment 2's attempt to broadly restrict from seeking benefits a narrowly defined class of citizens.
In 2007, fifteen years after the referendum on Amendment 2, the Colorado legislature amended its anti-discrimination law by forbidding discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity, in employment. In 2008, Colorado further expanded its LGBT protections to include housing, public accommodation, and advertising.
Future Chief Justice John Roberts donated time pro bono to prepare oral arguments for the plaintiffs. Speaking during his nomination process, a case leader, Walter A. Smith Jr., praised his work on the case, recalling,  "He said, 'Let's do it.' And it's illustrative of his open-mindedness, his fair-mindedness. He did a brilliant job."
See also
 1996 in LGBT rights
 Colorado for Family Values
 Compelling state interest
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 517
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 List of LGBT-related cases in the United States Supreme Court
References
Further reading
External links
Category:1996 in LGBT history
Category:1996 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Anti-discrimination case law in the United States
Category:Discrimination against LGBT people in the United States
Category:Legal history of Colorado
Category:LGBT in Colorado
Category:Politics of Colorado
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States LGBT rights case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Constitution of Colorado
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Rooker v. Fidelity Trust Co." ==> """
Rooker v. Fidelity Trust Co., 263 U.S. 413 (1923), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court enunciated a rule of civil procedure that would eventually become known as the Rooker-Feldman doctrine (also named for the later case of District of Columbia Court of Appeals v. Feldman, . The doctrine holds that lower United States federal courts may not sit in direct review of state court decisions.
 Background 
The case originated in Indiana, where a judgment had been entered against the plaintiff, Rooker by an Indiana state court. The judgment was affirmed by the Indiana Supreme Court, and the plaintiff was denied review by the United States Supreme Court.
The plaintiff then filed a claim in the United States district court in Indiana, seeking to overturn the judgment of the Indiana Supreme Court on constitutional grounds. The district court dismissed the claim for lack of jurisdiction, and the plaintiff again appealed to the United States Supreme Court.
Issue
The issue in this case was whether the United States district court had properly dismissed the claim for lack of jurisdiction.
Result
thumb|The Taft Court
The United States Supreme Court, in an opinion by Justice Van Devanter, affirmed the dismissal of the claim by the United States district court. The Court noted that, for the district court to have heard the case would have been an exercise of appellate jurisdiction; but the U.S. Congress has only granted the district courts original jurisdiction to hear cases arising under the Constitution and laws of the United States, meaning that they can only hear claims that were initially brought in or removed to the district court.
The Court noted that the Indiana state court had jurisdiction over the parties and the claims, provided due process, and adjudicated the issues, and that its decisions had been affirmed by the Indiana Supreme Court. Even if all of the Indiana courts came to the wrong conclusions, the only avenue of appeal left to the plaintiff was to the United States Supreme Court - for Congress had authorized no other court to hear appeals of state court decisions.
Later developments
This case laid the groundwork for the current understanding that the decisions of state courts can not be challenged in federal courts (other than the Supreme Court) unless Congress has enacted legislation that specifically authorized such relief. An example of legislation that has been interpreted to this effect is 28 U.S.C. § 2254, which authorizes federal courts to grant writs of habeas corpus. Another example of an explicit legislative exception to this doctrine was the statute passed by Congress to permit federal courts to review the decisions of Florida courts in the Terri Schiavo case.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 263
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1923 in United States case law
Category:Rooker–Feldman doctrine case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
"""

From "Rooney v. North Dakota" ==> """
Rooney v. North Dakota, , was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the adoption of private execution over public execution after sentence does not violate the Ex post facto clause.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court decisions on capital punishment
 John Rooney (murderer)
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1905 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Roper v. Simmons" ==> """
Roper v. Simmons, 543 U.S. 551 (2005), was a landmark decision in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that it is unconstitutional to impose capital punishment for crimes committed while under the age of 18..  The 5–4 decision overruled Stanford v. Kentucky,. in which the court had upheld execution of offenders at or above age 16, and overturned statutes in 25 states.
 Background 
In 1993, in the state of Missouri, 17-year-old Christopher Simmons, along with two younger friends, Charles Benjamin and John Tessmer, concocted a plan to murder Shirley Crook. The plan was to commit burglary and murder by breaking and entering, tying up a victim. The three met in the middle of the night; however, Tessmer dropped out of the plot. Simmons and Benjamin broke into Mrs. Crook's home, bound her hands and covered her eyes. They drove her to a state park and threw her off a bridge. Later she was found dead by drowning; she was 46 years of age.
Once the case was brought to trial, the evidence was overwhelming. Simmons had confessed to the murder, performed a videotaped reenactment at the crime scene, and there was testimony from Tessmer against him that showed premeditation (Simmons discussed the plot in advance and later bragged about the crime). The jury returned a guilty verdict. Even considering mitigating factors (no criminal history and his age),  the jury recommended a death sentence, which the trial court imposed.
Simmons moved for the trial court to set aside the conviction and sentence, citing, in part, ineffective assistance of counsel. His age, and thus impulsiveness, along with a troubled background, were brought up as issues that Simmons claimed should have been raised at the sentencing phase. The trial court rejected the motion, and Simmons appealed.
The case worked its way up the court system, with the courts continuing to uphold the death sentence.Simmons v. Bowersox, 235 F.3d 1124 (8th Cir. 2001), cert. denied, . However, in light of a 2002 U.S. Supreme Court ruling, in Atkins v. Virginia,. that overturned the death penalty for the intellectually disabled, Simmons filed a new petition for state post-conviction relief. The Supreme Court of Missouri concluded that "a national consensus has developed against the execution of juvenile offenders" and held that such punishment now violates the Eighth Amendment's prohibition of cruel and unusual punishment. They sentenced Simmons to life imprisonment without parole.
The State of Missouri appealed the decision to the U.S. Supreme Court, which agreed to hear the case.. (Donald P. Roper, the Superintendent of the correctional facility where Simmons was held, was a party to the action because it was brought as a petition for a writ of habeas corpus.)
 Opinion of the Court 
This case was argued on October 13, 2004. The appeal challenged the constitutionality of capital punishment for persons who were juveniles when their crimes were committed, citing the Eighth Amendment protection against cruel and unusual punishment.
A 1988 Supreme Court decision, Thompson v. Oklahoma,. barred execution of offenders under the age of 16. In 1989, another case, Stanford v. Kentucky, upheld the possibility of capital punishment for offenders who were 16 or 17 years old when they committed the capital offense. The same day in 1989, the Supreme Court ruled in Penry v. Lynaugh. that it was permissible to execute the intellectually disabled. However, in 2002, that decision was overruled in Atkins v. Virginia, where the Court held that evolving standards of decency had made the execution of the mentally retarded "cruel and unusual punishment" and thus unconstitutional.
Under the "evolving standards of decency" test, the Court held that it was cruel and unusual punishment to execute a person who was under the age of 18 at the time of the murder.  Writing for the majority, Justice Kennedy cited a body of sociological and scientific research that found that juveniles have a lack of maturity and sense of responsibility compared to adults. Adolescents were found to be over-represented statistically in virtually every category of reckless behavior. The Court noted that in recognition of the comparative immaturity and irresponsibility of juveniles, almost every state prohibited those under age 18 from voting, serving on juries, or marrying without parental consent. The studies also found that juveniles are more vulnerable to negative influences and outside pressures, including peer pressure. They have less control, or experience with control, over their own environment. They also lack the freedom that adults have, to escape a criminogenic setting.See .
In support of the "national consensus" position, the Court noted that states were reducing the frequency by which they applied capital punishment to juvenile offenders. At the time of the decision, 20 states had the juvenile death penalty on the books, but only six states had executed prisoners since 1989 for crimes committed as juveniles. Only three states had done so since 1994: Oklahoma, Texas, and Virginia. Furthermore, five of the states that allowed the juvenile death penalty at the time of the 1989 case had since abolished it.
The Court also looked to practices in other countries to support the holding. Between 1990 and the time of the case, the court said, "only seven countries other than the United States ha[d] executed juvenile offenders ... : Iran, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Nigeria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and China." Justice Kennedy noted that since 1990, each of those countries had either abolished the death penalty for juveniles or made public disavowal of the practice, and that the United States stood alone in allowing execution of juvenile offenders. The Court also noted that only the United States and Somalia had not ratified Article 37 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (September 2, 1990), which expressly prohibits capital punishment for crimes committed by juveniles. (Somalia went on to ratify it in 2015.)
 Dissents 
Justice Scalia wrote a dissent joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justice Thomas. Justice O'Connor also wrote a dissenting opinion. The dissents put into question whether a "national consensus" had formed among the state laws, citing the fact that at the time of the ruling, only 18 of the 38 states allowing the death penalty (47%) prohibited the execution of juveniles.
However, the primary objection of the Court's two originalists, Justices Scalia and Thomas, was whether such a consensus was relevant. Justice Scalia argued that the appropriate question was not whether there was presently a consensus against the execution of juveniles, but rather whether the execution of such defendants was considered cruel and unusual at the point at which the Bill of Rights was ratified.
In addition, Justice Scalia also objected in general to the Court's willingness to take guidance from foreign law in interpreting the Constitution; his dissent questioned not only the relevance of foreign law but also claimed the Court would "invoke alien law when it agrees with one's own thinking, and ignore it otherwise", noting that in the case of abortion, U.S. laws are less restrictive than the international norm.
Scalia also attacked the majority opinion as being fundamentally antidemocratic. His dissent cited a passage from The Federalist Papers in arguing that the role of the judiciary in the constitutional scheme is to interpret the law as formulated in democratically selected legislatures. He argued that the Court exists to rule on what the law says, not what it should say, and that it is for the legislature, acting in the manner prescribed in Article V of the Constitution to offer amendments to the Constitution in light of the evolving standard of decency, not for the Court to arbitrarily make de facto amendments. He challenged the right of unelected lawyers to discern moral values and to impose them on the people in the name of flexible readings of the constitutional text.
Implications
thumb|Pre-Roper minimum ages for executions by state 
 Impact on other death row prisoners 
In addition to striking down the death sentence of Christopher Simmons, the Supreme Court's decision in Roper v. Simmons also canceled the death sentences of 72 others for crimes they committed while younger than age 18. The greatest effects were in Texas, where 29 juvenile offenders were awaiting execution, and in Alabama, where 13 on death row had been sentenced as juveniles. No other state had more than five such offenders on death row.
Prior to the Roper decision, there had been 22 executions since 1976 of individuals who were juveniles at the time they committed the crime; 13 were in Texas.
 Constitutional jurisprudence 
The majority ruling highlighted several controversies in the field of constitutional jurisprudence. The first is the use of the concept of an evolving "national consensus" to allow for the re-interpretation of previous rulings.  In this case, the evolving consensus was influenced by behavioral and other research studies, such as those presented to the court in an amicus brief by the American Psychological Association.  What constitutes evidence for such a consensus—and from where the judicial branch derives its authority to determine it and implement it into law, a function constitutionally vested in the legislative branch, especially in the case of capital punishment—is unclear at this point. In Roper v. Simmons the majority cited the abolishment of juvenile capital punishment in 30 states (18 of the 38 allowing capital punishment) as evidence of such a consensus. In Atkins v. Virginia, it was the "consensus" of the 30 states (18 of 38 allowing capital punishment) that had banned execution of the mildly retarded.
Another controversy is the role of foreign laws and norms in the interpretation of U.S. law. In 2004 Representative Tom Feeney (FL-R) introduced a non-binding resolution instructing the judiciary to ignore foreign precedent when making their rulings: "This resolution advises the courts they are no longer engaging in 'good behavior' in the meaning of the Constitution and they may subject themselves to the ultimate remedy, which would be impeachment.""A flap over foreign matter at the Supreme Court" - NBC News coverage of Feeney resolution
 Beltway sniper case 
The implications of this ruling were immediately felt in the State of Virginia, where Lee Boyd Malvo became no longer eligible for the death penalty for his role in the Beltway sniper attacks that terrorized the Washington, D.C. area in October 2002.  At the time of the attacks, Malvo was 17 years old. Malvo had already been spared the death penalty in his first trial for the murder of FBI employee Linda Franklin in Falls Church, Virginia, and had pleaded guilty in another case in Spotsylvania County; however, he had yet to face trial in Prince William County, Virginia, as well as in Washington, D.C., Washington state, Texas, Maryland, Louisiana, California, Arizona and Alabama. In light of this Supreme Court decision, the prosecutors in Prince William County decided not to pursue the charges against Malvo. At the outset of the Beltway sniper prosecutions, the primary reason for extraditing the two suspects from Maryland, where they were arrested, to Virginia, was the difference in how the two states deal with the death penalty. While the death penalty was allowed in Maryland, it was only applied to persons who were adults at the time of their crimes, whereas Virginia had also allowed the death penalty for offenders who had been juveniles when their crimes were committed.
 Further developments 
In Ex parte Adams, the Supreme Court of Alabama remanded the death sentence of a juvenile for a rehearing in the lower court in light of the Roper decision, which was released while the Adams case was pending appeal. Justice Tom Parker, who had participated in the prosecution of the case, recused himself. He published an op-ed in The Birmingham News to criticize his non-recused colleagues for their decision. Justice Parker wrote that "State supreme courts may decline to follow bad U.S. Supreme Court precedents because those decisions bind only the parties to the particular case".
The State sought review in the U.S. Supreme Court, raising a single issue, "Whether this Court should reconsider its decision in Roper v. Simmons, 543 U.S. 551 (2005)". The Supreme Court denied certiorari (i.e., declined to take the case for review) on June 19, 2006, without a published dissent.
 See also 
 Kennedy v. Louisiana (2008)
 Graham v. Florida (2010)
 Miller v. Alabama (2012)
 Capital punishment for juveniles in the United States
 Notes 
 References 
 Lane, Charles (March 2, 2005) 5-4 Supreme Court Abolishes Juvenile Executions The Washington Post, p. A01.
 Boorstein, Michelle (October 27, 2004) Malvo Gets Two More Life Terms, Teen Sniper Enters Plea In Spotsylvania Attacks The Washington Post, p. B01.
 .
 .
External links
 Death Penalty Information Center – Juvenile Offenders Who Were On Death Row
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States children's rights case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:Capital punishment in Missouri
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:Capital punishment for juveniles
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Rose v. Locke" ==> """
Rose v. Locke, 423 U.S. 48 (1975), was a United States Supreme Court case in which a Tennessee statute proscribing "crime against nature" was held not unconstitutionally vague as applied to cunnilingus, satisfying as it does the due process standard of giving sufficient warning that men may so conduct themselves as to avoid that which is forbidden. Viewed against that standard, the challenged statutory phrase is no vaguer than many other terms describing criminal offenses at common law, which are now codified in criminal codes. Moreover, the Tennessee Supreme Court by previously rejecting claims that the statute was to be narrowly applied has given sufficiently clear notice that it would be held applicable to acts such as those involved here when such a case as this arose.
 Facts 
Defendant was convicted for having committed a crime against nature after Defendant entered a home of a woman, produced a knife, forced her to partially disrobe, and compelled her to submit to his twice performing cunnilingus upon her. Defendant appealed on the basis that the statutory term "crimes against nature" could not "in and of itself withstand a charge of unconstitutional vagueness" and being unable to find any Tennessee opinion previously applying the statute to the act of cunnilingus.
 Opinion of the Court 
In a per curiam decision issued on November 17, 1975, the Court found that the statute was not vague, and, furthermore, Defendant could not claim that he was afforded no notice that his conduct might be within the statute's scope.
The Court rejected Defendant's arguments, stating that the Tennessee statute's proscription encompassed the act of cunnilingus. As early as 1955, Tennessee had expressly rejected a claim that "crime against nature" did not cover fellatio, repudiating those jurisdictions which had taken a narrow and restrictive definition of the offense. Four years later, the Tennessee Supreme Court was quoted as saying that "the prohibition brings all unnatural copulation with mankind or a beast, including sodomy, within its scope". 
Furthermore, other jurisdictions had already reasonably construed identical statutory language to apply to such acts. And given the Tennessee court's clear pronouncements that its statute was intended to effect broad coverage, there was nothing to indicate, clearly or otherwise, that respondent's acts were outside the scope of "crimes against nature".
Therefore, the statute was not vague, and Defendant's motion was denied.
 Brennan's dissent 
Justice Brennan, with Justice Marshall concurring, first questioned the majority's broad interpretation of crimes against nature.
Of particular significance for this case, as the Court of Appeals accurately stated, "courts have differed widely [423 U.S. 48, 54] in construing the reach of 'crimes against nature' to cunnilingus".
 Stewart's dissent 
Justice Stewart, with Justice Marshall concurring, wrote that the case did not align with the ruling of Wainwright v. Stone, 414 U.S. 21. Specifically: [T]he Florida courts had repeatedly and explicitly ruled that the state law in question prohibited precisely the conduct in which the defendants were found to have engaged. Here, by contrast, the Tennessee courts had never ruled that the act that Locke was found to have committed was covered by the vague and cryptic language of the Tennessee statute. Tenn. Code Ann. 39-707.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 423
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:Void for vagueness case law
Category:Oral eroticism
Category:Cunnilingus
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Rosen v. United States" ==> """
Rosen v. United States, 161 U.S. 29 (1896), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court dealing with the concept of obscenity. In a decision written by Justice Harlan, the Court upheld the conviction of the defendant to 13 months hard labor and a fine of $1 for allegedly using the United States Postal Service to send material that was deemed "obscene, lewd and lascivious".
Background
It had been alleged that the defendant had, on April 24, 1893, within the Southern District of New York:
unlawfully, willfully, and knowingly deposit and cause to be deposited in the post office of the City of New York, for mailing and delivery by the post office establishment of the United States, a certain obscene, lewd, and lascivious paper, which said paper then and there, on the first page thereof, was entitled 'Tenderloin Number, Broadway,' and on the same page were printed the words and figures following, that is to say: 'Volume II, number 27; trademark, 1892; by Lew Rosen; New York, Saturday, April 15, 1893; ten cents a copy, $4.00 a year in advance,' and thereupon, on the same page, is the picture of a cab, horse, driver, and the figure of a female, together (underneath the said picture) with the word 'Tenderloineuse,' and the said paper consists of twelve pages, minute description of which, with the pictures therein and thereon would be offensive to the court and improper to spread upon the records of the court because of their obscene, lewd, and indecent matters, and the said paper, on the said twenty-fourth day of April, in the year one thousand eight hundred and ninety-three, was enclosed in a wrapper, and addressed as follows, that is to say: 'Mr. Geo. Edwards, P.O. Box 510, Summit, N.J.' -- against the peace of the United States and their dignity, and contrary to the statute of the United States in such case made and provided.161 U. S. 32, 33
The defendant, Lew Rosen, had been found guilty and appealed his conviction, arguing that the material the grand jury had found to be obscene had not been specifically identified on the record.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court upheld the conviction. Writing for the Court, Justice Harlan found that because the paper in question had been admitted into evidence and the defendant had not objected, and because he could have requested a bill of particulars that described the paper but chose not to, the indictment sufficiently informed the accused of the nature and cause of the accusation against him.161 U. S. 34-41
Justices White and Shiras dissented.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 161
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Fuller Court
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States obscenity case law
Category:1896 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Rosenberger v. University of Virginia" ==> """
Rosenberger v. Rector and Visitors of the University of Virginia, 515 U.S. 819 (1995), was an opinion by the Supreme Court of the United States regarding whether a state university might, consistent with the First Amendment, withhold from student religious publications funding provided to similar secular student publications..  The University of Virginia provided funding to every student organization that met funding-eligibility criteria, which Wide Awake, the student religious publication, fulfilled. The university's defense claimed that denying student activity funding of the religious magazine was necessary to avoid the University's violating the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment.
The Supreme Court disagreed with the University; constitutional law scholar Michael W. McConnell argued on behalf of the student religious publication, and John Calvin Jeffries argued on behalf of the University of Virginia. The decision centered upon Memorial and Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments, a document on religious freedom by James Madison.
Background
To fund student organization activities, the University of Virginia (UVA) charges and collects from the student body a semestral "activities fee." Registered student organizations, including "student news, information, opinion, entertainment, or academic communications media groups," may use said funding to pay some of their expenses; the ineligible UVA student activities include "religious activities, philanthropic activities, political activities, activities that would jeopardize the University's tax-exempt status, those that involve payment of honoraria or similar fees, or social or entertainment-related expenses." Moreover, the UVA student activity funding policy defined "religious activity" as one that "primarily promotes or manifests a particular belief in or about a deity or an ultimate reality." The funds were disbursed via student organization requests for reimbursement of third-party expenses, paid by the student-activities-fund administrator.
In the case of Rosenberger v. Rector and Visitors of the University of Virginia, the plaintiff was the UVA student religious magazine Wide Awake, and later the petitioner before the U.S. Supreme Court. In 1990, Ronald Rosenberger and other students founded Wide Awake, intending  to "publish a magazine of philosophical and religious expression" meant to "facilitate discussion, which fosters an atmosphere or sensitivity to and tolerance of Christian viewpoints", and to "provide a unifying focus for Christians of multicultural backgrounds."  The first issue of Wide Awake published articles about racism, crisis pregnancy, homosexuality, prayer, C.S. Lewis, eating disorders, and interviews of UVA instructors. The magazine was a registered student organization eligible for student activities funding, and requested some $6,000 to pay for printing the magazine. The fund administrator denied the funding, because the University classified Wide Awake magazine as a funding-ineligible religious activity, because it "promoted or manifested a particular belief in or about a deity or an ultimate reality." The editors appealed the denial to every pertinent administrator, and ultimately lost their case when the dean of students upheld the denial of student activities funds for the religious magazine Wide Awake.
Having no further recourse in the University of Virginia, Wide Awake magazine and Rosenberger asked the legal help of the Center for Individual Rights, which filed a lawsuit against UVA, under 42 U.S.C. § 1983,. in the United States District Court for the Western District of Virginia, who granted summary judgment to the University, ruling that denying student activities funding to Wide Awake was neither unconstitutional content-based discrimination, nor unconstitutional viewpoint discrimination, and that the University's interest in avoiding violating the Establishment Clause justified not subsidizing the magazine. Yet, the district court did not conclusively rule upon the related question of whether or not the UVA subsidizing of the student religious magazine would violate the Establishment Clause of the U.S. Constitution. Wide Awake appealed its lost case to the Fourth Circuit court, which ruled that the University had engaged in unconstitutional viewpoint discrimination, but that the University's subsidizing the religious magazine would affirmatively violate the Establishment Clause. Wide Awake then appealed the Fourth Circuit Court's decision to the U.S. Supreme Court, which agreed to review the case.
Majority opinion
The free speech claim
The Government may not discriminate against a given point of view in a limited public forum, a government-created space wherein speech might occur according to the government's guidelines.  "The necessities of confining a forum to the limited and legitimate purposes for which it was created may justify the State in reserving it for certain groups or for the discussion of certain topics." Yet, under the First Amendment interpretation posited in Perry Educational Association v. Perry Local Educators' Association,. said government guidelines may not "regulate speech when the specific motivating ideology or the opinion or perspective of the speaker is the rationale for the restriction."
Before deciding Rosenberger v. University of Virginia, the Court's last case about the constitutionality of restrictions upon limited public fora was its decision in Lamb's Chapel v. Center Moriches Union Free School District, . wherein a Christian organization sought after-hours use of public school space to show Christian child-rearing films. The Court ruled that excluding the religious organization from school installations, whilst simultaneously permitting secular groups' use of the same place for a "wide variety of social, civic, and recreational purposes," constituted viewpoint discrimination that violated the First Amendment.
The University of Virginia Student Activities Fund (SAF) constituted a limited public forum, albeit "more in a metaphysical sense than in a spatial or geographic sense," yet "By the very terms of the SAF prohibition, the University does not exclude religion as a subject matter, but selects for disfavored treatment those student journalistic efforts with religious editorial viewpoints. Religion may be a vast area of inquiry, but it also provides, as it did here, a specific premise, a perspective, a standpoint from which a variety of subjects may be discussed and considered. The prohibited perspective, not the general subject matter, resulted in the refusal to make third-party payments, for the subjects discussed were otherwise within the approved category of publications."
The University of Virginia defense distinguished between its funds-denial action and the actions tried in Lamb's Chapel v. Center Moriches Union Free School District noting that it involved use of public school buildings, whilst the case of Rosenberger v. University of Virginia involved the use of school money. "Were the reasoning of Lamb's Chapel to apply to funding decisions as well as to those involving access to facilities, it is urged, its holding would become a judicial juggernaut, constitutionalizing the ubiquitous content-based decisions that schools, colleges, and other government entities routinely make in the allocation of public funds." The Court held that when a public school or university spends its own money to disseminate its own message, it may control the content and perspective, yet "it does not follow ... that viewpoint-based restrictions are proper when the University does not, itself, speak or subsidize transmittal of a message it favors, but instead expends funds to encourage a diversity of viewpoints from private speakers." UVA student organizations are not University agents subject to University control, and are not a University responsibility. Because the University of Virginia will pay third-party printing costs of private speakers communicating their own messages, it may not "silence the expression of selected viewpoints."
Vital First Amendment speech principles are at stake here.  The first danger to liberty lies in granting the State the power to examine publications to determine whether or not they are based on some ultimate idea and, if so, for the State to classify them.  The second, and corollary, danger is to speech from the chilling effect of individual thought and expression.  That danger is especially real in the University setting, where the State acts against a background and tradition of thought and experiment that is at the center of our intellectual and philosophic tradition.  In ancient Athens, and, as Europe entered into a new period of intellectual awakening, in places like Bologna, Oxford, and Paris, universities began as voluntary and spontaneous assemblages or concourses for students to speak and to write and to learn.  The quality and creative power of student intellectual life to this day remains a vital measure of a school's influence and attainment.  For the University, by regulation, to cast disapproval on particular viewpoints of its students risks the suppression of free speech and creative inquiry in one of the vital centers for the Nation's intellectual life, its college and university campuses.Rosenberger, 515 U.S. at 835-36.
The Guideline invoked by the University to deny third-party contractor payments on behalf of Wide Awake effects a sweeping restriction on student thought and student inquiry in the context of University sponsored publications.  The prohibition on funding on behalf of publications that "primarily promote or manifest a particular belief in or about a deity or an ultimate reality," in its ordinary and commonplace meaning, has a vast potential reach.  The term "promotes" as used here would comprehend any writing advocating a philosophic position that rests upon a belief in a deity or ultimate reality.  And the term "manifests" would bring within the scope of the prohibition any writing that is explicable as resting upon a premise that presupposes the extistence of a deity or ultimate reality.  Were the prohibition applied with much vigor at all, it would bar funding of essays by hypothetical students such as Plato, Spinoza, and Descartes.  And if the regulation covers, as the University says it does, those student journalistic efforts that primarily manifest or promote a belief that there is no deity and no ultimate reality, then undergraduates named Karl Marx, Bertrand Russell, and Jean-Paul Sartre would likewise have some of their major essays excluded from student publications.  If any manifestation of beliefs in first principles disqualifies the writing, as seems to be the case, it is indeed difficult to name renowned thinkers whose writings would be accepted, save perhaps for articles disclaiming all connection to their ultimate philosophy.  Plato could contrive perhaps to submit an acceptable essay on making pasta or peanut butter cookies, provided he did not point out their (necessary) imperfections.Rosenberger, 515 U.S. at 836-37.
The University's Establishment Clause claim
Although the University of Virginia appeared to concede that its Establishment Clause claim lacked merit, the majority of the Court addressed the matter, because the Fourth Circuit Court's ruling rested upon it. Government partiality towards organized religion is a necessary component of an Establishment Clause violation; in this sense, the government acts neutrally when it follows neutral criteria and policies in extending benefits to recipients representing a wide range of political and religious ideologies. The Establishment Clause does not require government to refuse free speech rights to religious organizations participating in neutral-design government programs. UVA's student activities funding design is neutral, for seeking to "open a forum for speech and to support various student enterprises, including the publication of newspapers, in recognition of the diversity and creativity of student life". Furthermore, the fact that UVA is not the speaker under this program supports the conclusion that the UVA student activities funding design does not violate the Establishment Clause, because it is unlikely that the University will be perceived as the speaker.
O'Connor's concurrence
Justice O'Connor identified the difficult aspect of Rosenberger v. University of Virginia—it lies at the "intersection of the principle of government neutrality and the prohibition on state funding of religious activities."Rosenberger, 515 U.S. at 847 (O'Connor, J., concurring). She identified four considerations showing no Establishment Clause violation arising from UVA's potential endorsement of the religious message Wide Awake magazine might communicate.  First, Wide Awake is "strictly independent" of UVA. Second, the student activities funds disbursed to it may only be used for permitted third-party reimbursements. Third, "assistance is provided to the religious publication in a context that makes improbable any perception of government endorsement of the religious message", because it also funds a "wide array of nonreligious, anti-religious and competing religious viewpoints" via the student activities fund. Fourth, students contribute the money, and students are directly involved in disbursing it under UVA administrative supervision.
Thomas's concurrence
Justice Thomas concurred with the Court majority's opinion, but separately published his historical explanation of the Establishment Clause principle that determined the Rosenberger v. University of Virginia judgment. To wit, James Madison's objection to government subsidy of organized religion in Memorial and Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments was that the taxes were solely to fund Christian churches — the unconstitutional religious partiality against which the Establishment Clause guarded the nation. The historical evidence did not, as the dissent argues, support the conclusion that "the Establishment Clause categorically condemn[s] State programs directly aiding religious activity when that aid is part of a neutral program available to a wide array of beneficiaries".Rosenberger, 515 U.S. at 856 (Thomas, J., concurring, internal quotation marks omitted). That Madison's advocacy of religious neutrality led the Court majority to its judgment of Rosenberger v. University of Virginia. That, if the dissenting justices had their way, and the Establishment Clause required no government money to organized religion, then UVA could allow the Wide Awake editors to themselves print the magazine, but it could not pay for the student religious magazine's third-party printing costs. "Though our Establishment Clause jurisprudence is in hopeless disarray, this case provides an opportunity to reaffirm one basic principle that has enjoyed an uncharacteristic degree of consensus: The Clause does not compel the exclusion of religious groups from government benefits programs that are generally available to a broad class of participants."Rosenberger, 515 U.S. at 861 (Thomas, J., concurring).
Thomas argued in the process that "Contrary to the dissent's suggestion, Madison's objection to the assessment bill did not rest on the premise that religious entities may never participate on equal terms in neutral government programs. Nor did Madison embrace the argument that forms the linchpin of the dissent: that monetary subsidies are constitutionally different from other neutral benefits programs. Instead, Madison's comments are more consistent with the neutrality principle that the dissent inexplicably discards. According to Madison, the Virginia assessment was flawed because it 'violate[d] that equality which ought to be the basis of every law.'"
Dissenting Opinions
Souter's dissent
Justice Souter began his dissenting opinion with a detailed description of the religious message of Wide Awake magazine. "Each issue of Wide Awake contained in the record makes good on the editor's promise, and echoes the Apostle's call to accept salvation ... The masthead of every issue bears St. Paul's exhortation, that the hour has come for you to awake from your slumber, because our salvation is nearer now than when we first believed". Example articles about eating disorders and racism, began with a secular perspective, but soon became religious messages decrying racism, and proclaiming that Jesus Christ alone can "provide the ultimate source of spiritual fulfillment which permeates the emotional, psychological, and physical dimensions of our lives. This writing is not merely descriptive examination of religious doctrine," nor is it "merely the expression of editorial opinion that, incidentally, coincides with Christian ethics and reflects a Christian view of human obligation. It is straightforward exhortation to enter into a relationship with God, as revealed in Jesus Christ, and to satisfy a series of moral obligations derived from the teachings of Jesus Christ."
For Souter, the University of Virginia directly subsidized religion by paying third-party printing costs for Wide Awake magazine. Such a subsidy had been understood to violate the Establishment Clause since before it was added to the Constitution in 1791. "Nearly every colony had exacted a tax for church support", and the "practice was so commonplace as to shock the freedom-loving colonials into a feeling of abhorrence".  James Madison "captured the colonists' conviction that individual religious liberty could be achieved best under a government stripped of all power to tax, to support, or otherwise to assist any or all religions, or to interfere with the beliefs of any religious individual or group".
Accordingly, the UVA student activities fee was a patent violation of the principle of no direct government funding of organized religion, because the University of Virginia "exercises the power of the State to compel a student to" subsidize religion.
Why does the Court not apply this clear law to these clear facts, and conclude, as I do, that the funding scheme here is a clear constitutional violation? The answer must be, in part, that the Court fails to confront the evidence set out in the preceding section. Throughout its opinion, the Court refers uniformly to Wide Awake'''s Christian viewpoint or its religious perspective, and in distinguishing funding of Wide Awake'' from the funding of a church, the Court maintains that Wide Awake is not a religious institution, at least in the usual sense. The Court does not quote the magazine's adoption of Saint Paul's exhortation to awaken to the nearness of salvation, or any of its articles enjoining readers to accept Jesus Christ, or the religious verses, or the religious textual analyses, or the suggested prayers. And so, it is easy for the Court to lose sight of what the University students and the Court of Appeals found so obvious, and to blanch the patently and frankly evangelistic character of the magazine by unrevealing allusions to religious points of view.Rosenberger, 515 U.S. at 877 (Souter, J., dissenting).
To Justice Souter, the Court's analysis was contradictory—it demanded neutrality, but used an Establishment Clause analysis to support that neutrality demand.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 515
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
University of Virginia response to case, declaring religious publications eligible for funding
Article by the Center for Individual Rights, which represented Rosenberger and his co-litigants
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:University of Virginia
Category:1995 in United States case law
Category:1995 in religion
Category:Alliance Defending Freedom litigation
"""

From "Rosenblatt v. Baer" ==> """
Rosenblatt v. Baer, 383 U.S. 75 (1966), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Baer, a supervisor of a county recreation area, brought a civil libel claim in New Hampshire state court against the petitioner Rosenblatt.  The recreation area had been used primarily as a ski resort.  The column in question had criticized the fiscal management of the area by Baer, stating "What happened to all the money last year? and every other year?" Between the trial and an appeal brought by petitioner, the Court had decided New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, in which they held that a State cannot award damages to a public official for a defamatory falsehood relating to official conduct unless the official can show actual malice. The New Hampshire Supreme Court had affirmed the award in the original case.
 Opinion of the Court 
In an 8–1 decision, the Court reversed the decision of the New Hampshire Supreme Court.  It argued that there was a probability that Baer was a public official and therefore would be required to show actual malice in the depictions presented by the newspaper.  It was left to the trial judge to decide whether Baer qualified as a public figure.
 See also 
 New York Times Co. v. Sullivan
 Defamation
External links
 ACLU summary of the case
Category:New Hampshire state case law
Category:United States defamation case law
Category:Ski areas and resorts in New Hampshire
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1966 in United States case law
Category:Belknap County, New Hampshire
"""

From "Rosenbloom v. Metromedia, Inc." ==> """
Rosenbloom v. Metromedia, Inc., 403 U.S. 29 (1971), was  a United States Supreme Court case of libel brought by George Rosenbloom against Metromedia.. This case was responsible for establishing the idea that the knowingly and recklessly false standard (known as the "actual malice" test) for defamatory statements should apply to private individuals as well as public officials in matters of public concern. Concluding that the story was a matter of public concern, the Supreme Court ruled that it did not matter that Rosenbloom was a private citizen; however, the evidence provided in the case did not support the damages awarded to Rosenbloom. The decision was made June 7, 1971 with a 5-3 decision.
Background
A byproduct of the First Amendment, the court had been forced to provide limitations outlining the offense of libel.  This was the topic of a series of court cases, two of the most famous being New York Times Co. v. Sullivan. and Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc...  At the focal point of these cases was the "knowingly and recklessly false" requirement, which had been used to protect public officials from libel.  After raiding his home, George Rosenbloom was arrested in Philadelphia in October 1963 for distribution of nudist magazines, and a news outlet that reported every half-hour broadcast reported on the arrest of George Rosenbloom using his name when talking about police seizure of "obscene books". Later stories run by Metromedia excluded Rosenbloom's name, when using language such as "girlie look peddlers" and "smut distributors". After his acquittal of criminal obscenity charges in May 1964, Rosenbloom filed a suit in the District Court under the Pennsylvania libel law. Rosenbloom claimed that the depiction of his arrest as well as the description of the books were both proved false from his acquittal as well as defamatory. The outcome of this case lead to Rosenbloom being awarded $25,000 in general damages and $725,000 in punitive damages.
Decision
The Supreme Court made a 5-3 majority decision that upheld the ruling as it was made in the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit. In conjunction with the decision being upheld, the Supreme Court reduced the punitive damages from the originally-awarded $725,000 to $250,000.
 References 
 Further reading 
External links
Case Summary
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:United States defamation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Metromedia
"""

From "Ross v. Blake" ==> """
Ross v. Blake, 578 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that "special circumstances" cannot excuse an inmate's failure to exhaust administrative remedies before filing a lawsuit under the Prison Litigation Reform Act of 1995,, 136 S. Ct. 1850, 1857-58 (2016). but clarified that inmates are required to exhaust only administrative remedies that are genuinely available.Ross, 136 S. Ct. at 1859-60. In so doing, it vacated and remanded the decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit.Ross, 136 S. Ct. at 1862.
 Facts and Procedural History 
In 2007, Shaidon Blake, an inmate in a Maryland prison, was assaulted by guards James Madigan and Michael Ross while being moved from his regular cell to the segregation unit.Ross, 136 S. Ct. at 1855. Blake reported the incident to a senior corrections officer who referred it to the Maryland prison system's Internal Investigative Unit (IIU), which investigates employee misconduct. The IIU investigated for a year, and then issued a report that condemned Madigan but made no findings regarding Ross. Madigan then resigned.
After the IIU issued its report, Blake sued Madigan and Ross under 42 U.S.C. § 1983; he claimed that Madigan used excessive force and Ross failed to take protective action. A jury awarded Blake $50,000 as to his claim against Madigan.
Ross presented an affirmative defense: Blake had sued without first exhausting the prison's Administrative Remedy Procedure (ARP) process, and thus was barred from court under the PLRA. The PLRA, 42 U.S.C. § 1997e(a) provides that “No action shall be brought with respect to prison conditions under section 1983 of this title, or any other Federal law, by a prisoner confined in any jail, prison, or other correctional facility until such administrative remedies as are available are exhausted.”. Blake conceded that he had not submitted a formal grievance through the ARP, "because, he thought, the IIU investigation served as a substitute for that otherwise standard process."
 District Court Decision 
Judge Alexander Williams, Jr. of the United States District Court for the District of Maryland dismissed the case, reasoning that "the commencement of an internal investigation does not relieve prisoners from the [PLRA's] exhaustion requirement."Blake v. Maynard, No. 8:2009cv02367, Doc. 110 (D. Md. Nov. 14, 2012), at 9.
 Court of Appeals Decision 
The United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit reversed. It explained that the PLRA's "exhaustion requirement is not absolute."Blake, 787 F.3d at 698. Rather, there are certain "special circumstances" that can justify an inmate's failure to exhaust available administrative remedies. One such circumstance, the Fourth Circuit panel held, was when an inmate failed to exhaust because he reasonably believed that he had already exhausted and no additional remedies were available. And here, the court held that Blake was entitled to the "special circumstances" exception because he thought the IIU investigation precluded him from pursuing remedies through the regular ARP process.Blake, 787 F.3d at 700. Judge G. Steven Agee dissented, holding that judge-made exceptions to the PLRA's Congressionally-mandated exhaustion requirement were impermissible.Blake, 787 F.3d at 703 (Agee, J., dissenting).
 Decision of the Court 
Associate Justice Elena Kagan authored the majority opinion. The Supreme Court vacated the judgment of the Fourth Circuit and remanded for the lower court to determine whether the ARP process was, in fact, “available” to Blake.
The Court criticized the Fourth Circuit for making “no attempt to ground its analysis in the PLRA’s language.”Ross, 136 S. Ct. at 1856. It agreed with Blake's characterization of the Fourth Circuit's rule as an “extra-textual exception to the PLRA’s exhaustion requirement.” The PLRA's text, it held, “suggests no limits on an inmate’s obligation to exhaust – irrespective of any ‘special circumstances.’” While the Court acknowledged that judges can craft exceptions to judge-made exhaustion requirements, it emphasized that statutory exhaustion requirements are different, and only Congress can create exceptions.Ross, 136 S. Ct. at 1857. In this case, it explained, both Supreme Court precedent and the broader history of the PLRA supported the conclusion that Congress intended the exhaustion requirement to be mandatory.Ross, 136 S. Ct. at 1858.
The Court noted, however, that its rejection of the “special circumstances” exception did not decide the case, because “the PLRA contains its own, textual exception to mandatory exhaustion.” Inmates are required to exhaust only “such administrative remedies as are available.” In other words, inmates must only exhaust remedies that are capable of use to obtain some relief.Ross, 136 S. Ct. at 1859. The Court then outlined three situations in which an administrative remedy may be official policy, but yet is “not capable of use to obtain relief.” First, a remedy is unavailable when officers are consistently unable or unwilling to give inmates any sort of relief. Second, a remedy is unavailable if it is “so opaque” that “no ordinary prisoner can discern or navigate it.” Third, a remedy is unavailable if administrators “thwart inmates from taking advantage of a grievance process through machination, misrepresentation, or intimidation.”Ross, 136 S. Ct. at 1860.
In this case, the Court noted, the facts suggested it was possible (but not certain) that the ARP was not “available” for Blake to exhaust.Ross, 136 S. Ct. at 1860-61. While Maryland's Inmate Handbook provided that prisoners could use the ARP for all kinds of grievances, Blake maintained that “once the IIU commences such an inquiry, a prisoner cannot obtain relief through the standard ARP process – whatever the Handbook may say to the contrary.” Because the materials the Court had seen concerning the operation of the IIU and ARP processes were “not conclusive,” it remanded for the lower courts to “perform a thorough review of such materials, and then address the legal issues [the Court] has highlighted concerning the availability of administrative remedies.”Ross, 136 S. Ct. at 1861.
 Concurrence of Justice Thomas 
Justice Thomas concurred in part and in the judgment. He joined the Court's opinion, except for its discussion of the interaction of the ARP and IIU systems, which involved consideration of documents lodged with the Supreme Court, but never previously raised in the lower courts.Ross, 136 S. Ct. at 1862 (Thomas, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment). Justice Thomas opined that “[t]aking notice of the documents encourages gamesmanship and frustrates our review.”
 Concurrence of Justice Breyer 
Justice Breyer concurred in part. Echoing his concurrence in Woodford v. Ngo, he wrote that the PLRA exhaustion requirement is subject to administrative law's “well-established exceptions” to exhaustion. While these do not include a “special circumstances” exception, other non-textual exceptions may apply.Ross, 136 S. Ct. at 1862-63 (Breyer, J., concurring in part).
 Implications 
Ross v. Blake has been cited in nearly 2,000 cases as of March 2019.https://1.next.westlaw.com (citing references for Ross v. Blake). While it is sometimes described as limiting access to courts for prisoners by abrogating the “special circumstances” exception, it is also often characterized as expanding prisoner recourse by clarifying that, in certain circumstances, administrative remedies may be on the books but yet practically “unavailable.” Though Ross has been discussed extensively by courts, it has received limited attention from scholars and news outlets.
 Selected Supreme Court and Federal Courts of Appeals Cases 
 Fry v. Napoleon Cmty. Sch., 137 S. Ct. 743, 753 (2017) (citing Ross for the proposition that administrative relief is only available when it is "accessible or may be obtained," and applying this principle in the context of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act).
Williams v. Corr. Officer Priatno, 829 F.3d 118, 121 (2d Cir. 2016) (finding a prison grievance process unavailable in light of Ross, which "clarified the framework under which courts should assess whether a prisoner has complied with the PLRA exhaustion requirement").
Rinaldi v. United States, 904 F.3d 257, 267-70 (3d Cir. 2018) (applying Ross and holding that intimidation by prison officials thwarted appellant from using the grievance process, rendering it unavailable to him).
Ramirez v. Young, 906 F.3d 530, 538 (7th Cir. 2018) (holding that Ross’s three examples of when administrative remedies are unavailable were “not a closed list” and finding unavailability where the prison did not take reasonable steps to inform the inmate about his remedies).
Townsend v. Murphy, 898 F.3d 780, 783-84 (8th Cir. 2018) (applying Ross and finding a formal grievance procedure unavailable where an inmate was denied access to the prison library that contained the only copy of the administrative directive).
Fuqua v. Ryan, 890 F.3d 838, 849-50 (9th Cir. 2018) (concluding that a particular prison administrative remedy was so opaque as to be functionally unavailable based on the reasoning in Ross).
 Selected Scholarship 
 Jacqueline Hayley Summs, Comment, Grappling with Inmates' Access to Justice: The Narrowing of the Exhaustion Requirement in Ross v. Blake, 69 ADMIN. L. REV. 467 (2017) (arguing that while “the immediate effect” of Ross may be “to create more obstacles” for inmates, “the larger significance of the case lies in the Court's decision to provide specific language to the PLRA's textual exception). 
 Nicola A. Cohen, Note, Why Ross v. Blake Opens a Door to Federal Courts for Incarcerated Adolescents, 51 COLUM. J.L. & SOC. PROBS. 177 (2017) (arguing that adolescents incarcerated in adult facilities face increased difficulty comprehending grievance processes, which should excuse their failure to exhaust in light of Ross).
 Selected Treatises and Manuals 
 4 ADMINISTRATIVE LAW AND PRACTICE § 12:21 (3d ed., February 2019)
15 AMERICAN JURISPRUDENCE CIVIL RIGHTS § 124 (2d ed., February 2019) 
Prison Litigation Reform Act (PLRA): Procedural Basics, PRACTICAL LAW PRACTICE NOTE w-015-8501
14A CORPUS JURIS SECUNDUM CIVIL RIGHTS § 350 (March 2019 update)
 Selected News Articles and Blog Posts 
 Celeste Valencia & Charles C. Dike, Prison Litigation Reform Act: Congressional Statute Not Open to Judicial Discretion, 45 J.  AM. ACAD. PSYCHIATRY L. ONLINE 116 (2017). 
Federalist Society, Ross v. Blake - Post-Decision SCOTUScast (July 28, 2016).
Prison Legal News, Second Circuit: Ross Abrogates “Special Circumstances” Exhaustion Exception (Oct. 10, 2017).
Steven D. Schwinn, Constitutional Law Prof. Blog, Mixed Result in State Prisoner-Rights Case (June 6, 2016).
 See also 
 Prison Litigation Reform Act (PLRA)
 Exhaustion of remedies
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 578
 References 
 External links 
 Text of Ross v. Blake, 578 U.S. ___ (2016) is available from:  Cornell  CourtListener  Justia  Oyez (oral argument audio)  Supreme Court (slip opinion)
SCOTUSblog coverage
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Rostker v. Goldberg" ==> """
Rostker v. Goldberg, 453 U.S. 57 (1981), is a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States holding that the practice of requiring only men to register for the draft was constitutional. After extensive hearings, floor debate and committee sessions on the matter, the United States Congress reauthorized the law, as it had previously been, to apply to men only. Several attorneys, including Robert L. Goldberg, subsequently challenged the Act as gender distinction. In a 6–3 decision, the Supreme Court upheld the Act, holding that its gender distinction was not a violation of the equal protection component of the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment.Rostker, 453 U.S. 57 (1981), slip opinion.
Background
The Military Selective Service Act of 1948 (Act), revised in 1967, authorizes the president to require the registration for possible military service of males, but not females. While the Act was amended in 1973 to prohibit conscription, the purpose of registration is to facilitate conscription under the Act when deemed necessary by the president and Congress.
Registration for the draft was discontinued by presidential proclamation in 1975. In 1980, President Jimmy Carter re-established registration under the Selective Service System following the Soviet Union's invasion of Afghanistan. Carter asked Congress to provide funding for registration and to amend the Act so that registration would be extended to include women. The question of registering women for the Selective Service System received not only considerable national attention, including wide-ranging public debate, but was also extensively debated by Congress in hearings, floor debate, and in committee. Following debate, the House on April 22, and the Senate on June 12, passed a joint resolution to resume the registration process. However, Congress did not approve the full funding requested by Carter and did not amend the Act to require the registration of women. Registration of men began on July 21, 1980.
District Court
In 1971 an anti-war group, the Philadelphia Resistance, gathered a group of young male high school students, including Andrew Rowland, his brother, David Sitman and David Fruedman to protest the draft. In Rowland v. Tarr (1971) the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania heard a challenge to the MSSA on several grounds, one of which was gender discrimination. In 1974, they were not granted a 3-judge court opinion because the draft was now discontinued. This group of men petitioned again in 1974 in Goldberg v. Tarr. Robert Goldberg was a medical student at Penn State who registered and claimed to be a conscientious objector. In July 1980, just a few days before registration was to commence again, the district court offered an opinion claiming that the MSSA violated the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment.
The director of the Selective Service System, Bernard Rostker, filed an appeal and Justice William J. Brennan Jr.,  Circuit Justice for the Third Circuit, stayed the district court's decision and registration began as scheduled. The Supreme Court subsequently granted certiorari.
Arguments
The Army and Marine Corps precluded the use of women in combat as a matter of established policy, and both the Navy and the Air Force restricted women's participation in combat. Even President Carter, who had originally suggested that women be included, expressed his intent to continue the current military policy excluding women from combat. Since the purpose of registration was to prepare for a draft of combat troops, and since women are excluded from combat, Congress concluded that they would not be needed in the event of a draft, and therefore decided funds should not be used to register them.  As one Senator said, “It has been suggested that all women be registered, but only a handful actually be inducted in an emergency. The Committee finds this a confused and ultimately unsatisfactory solution." As the Senate Committee recognized a year before, "training would be needlessly burdened by women recruits who could not be used in combat." All in all, the proponents of the current MSSA advocated not using government funds to register people who were excluded from the job anyway. The main point of those who favored the registration of females was that females were in favor of it because of gender equality principles; women, as full citizens, ought to have the same civic duties and responsibilities as men.
Opinion of the Court
In the majority opinion, Justice William Rehnquist wrote "[t]he existence of the wartime restrictions clearly indicates the basis for Congress' decision to exempt women from registration. The purpose of registration was to prepare for a draft of combat troops. Since women are excluded from combat, Congress concluded that they would not be needed in the event of a draft, and therefore decided not to register them." Implicit in the obiter dicta of the ruling was to hold valid the statutory restrictions on gender discrimination in assigning combat roles. Both men and women, because of the combat restrictions on women, are simply not similarly situated for purposes of a draft or registration for a draft therefore, there is no violation of the Due Process Clause. The Supreme Court therefore reversed the decision of the district court.
Dissenting opinion
Justices White, Marshall, and Brennan dissented. Justice White did not think that excluding women “offended the Constitution” but rather that Congress did not “conclude that every position in the military, no matter how far removed from combat, must be filled with combat ready men.” Marshall dissented on the principle of equal civic obligation.
Later developments
In 2013, the U.S. military began removing restrictions on women in certain combat situations, and by 2015, had eliminated all restrictions barring women from combat. A new suit, brought by the National Coalition for Men, charged that with the removal of service restrictions, the Selective Service System's men-only requirement failed the Equal Protection clause. Judge Gray H. Miller of the United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas ruled in National Coalition for Men v. Selective Service System in February 2019 in favor of the plaintiffs, that the Service's men-only requirement was unconstitutional, though issued no order or injunction. Judge Miller wrote that while at the time Rostker was decided, women were banned from serving in combat, the situation has since changed with the 2013 and 2015 restriction removals. Miller's opinion was reversed by the Fifth Circuit, stating that only the Supreme Court could overturn the Supreme Court precedence from Rostker. The Supreme Court considered but declined to review the Fifth Circuit's ruling in June 2021. In an opinion authored by Justice Sonia Sotomayor and joined by Justices Stephen Breyer and Brett Kavanaugh, the three justices agreed that the male-only draft was likely unconstitutional given the changes in the military's stance on the roles, but because Congress had been reviewing and evaluating legislation to eliminate its male-only draft requirement via the National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service (NCMNPS) since 2016, it would have been inappropriate for the Court to act at that time.
 See also 
 United States v. Virginia (1996)
 Women in the military
 Conscription in the United States#Legality
References
Further reading
External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:Conscription in the United States
Category:Conscription law
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
Category:Women in the United States military
Category:1981 in United States case law
Category:Sexism in the United States
Category:June 1981 events in the United States
"""

From "Roth v. United States" ==> """
Roth v. United States, 354 U.S. 476 (1957), along with its companion case Alberts v. California, was a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States which redefined the constitutional test for determining what constitutes obscene material unprotected by the First Amendment.Roth v. United States, . The Court, in an opinion by Justice William J. Brennan Jr. created a test to determine what constituted obscene material: Whether the average person, applying contemporary community standards would find that the material appeals to a prurient interest in sex, and whether the material was utterly without redeeming social value. Although the Court upheld Roth’s conviction and allowed some obscenity prosecutions, it drastically loosened obscenity laws. The decision dissatisfied both social conservatives who thought that it had gone too far in tolerating sexual imagery, and liberals who felt that it infringed on the rights of consenting adults. 
The decision was superseded by Miller v. California which removed the "utterly without redeeming social value" test, and replaced it with without "serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value". In that case, Justice Brennan dissented, repudiating his previous position in Roth, arguing that states could not ban the sale, advertisement, or distribution of obscene materials to consenting adults.
 Prior history 
Under the common law rule that prevailed before Roth, articulated most famously in the 1868 English case Regina v Hicklin, any material that tended to "deprave and corrupt those whose minds are open to such immoral influences" was deemed "obscene" and could be banned on that basis. Thus, works by Balzac, Flaubert, James Joyce and D. H. Lawrence were banned based on isolated passages and the effect they might have on children.
Samuel Roth, who ran an adult book-selling business in New York City, was convicted under a federal statute criminalizing the sending of "obscene, lewd, lascivious or filthy" materials through the mail for advertising and selling a publication called American Aphrodite ("A Quarterly for the Fancy-Free") containing literary erotica and nude photography. David Alberts, who ran a mail-order business from Los Angeles, was convicted under a California statute for selling lewd and obscene books."Roth v. United States." Oyez, Accessed 6 May. 2021. The Court granted certiorari and affirmed both convictions.
 Ruling 
Roth came down as a 6–3 decision, with the opinion of the Court authored by William J. Brennan Jr. The Court repudiated the Hicklin test and defined obscenity more strictly, as material whose "dominant theme taken as a whole appeals to the prurient interest" of the "average person, applying contemporary community standards." Only material meeting this test could be banned as "obscene." However, Brennan reaffirmed that obscenity was not protected by the First Amendment and thus upheld the convictions of Roth and Alberts for publishing and sending obscene material through the mail.
Congress could ban material, "utterly without redeeming social importance," or in other words, "whether to the average person, applying contemporary community standards, the dominant theme of the material taken as a whole appeals to the prurient interest."
Chief Justice Earl Warren worried that "broad language used here may eventually be applied to the arts and sciences and freedom of communication generally," but, agreeing that obscenity is not constitutionally protected, concurred only in the judgment.
Justices Hugo Black and William O. Douglas, First Amendment "literalists," dissented in Roth, arguing vigorously that the First Amendment protected obscene material.
Justice John Marshall Harlan II dissented in Roth, involving a federal statute, but concurred in Alberts, involving a state law, on the grounds that while states had broad power to prosecute obscenity, the federal government did not.
 Legacy 
In Memoirs v. Massachusetts (1966),Memoirs v. Massachusetts, . a plurality of the Court further redefined the Roth test by holding unprotected only that which is "patently offensive" and "utterly without redeeming social value," but no opinion in that case could command a majority of the Court either, and the state of the law in the obscenity field remained confused.
Pornography and sexually oriented publications proliferated as a result of the Warren Court's holdings, the "Sexual Revolution" of the 1960s flowered, and pressure increasingly came on the Court to allow leeway for state and local governments to crack down on obscenity. During his ill-fated bid to become Chief Justice, Justice Abe Fortas was attacked vigorously in Congress by conservatives such as Strom Thurmond for siding with the Warren Court majority in liberalizing protection for pornography. In his 1968 presidential campaign, Richard Nixon campaigned against the Warren Court, pledging to appoint "strict constructionists" to the Supreme Court.
In Miller v. California (1973), a five-person majority agreed for the first time since Roth as to a test for determining constitutionally unprotected obscenity, thereby superseding the Roth test. By the time Miller was considered in 1973, Justice Brennan had abandoned the Roth test and argued that "no formulation of this Court, the Congress, or the States can adequately distinguish obscene material unprotected by the First Amendment from protected expression."Miller v. California, .
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 354
 Freedom of speech
 United States Bill of Rights
 United States Constitution
 One, Inc. v. Olesen, , an application of the Roth standard.
 Censorship
 References 
External links
 Summary of background and decision 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States obscenity case law
Category:United States Tenth Amendment case law
Category:1957 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Rothgery v. Gillespie County" ==> """
Rothgery v. Gillespie County, 554 U.S. 191 (2008), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a criminal defendant's initial appearance before a magistrate judge, where he learns the charge against him and his liberty is subject to restriction, marks the initiation of adversary judicial proceedings that trigger attachment of the Sixth Amendment right to counsel.. Attachment does not also require that a prosecutor (as distinct from a police officer) be aware of that initial proceeding or involved in its conduct.
 Background 
Texas police had relied on erroneous information that Rothgery had a previous felony conviction to arrest him as a felon in possession of a firearm. The officers brought Rothgery before a magistrate judge, as required by state law, for a so-called “article 15.17 hearing,” at which the Fourth Amendment probable-cause determination was made, bail was set, and Rothgery was formally apprised of the accusation against him.
After the hearing, the magistrate judge committed Rothgery to jail, and he was released after posting a surety bond. Rothgery had no money for a lawyer and made several unheeded oral and written requests for appointed counsel. He was subsequently indicted and rearrested, his bail was increased, and he was jailed when he could not post the bail. Subsequently, Rothgery was assigned a lawyer, who assembled the paperwork that prompted the indictment’s dismissal.
Rothgery then brought this 42 U.S.C. §1983 action against the County, claiming that if it had provided him a lawyer within a reasonable time after the article 15.17 hearing, he would not have been indicted, rearrested, or jailed. He asserted that the County’s unwritten policy of denying appointed counsel to indigent defendants out on bond until an indictment is entered violated his Sixth Amendment right to counsel.
The District Court granted the County summary judgment, and the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed, considering itself bound by Circuit precedent to the effect that the right to counsel did not attach at the article 15.17 hearing because the relevant prosecutors were not aware of, or involved in, Rothgery’s arrest or appearance at the hearing, and there was no indication that the officer at Rothgery's appearance had any power to commit the State to prosecute without a prosecutor’s knowledge or involvement.
 Opinion of the Court 
In an 8 to 1 decision delivered by Justice Souter, the Supreme Court vacated the Fifth Circuit's opinion, holding that "a criminal defendant’s initial appearance before a judicial officer, where he learns the charge against him and his liberty is subject to restriction, marks the start of adversary judicial proceedings that trigger attachment of the Sixth Amendment right to counsel."Rothgery v. Gillespie County, 554 U.S. 191, Slip Opinion, p. 20 Justice Thomas dissented.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2008 in United States case law
Category:Gillespie County, Texas
Category:United States criminal case law
"""

From "Rotkiske v. Klemm" ==> """
Rotkiske v. Klemm, 589 U.S. ___ (2019), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States involving the statute of limitations under the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act of 1977. The Court ruled that the statute of limitations begins one year after the alleged FDCPA violation took place, not one year after the violation was discovered by the plaintiff.. This ruling affirmed a decision by the 3rd Circuit Court of Appeals. It is noteworthy for being the first signed opinion released from the 2019 term. It is also noteworthy for resolving a circuit split regarding a major consumer protection law.
 Background 
 Legal concepts 
 The Fair Debt Collection Practices Act 
In 1977, Congress enacted the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act (FDCPA), a landmark consumer protection law which established federal legal protections against abusive or unfair debt collection practices. It enacted regulations on the way debt collectors could conduct business, including requirements for serving notice of collection lawsuits to debtors. The FDCPA is enforced by a variety of federal agencies, primarily the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). The FDCPA also establishes a private right of action; this allows private individuals who are harmed by unlawful debt collection practices to file lawsuits against the debt collector on their own. 
 Tolling 
In law, tolling is a legal doctrine that allows for the delay or pausing of a statute of limitations. (That is, the statute of limitations can be 'tolled' (paused) for a period of time, granting one party additional time to file a lawsuit). Even if a statute doesn't explicitly contain a provision for tolling, courts can sometimes toll a statute of limitations under the principle of equity, generally when the plaintiff -- through no fault of their own -- was denied their ability to file suit in a timely manner.
 Case history 
The plaintiff, Rotkiske, accrued approximately $1,200 in credit card debt between 2003 and 2005. After he failed to pay the debt, his bank turned to a professional debt-collection firm called Klemm & Associates. 
Klemm first attempted to sue Rotkiske in Philadelphia Municipal Court in March 2008. However, it served the notification of the lawsuit to an old address, where a stranger at that address accepted the notification. When Klemm learned that they had the wrong address, they dropped the suit. In 2009, Klemm filed suit for the second time, sending the notification of the lawsuit the same address as in 2008 where, again, a stranger accepted the notification. When Rotkiske failed to appear, the Philadelphia Municipal Court entered a default judgment against him.
In September 2014, Rotkiske discovered the default judgment on his record when he was denied a mortgage because of it. In June 2015, Rotkiske filed a federal lawsuit under the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act in the federal court. 
 In lower courts 
Rotkiske's federal lawsuit was first heard by the Eastern District of Pennsylvania. Rotkiske argued that Klemm had violated the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act when it filed its second lawsuit against him in 2009, after the state-law statute of limitations had expired. He argued that Klemm should not have even attempted to contact him when it knew it did not have the legal ability to collect. Klemm responded by filing a motion to dismiss, arguing that the FDCPA provides a 1-year statute of limitations for private suits, which had long expired by 2015.
Rotkiske acknowledged that he had filed his lawsuit extremely late. However, in his filing he argued that the doctrine of equitable tolling meant that the statute of limitations should not have begun until 2014 (when he discovered the default judgment while applying for his mortgage). He argued that the doctrine of equitable tolling applied to his case because Klemm committed fraud by deliberately sending the notification of the 2009 lawsuit to an address that they knew was incorrect, thus depriving him of the ability to appear in court. This practice, colloquially known as sewer service (in reference to the act of "serving" court papers to someone by dumping them in a sewer), is prohibited by law. He also argued in the alternative that the statute of limitations would not begin until he discovered the default judgment on his record.
In March 2016 Eastern District court sided with Klemm, dismissing Rotkiske's lawsuit over the statute of limitations issue. The judge ruled that the statute of limitations continues to run even if the plaintiff did not know about the FDCPA violation. They also rejected his argument regarding equitable tolling, ruling that, even if Klemm had deliberately sent the notification to the wrong house, Rotkiske had not been misled by their conduct Rotkiske appealed to the 3rd Circuit Court of Appeals, which in a unanimous en banc ruling authored by Judge Thomas Hardiman, upheld the Eastern District court's ruling against him in May 2018. The precedent established by the 3rd Circuit contradicted rulings from the 4th Circuit and the 9th Circuit, each of which had previously held that the statute of limitations begins to toll from the date the violation was discovered, not when it occurred. 
Rotkiske appealed again, this time to the United States Supreme Court. The Supreme Court granted his application for a writ of certiorari, agreeing to hear the case, on February 25, 2019.
Before the Supreme Court, Rotkiske was represented by Scott Gant of the prominent firm Boies Schiller Flexner LLP. Shay Dvoretzky from Jones Day argued the case on behalf of Klemm.
 Supreme Court opinion 
On December 10, 2019, the United States Supreme Court ruled that the one-year filing deadline for FDCPA lawsuits runs from the date when the alleged violation occurs. 
 Majority opinion 
In the 8–1 majority opinion, authored by Justice Clarence Thomas, the Court applied a textualist reading of the FDCPA and found that the plain language of the law was unambiguous: an FDCPA action "may be brought [...] within one year from the date on which the violation occurs", with no mention of "discovery rule" extending the deadline to file to one year after the violation was discovered by the plaintiff. The majority opinion rejected Rotkiske's wish to incorporate a discovery rule into the FDCPA, describing such an expansive application of the discovery rule as a "bad wine of recent vintage". The opinion noted that Congress could have chosen to include a discovery rule in the law but deliberately chose not to, making it inappropriate for the Supreme Court to add that to the law. It also noted that, though Rotkiske had made an argument based on equitable tolling and fraud in the District Court, he chose not to raise that argument in his appeal, thus preventing the Supreme Court from addressing it.
 Concurrence 
In her concurrence, Justice Sonia Sotomayor agreed with the majority opinion's interpretation of the FDCPA and its ruling against Rotkiske. She wrote separately to challenge the majority's assertion that the discovery rule was a "bad wine of recent vintage", noting that the Supreme Court had long recognized this exception to the statutes of limitation for suits based on fraud or concealment, including Holmberg v. Armbrecht (1946), Exploration Co. v. United States (1918), and Bailey v. Glover (1875).
 Dissent 
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg filed an opinion dissenting in part and dissenting from the judgment. She agreed with the majority's interpretation of the FDCPA statute of limitations, but asserted that the fraudulent actions alleged in the complaint should warrant the application of the discovery rule, starting the statute of limitations on the date that he learned of the default judgment (in 2014). She considers this fraud-based discovery rule distinct from the generic discovery rule rejected by the majority, and would apply it even in cases where the generic discovery rule does not apply. Ginsburg's opinion also challenges the claim that Rotkiske failed to preserve the fraud argument in his appeals.
 Effect 
This ruling upheld the 3rd Circuit's ruling against Rotkiske, and resolved a circuit split between the 3rd Circuit and the 4th and 9th Circuit Courts of Appeal.
 References 
External links
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Consumer protection case law
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:Statutes of limitations
Category:Debt collection
"""

From "Rousey v. Jacoway" ==> """
Rousey v. Jacoway, 544 U.S. 320 (2005), was a bankruptcy case decided by the United States Supreme Court in which the Court held that Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) qualify for certain exemptions under Title 11 of the United States Code.
 Background 
Richard and Betty Jo Rousey filed a joint Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Western District of Arkansas. They petitioned the court to shield portions of their IRAs from their creditors under section 522(d)(10)(E) of the United States Bankruptcy Code (). Jill Jacoway, the Chapter 7 trustee, objected to the petition, and the court sustained the objection. The Bankruptcy Appellate Panel and the Eight Circuit Court of Appeals both affirmed.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Thomas delivered the opinion of the unanimous court.
The Court held that IRAs qualify for exemption because such plans are intended to substitute income (like other plans and programs specifically listed in the statute) and payments from the plan are because of one's age, thus satisfying the section's requirements.
External links
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:United States bankruptcy case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Rowan v. United States Post Office Department" ==> """
Rowan v. Post Office Dept., 397 U.S. 728 (1970), is a case in which the United States Supreme Court ruled that an addressee of postal mail has sole, complete, unfettered and unreviewable discretion to decide whether he or she wishes to receive further material from a particular sender, and that the sender does not have a constitutional right to send unwanted material into someone's home. It thus created a quasi-exception to free speech in cases in which a person is held as a "captive audience".Eugene Volokh, Freedom of Speech and Workplace Harassment, 39 UCLA Law Review 1791 (1992), excerpted with substantial modifications.
Background
While the statute only explicitly applies to "a pandering advertisement which offers for sale matter which the addressee in his sole discretion believes to be erotically arousing or sexually provocative", a lower court had found that § 4009 was constitutional when interpreted to prohibit advertisements similar to those initially mailed to the addressee, and this decision upholds that interpretation. In other words, a recipient may obtain a Prohibitory Order applying prohibiting mail from a given sender, and the mailing used as the basis for that order need not be erotic or sexually provocative in order to be the basis of prohibiting the sender from sending further mail. The only absolute requirement is that it must be possible to construe the mail as an offer to sell goods or services.
Opinion of the Court
The opinion of the Court was delivered by Justice Warren Burger, and a concurring opinion was filed by Justice William Brennan, joined by William Douglas. The majority concluded that the addressee of postal mail has sole, complete, unfettered and unreviewable discretion to decide whether to receive further material from a particular sender, and a vendor does not have a constitutional right to send unwanted material to an unreceptive addressee.
Subsequent developments
The United States Postal Service's PS Form 1500 still refers to material that the applicant considers "erotically arousing or sexually provocative" even though the court interpreted the statute to apply to any unwanted advertising: "The statute allows the addressee sole, complete, unfettered and unreviewable discretion to decide whether he wishes to receive any further material from a particular sender."
See also
 Prohibitory Order
 Administrative Procedure Act (United States)
 Due Process
 Monis v The Queen
List of United States Supreme Court cases
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 397
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
References
Volokh, Eugene (2008). The First Amendment and Related Statutes. Foundation Press.
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Void for vagueness case law
Category:1970 in United States case law
Category:United States Postal Service litigation
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Office
"""

From "Rowell v. Lindsay" ==> """
Rowell v. Lindsay, 113 U.S. 97 (1885), was a bill brought by the appellants, John S. Rowell and Ira Rowell, the plaintiffs in the circuit court. The bill was in equity against Edmund J. Lindsay and William Lindsay, the appellees, to restrain the infringement of reissued letters patent No. 2,909, dated March 31, 1868, granted to the plaintiffs for 'a new and improved cultivator.. 
The answer of the defendants, among other defenses, denied infringement of the letters patent. The plaintiffs contended that infringement of their letters patent was made out by the evidence, which tended to show that the defendants constructed and sold seeding-machines made according to the specification of letters patent granted to John H. Thomas and Joseph W. Thomas, dated June 30, 1874, for 'an improvement in seeding-machines.' This invention related to the drag-bars and shovel standards of broad cast seeders, and consisted mainly in the manner of attaching the standards to the drag-bar. 
Upon final hearing upon the pleadings and proofs the circuit court dismissed the bill, and the plaintiffs appealed. 
The evidence showed that the shanks or standards of plows, cultivators, and seeding machines have been used in a great variety of forms. In some, the upper end of the brace entered the beam in the rear, and in others, in front of the shank. In some, the upper end of the shank and the brace were so formed and united as to present an elliptical figure. Many, perhaps the majority, were without braces. In some, the upper end of the shank was made with a head in the form of an elliptical or circular plate, called an enlarged head. This performed the function of a brace. 
The patent of the plaintiffs stood on narrow ground, and to sustain it, it must be construed as to confine it substantially to the form described in the specification. The patent of the plaintiffs was for a combination only. None of the separate elements which the combination was composed are claimed as the invention of the patentee; therefore none of them, standing alone, are included in the monopoly of the patent. As was said by Mr. Justice BRADLEY in the case of The Corn-Planter Patent, 23 Wall. 224: 'When a patentee, after describing a machine, claims as his invention a certain combination of elements, or a certain device, or part of the machine, this is an implied declaration-as conclusive, so far as that patent is concerned, as if it were expressed-that the specific combination or thing claimed is the only part which the patentee regards as new. True, he or some other person may have a distinct patent for portions not covered by this, but that will speak for itself. So far as the patent in question is concerned, the remaining parts are old, or common and public.' See, also, Merrill v. Yeomans, 94 U.S. 573; Water-meter Co. v. Desper, 101 U.S. 332-337; Miller v. Brass Co. 104 U.S. 350. These authorities dispose of the contention of the plaintiffs' counsel that their patent covers one of the separate elements which enters into the combination, namely, a slotted wooden beam, because, as they contend, that element is new, and is the original invention of the patentees. 
The patent was for a combination so there could be no infringement unless the combination is infringed. It was plain, upon an inspection of the drawings, that the defendants do not use a brace-bar similar in shape or position to that described in the plaintiffs' patent.  The specification and drawings of the plaintiffs' patent, and the testimony of the plaintiffs' witnesses, show that one purpose of the brace-bar, used in the plaintiffs' combination, was to strengthen and support the shank between the tooth and the beam. The use of the brace-bar enabled the plaintiffs to make the shank with less material, and, at the same time, to increase its strength. The court found that the curved upper part of the shank used by defendants does not perform one of the material functions of the brace-bar of the plaintiffs' combination. It cannot, therefore, be the equivalent of the latter. For where one patented combinais asserted to be an infringement of another, a device in one, to be the equivalent of a device in the other, must perform the same functions. 
therefore, there was one element of the plaintiffs' patented combination which the defendants do not use, and for which they do not employ an equivalent, it follows that they do not infringe the plaintiffs' patent.  The decree of the circuit court, which dismissed the plaintiffs' bill, was therefore affirmed; and it was so ordered.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
John S. Rowell Wikipedia Article
References
External links
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
"""

From "Ruan v. United States" ==> """
Ruan v. United States, 597 U.S. ___ (2022), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States.
 Background 
From January 2011 to May 2015, Dr. Xiulu Ruan operated a clinic with Dr. John Couch and prescribed over 475,000 opioids to his patients and was both indicted by the United States in 2016 under , under the Controlled Substances Act. The United States argued that they prescribed medicine that diverged with standard medical practice, the doctors, however, argued that they were prescribing medicine in accordance to standard medical practice. The doctors seek the judge to inform the jury that if they had acted in "good faith" they should not be guilty under , the judge disagreed and informed the jury that the doctors can be held guilty if their actions had deviated away from medical practice that was "unrecognizable" The jury ultimately disagreed with the doctors and held that they were guilty under .
Ruan and Couch appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh circuit and argued that the instructions to the jury in the district court was "legally erroneous", they argued since they believe that their practice was in accordance with standard medical practice, the jury should be informed about the "good faith" defense. The Court of Appeals disagreed and affirmed the lower court's decision.
Similarly in the case of Dr. Shakeel Kahn, he was charged under , for over prescription of Schedule II drug. The United States provided the same argument and Kahn rebutted with the same argument that he acted in "good faith", the trial judge told the jury that the "good faith" argument cannot stand ground if the actions of Kahn practiced medicine outside the bounds of standard medical practice. The jury agreed with the United States and handed down the guilty verdict. Kahn appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth circuit and the court of appeals, similarly, affirmed the lower court decision.
In both cases, the defendant appealed to the Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted for both cases on November 5, 2021, and these cases were consolidated. Oral arguments were held on March 1, 2022. On June 27, 2022, the court ruled unanimously to vacate the judgement of the Eleventh Circuit. Justice Stephen Breyer wrote the majority opinion, while Justice Samuel Alito (along with Justices Clarence Thomas and Amy Coney Barrett) concurred in the judgement.
 Opinion of the Court 
In his opinion, Justice Breyer wrote that the United States must prove the defendant "knowingly or intentionally" acted in an unauthorised manner beyond a reasonable doubt, once the defendant meets their "burden of proof". The court rejected the government's "mens rea" standard in which the government argued that the statute should be read as containing an "objectively reasonable good-faith effort". The court rejected such an interpretation stating that such an interpretation would put the burden on the defendant to proof that their mental state is of a "hypothetical 'reasonable' doctor". He cited Elonis v. United States as jurisprudence against the government requirement for the accused to prove that they are ”reasonable person" is flawed. Additionally, the court rejected the "bad-apple" argument, that the additional burden on the government to prove would allow doctors to escape criminal liability much more easily, by stating that such an argument could be applied to almost all cases.
References
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States controlled substances case law
"""

From "Rubber Company v. Goodyear" ==> """
Rubber Co. v. Goodyear, 76 U.S. (9 Wall.) 788 (1869), is an early decision of the United States Supreme Court recognizing the right of a patent owner to license another person to practice the invention only in a limited field, and holding that such a licensee committed patent infringement when it made and sold products of the invention outside that field.Rubber Co. v. Goodyear, .
Background
thumb|300px|right|Goodyear's patented machine for making vulcanized rubber fabric
Charles Goodyear invented a process for "vulcanizing" rubber by heating it to a high temperature in the presence of sulfur and lead carbonate or another chemical, so that it was converted from a soft, sticky, gummy product (so-called India rubber) to a hard, resilient, elastic, flexible product (so-called vulcanized rubber). Goodyear was issued a patent on the process by which vulcanized India-rubber is manufactured and another patent for the product that the process produced.76 U.S. at 789–90, 794; Goodyear v. Providence Rubber Co., 10 F. Cas. 712, 720 (C.C.D.R.I. 1864). Goodyear received other patents, as well, including one, U.S. Patent No. 9319, on a machine for making vulcanized-rubber fabric, depicted at right.
In 1846, Goodyear granted what amounted to a royalty-free exclusive license to E.M. Chaffee, the assignor to the Providence Rubber Company (Providence), to "use" the patented "metallic gum-elastic composition for coating of cloths for the purpose of japanning, marbling, and variegate japanning, at his own establishment, but not to be disposed of to others for that purpose without the consent of said Goodyear." Further, the licensee was to pay Goodyear "at the rate of three cents per square yard of cloth japanned, marbled, or variegated as aforesaid."10 F. Cas. at 722–23. The license expressly provided that it did not "convey any right to make any contract with the government of the United States."79 U.S. at 799.
Providence subsequently made and sold to the government "army and navy equipments made of vulcanized India-rubber, including vulcanized India-rubber blankets, coats, cloaks, cloth, clothing, ponchos for army, navy, and other purposes" using the patented composition. Goodyear's assignees sued Providence for patent infringement, seeking an injunction and an accounting for profits.76 U.S. at 790, 800.
Ruling of circuit court
Supreme Court Justice Nathan Clifford, sitting as a circuit justice in the circuit court in Rhode Island, held that Providence infringed Goodyear's patent. Providence sought to defend on the ground that it was licensed to engage in the allegedly infringing conduct, but the court held that the license was "restricted to the manufacture of cloths to be japanned, marbled, and variegated, as therein described, and that it confers no authority to manufacture any of the articles specified in the bill of complaint." It therefore ruled against Providence, which then appealed to the Supreme Court.
Ruling of Supreme Court
Justice Swayne delivered the unanimous opinion of the Court.
The Court described the limitations in the terms of the license to particular products and the exclusion of sales to the government, stating that the license "conveyed authority to this extent and nothing more." Accordingly, the Court held: "This defence [of license] cannot avail the defendants."76 U.S. at 799–800 The Court did not cite any case authority on this point.
The decree of the circuit court was therefore affirmed.76 U.S. at 804.
Subsequent developments
General Talking Pictures
In General Talking Pictures Corp. v. Western Electric Co., 304 U.S. 175, 182 (1938) (upholding as legitimate field-of-use limitations on scope of patent licenses to make and sell amplifiers only in “non-commercial” field), affirmed on rehearing, 305 U.S. 124 (1938), the Supreme Court held that a patent owner could permissibly license another to manufacture the patented product only in a defined field (in that case, amplifiers for sale and use other than to movie theaters, so-called noncommercial use). The defendants were held patent infringers for making and selling the patented product to movie theaters. The Court stated (305 U.S. at 127):
The practice of granting licenses for a restricted use is an old one, see Rubber Company v. Goodyear, 9 Wall. 788, 799, 800 . . . So far as appears, its legality has never been questioned. The parties stipulated that "it is common practice where a patented invention is applicable to different uses, to grant written licenses to manufacture under United States Letters Patents restricted to one or more of the several fields of use permitting the exclusive or non-exclusive use of the invention by the licensee in one field and excluding it in another field."
Mallinckrodt
In Mallinckrodt, Inc. v. Medipart, Inc., 976 F.2d 700 (Fed. Cir. 1992), the Federal Circuit cited Goodyear incorrectly (conflating sales and licenses to manufacture) for support that it was established law that it was lawful to impose post-sale restrictions on the sale of patented products. The court said:
The practice of granting licenses for restricted use is an old one, see Rubber Company v. Goodyear, 76 U.S. 788, 9 Wall. 788, 799, 800. . . . So far as it appears, its legality has never been questioned.
But Mallinckrodt involved a sale subject to a restriction, while Goodyear involved a license to manufacture subject to a limitation as to field of use (as in General Talking Pictures).
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
Category:United States patent case law
Category:1869 in United States case law
"""

From "Rubber-Tip Pencil Co. v. Howard" ==> """
Rubber-Tip Pencil Co. v. Howard, 87 U.S. (20 Wall.) 498 (1874), is an 1874 decision of the United States Supreme Court concerning the patent eligibility of abstract ideas.. As explained below in the Subsequent developments section, it is intermediate in the development of that aspect of patent law from Neilson v Harford,151 Eng. Rep. 1266, 8 M. & W. 806, Web. Pat. Cases 295 (1841). through O'Reilly v. Morse,56 U.S. (15 How.) 62 (1853). to Funk Bros. Seed Co. v. Kalo Inoculant Co.,333 U.S. 127 (1948). and then to Parker v. Flook,437 U.S. 584 (1978). Mayo Collaborative Servs. v. Prometheus Labs., Inc.,566 U.S. __, 132 S. Ct. 1289 (2012). and Alice Corp. v. CLS Bank Int'l.573 U.S. __, 134 S. Ct. 2347 (2014).
The Rubber-Tip Pencil case has frequently been cited in the subsequent Supreme Court decisions concerning the patent eligibility of computer-related claimed inventions, such as Alice Corp. v. CLS Bank,134 S. Ct. 2347, 2355 (2014) ("an idea of itself is not patentable"). Diamond v. Diehr,450 U.S. 175, 185 (1981) (same). Parker v. Flook,437 U.S. 584 598 (1978) (dissenting opinion) ("laws of nature, physical phenomena, and abstract ideas are not patentable subject matter"). and Gottschalk v. Benson,409 U.S. 63, 67 (1972) (same). See also In re Comiskey, 554 F.3d 967, 978 (Fed. Cir. 2009); In re Warmerdam, 33 F.3d 1354, 1360 (Fed. Cir. 1994).
Background
300px|thumb|right|Cross-sectional drawing of rubber-tip pencil in patent on that product – U.S. Pat. No. 66,938. "A" designates pencil; "B" designates eraser.
Lead pencils and rubber erasers were known for a long time.The Greeks and Romans used a sharpened lump of lead or a lead stylus to make gray marks on papyrus, about 200 years ago. Karl S. Kruszelnicki, Lead in your pencil, ABC  (Sept. 9, 2004). In the mid-1500s a deposit of high-grade graphite was discovered, was mistakenly thought to be black lead, and was utilized for writing on paper. Daven Hiskey, [http://www.todayifoundout.com/index.php/2010/11/why-pencil-lead-is-called-lead/ Why pencil "lead" is called "lead",  (Nov. 24, 2010). Rubber erasers have been in use since approximately 1770. See  xv n. (1769). Up until the time of the invention, pencils and erasers were separate products. In 1867 it occurred to Blair, a poor artist in Philadelphia, that it would be more convenient to him if he combined pencil and eraser into one unit so that the eraser would readily be at hand when he needed it to correct his drawings as he made them.See 87 U.S. at 504. He made a hole in a piece of rubber, slightly smaller than the size of his pencil, and stuck the pencil into the hole. The eraser stayed fastened to the pencil, because, as "everybody knew  . . if a solid substance was inserted into a cavity in a piece of rubber smaller than itself, the rubber would cling to it."87 U.S. at 507. Blair applied for a patent, which issued July 23d, 1867, as U.S. Pat. No. 66,938
Millions of rubber-tipped pencils were then sold. Blair assigned his rights to the Rubber-Tip Pencil Co. The defendant Howard made rubber-tipped pencils like those covered by the patent, so the company filed a bill in equity in the circuit court in New York, to enjoin him.See Rubber-Tip Pencil Co. v. Howard, 20 Fed. Cas. 1298, Case No. 12,102, 1872 U.S. App. LEXIS 1450 (C.C.S.D.N.Y. 1872).
Ruling of the circuit court
The circuit court denied relief.Rubber Tip Pencil Co. v. Howard, 20 Fed. Cas. 1298, Case No. 12,102, 1872 U.S. App. LEXIS 1450 (C.C.S.D.N.Y. 1872). It said the patented article consists "of a piece of India rubber, with a hole in it."20 Fed. Cas. at 1299. The court stated:
Such an article cannot be the subject of a patent The elastic and erasive properties of India-rubber were known to all . . . ; and how to make a piece of rubber encompass and adhere to another article, was known to every person who had ever seen a rubber shoe. No person knowing of the elastic quality of rubber, could be wanting in the knowledge that a piece of rubber could be made to encompass and adhere to a pencil, ink eraser, or other article of similar character, by making a hole in it, nor could anyone be deficient in the skill requisite to make such a hole.20 Fed. Cas. at 1299.
The court, therefore, concluded that "the patent in question cannot be upheld, for want of invention," and dismissed the bill.Id. The company then appealed to the Supreme Court.
Proceedings in Supreme Court
Argument for Rubber-Tip Pencil Co.
Counsel for the Rubber-Tip company made this argument"
Lead-pencils have very long — longer than any living man remembers — been used to make marks. India-rubber has very long — longer than any living man remembers — been used to rub them out. But never until lately was India-rubber used for this purpose except in a form disconnected from the pencil. But on a summer's morning of 1867, one Blair, a poor artist of Philadelphia, seeing that it will be more convenient to use it on his pencil than off, puts in a certain way, a piece of a certain shape, on the pencil, and finding a great advantage in thus using such a piece, shows what he has done.
Behold! thousands, hundreds of thousands and millions of rubber-tipped pencils at once appear. Very rich companies, like the Rubber-Tip Pencil Company, are incorporated. Great capital is invested in the matter, and rubber-tipped pencils become a manufacture of the nation.
How can it be said that there is no invention here? So far as the patent laws are concerned, utility, as ascertained by the consequences of what is done, is the test of invention, and when utility is proved to exist in any great degree, a sufficiency of invention to support the patent must be presumed. In such a case it is vain to talk about the small amount of ingenuity shown or to say that the arrangement and application are so simple and obvious that anybody could see them.87 U.S. at 504.
Ruling of Supreme Court
150px|thumb|right|Justice Waite
Writing for a unanimous Court, Chief Justice Morrison Waite began by ascertaining what the claimed invention was. It was not for the external form of the device described. Rather:
[I]t is very evident that the essential element of the invention as understood by the patentee was the facility provided for attaching the [rubber] head to the pencil. The prominent idea in the mind of the inventor clearly was the form of the attachment, not of the head.87 U.S. at 506.
The Court then turned to the piece of rubber with a hole in it: "the cavity must be made smaller than the pencil and so constructed as to encompass its sides and be held thereon by the inherent elasticity of the rubber." But that "adds nothing to the patentable character of the invention." The reason was:
Everybody knew when the patent was applied for that if a solid substance was inserted into a cavity in a piece of rubber smaller than itself, the rubber would cling to it. The small opening in the piece of rubber not limited in form or shape was not patentable, neither was the elasticity of the rubber. What, therefore, is left for this patentee but the idea that if a pencil is inserted into a cavity in a piece of rubber smaller than itself the rubber will attach itself to the pencil, and when so attached become convenient for use as an eraser?87 U.S. at 507.
That idea was the invention. But, the Court reasoned, an idea cannot be patented—only its mechanical application can be patented. Yet here the method of mechanical application was old and well known:
An idea of itself is not patentable, but a new device by which it may be made practically useful is. The idea of this patentee was a good one, but his device to give it effect, though useful, was not new. Consequently, he took nothing by his patent.87 U.S. at 507.
Subsequent developments
Earlier case law
In Neilson (1841), the court recognized that an idea as such could not be patented while an apparatus exploiting an idea could be patented, but it did not address or consider whether the implementation was inventive or conventional. In that case, the underlying principle was that heating the air blast before introducing it into a blast furnace made for better iron. That principle could not be patented, but the implementation utilized to exploit the principle could be patented. The implementation, in that case, was a heated metal box interposed between the source of air and the furnace into which the heated air was injected.
In Morse (1853), the Court recognized the same legal principle against patenting ideas, found one of Morse's claims to impermissibly preempt an abstract idea since it was not limited to any particular apparatus,That claim, claim 8, was to the use of the electromagnetic force "however developed" to transmit information to any distance. See 56 U.S. at 86. mentioned that Morse's actual apparatus was the product of great ingenuity on his partMorse devised "certain complicated and delicate machinery, adjusted and arranged upon philosophical principles and prepared by the highest mechanical skill." 56 U.S. at 117, and upheld a claim to it, but did not hold or even state that ingenuity of the apparatus implementation was a requirement.
Rubber-Tip case
In the Rubber-Tip Pencil case (1874), the Court said that the inventor had a good idea and a useful one, but his implementation of the idea merely used expedients that "everybody knew" already, and therefore the inventor "took nothing by his patent". The Court did not provide any explanation of what was requisite for a patent on a good and useful idea, other than that novelty was required.
Subsequent case law
In Funk (1948), the Court said ideas (natural principles) could not be patented and that the device utilized in that case "may have been the product of skill, [but] it certainly was not the product of invention"; yet, the Court did not yet state in terms that the key to patenting the implementation of an idea is inventive implementation.
In Flook (1978), Mayo (2012), and Alice (2014), the Court expressly held that abstract ideas could not be patented and their implementations could be patented only when the implementations were inventive rather than routine or conventional. The last three cases represent the present state of US law on this point.
References
External links
Category:United States patent case law
Category:1874 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
"""

From "Rubin v. Islamic Republic of Iran" ==> """
Rubin v. Islamic Republic of Iran, 583 U.S. ___ (2018), was a United States Supreme Court case brought against the nation of Iran by the families of American victims of the Ben Yehuda Street bombings which occurred in September 1997. Under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976, nations cannot typically be sued unless the state can be proved to have provided support for terrorists or acts of terrorism. After a district judge ruled Iran owed $71.5 million to the families of the victims, the families brought several cases to court in an attempt to attach and execute on assets owned by the state of Iran located in the United States.
Under subsections (a) and (g) of 28 U.S.C. § 1610, attachment and execution on the property of a foreign state is permissible provided that it is being used for "a commercial activity in the United States". However, the items in question in this particular case—ancient Persian artifacts held by the University of Chicago Oriental Institute and the Field Museum (both of whom were sued by Rubin et al.) were not in use by the state of Iran, and therefore could not be executed upon, as ruled by both the district court and Seventh Circuit. An 8-0 (Kagan did not participate) opinion was delivered by Justice Sotomayor upholding the judgment that the ancient artifacts cannot be seized, ruling that exceptions to the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act did not apply in this case.
The United States wrote an amicus curiae brief in support of Iran, writing: "The property at issue here consists of ancient Persian artifacts, documenting a unique aspect of Iran's cultural heritage, that were lent to a U.S. institution in the 1930s for academic study....Execution against such unique cultural artifacts could cause affront and reciprocity problems."
See also
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:Iran–United States relations
Category:Foreign Sovereign Immunity Act case law
"""

From "Rucho v. Common Cause" ==> """
 is a landmark case of the United States Supreme Court concerning partisan gerrymandering. The Court ruled that while partisan gerrymandering may be "incompatible with democratic principles", the federal courts cannot review such allegations, as they present nonjusticiable political questions outside the remit of these courts.
The case was one of three heard in the 2018 term dealing with issues related to partisan gerrymandering used in the districting plans of states. It was combined with Rucho v. League of Women Voters of North Carolina, and its decision included the Court's judgement on Lamone v. Benisek, a partisan gerrymandering case from Maryland. The 5–4 decision, divided along ideological lines, left in place North Carolina's congressional districts, which favor the Republican Party, and Maryland's congressional districts, which favor the Democratic Party.
Background
Historically, North Carolina is seen to have a near-equal split of voters between the Republican and Democratic parties, and the political parties, backed by wealthy donors on both sides, have fought over control of the state using gerrymandering for decades. Prior to 2011, seven of the state's thirteen districts favored Democrats, the rest Republican.
The first redistricting map for North Carolina following the 2010 Census was released in 2011, which resulted in nine districts favoring Republicans. A legal challenge over the new congressional redistricting map shortly followed, claiming that the map utilized racial gerrymandering which was unconstitutional under the Voting Rights Act of 1965. In 2016, the case's hearing in the Middle District of North Carolina ruled the map was unconstitutional and gave the state's General Assembly two weeks to revise the map, to be approved by the District Court. The ruling was challenged, and ultimately reached the Supreme Court as Cooper v. Harris.. The Supreme Court affirmed the District Court's ruling in 2017.
While the case was challenged at the Supreme Court, the previous chairmen of the state's redistricting committee, State Senator Robert A. Rucho and Representative David R. Lewis, brought in an expert to help with a new map, while a new redistricting committee was formed by the Republican-favored General Assembly and voted on seven principles for this new map. Among them, the new map would not be developed using any data on racial makeup, but that it would use political makeup to strive to keep the same proportion of voters in each district. Lewis was quoted as saying "I propose that we draw the maps to give a partisan advantage to 10 Republicans and three Democrats, because I do not believe it’s possible to draw a map with 11 Republicans and two Democrats." The District Court approved the 2016 map, and it has been used for both the 2016 and was set to be used in the 2018 general elections.
thumb|right|The 12th Congressional district of North Carolina, as defined from 2013 to 2017
The new 2016 maps were subject to immediate challenge by Common Cause, the North Carolina Democratic Party, the League of Women Voters, and several individuals in separate lawsuits against Rucho, Lewis, and other state legislators, not only that the redistricting violated the Equal Protection Clause and the First Amendment but also violated two principles of Article I of the United States Constitution. Of particular concern were North Carolina's 1st and 12th congressional district, which had been previously identified as gerrymandered districts in the 2011 maps, and were identified to be disproportionately Democratic with the 2016 maps. The cases were consolidated at the U.S. District Court for the Middle District of North Carolina.
At this time, the Supreme Court was hearing the challenge of Gill v. Whitford, a partisan gerrymandering case out of Wisconsin.. In North Carolina, the defendants sought a stay of the trial pending the result of Gill, but were denied. The case proceeded with the District Court finding in early 2018 in favor of the plaintiffs that the 2016 North Carolina map was unconstitutional towards all four points made by the plaintiffs. Again, the District Court ordered the legislature to draw up a new map within 14 days and enjoined the state from using the 2016 map. The defendant sought an emergency stay of the District Court's order from the Supreme Court, given the nearness of the 2018 general elections. The Supreme Court agreed, staying the District Court's order until after a decision on Gill had been made.
The Supreme Court decided Gill in June 2018, which ruled that the petitioners challenging the redistricting map in Gill did not have standing to challenge the map, and thus did not reach the merits of the partisan gerrymandering allegations. The Supreme Court subsequently vacated the North Carolina District Court's ruling and directed that it review the case in light of their decision on Gill. By August 2018, the District Court issued its new decision, affirming that the plaintiffs had standing, and affirming their previous decision on the 2016 maps being unconstitutional. While the option of enjoining the use of the 2016 maps was offered, plaintiffs agreed that the 2018 general election was too close, and the Court allowed the 2016 maps to be used until after the 2018 elections, while requiring the state legislature to draw up new maps.
Separately, Common Cause and state Democrats challenged the legislative redistricting maps drawn up alongside the congressional district maps within the North Carolina state courts.
 Supreme Court 
The state legislators named as defendants in this case filed a petition for writ of certiorari with the Supreme Court, asking if the plaintiffs have standing and if their claims on partisan gerrymandering were justiciable, and whether the 2016 map is considered a partisan gerrymandering. The Court granted certiorari, with arguments heard on March 26, 2019. The oral arguments were heard alongside those of Lamone v. Benisek, another partisan gerrymandering case from Maryland's redistricting which followed the Court's per curiam decision in Benisek v. Lamone (2018)..
The Court issued its decision in Rucho and Lamone on June 27, 2019. In the 5–4 majority opinion, the Court ruled that "partisan gerrymandering claims present political questions beyond the reach of the federal courts", vacating and remanding the lower courts' decisions with instructions to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction. Chief Justice John Roberts delivered the majority opinion, joined by Justices Thomas, Alito, Gorsuch, and Kavanaugh. Roberts made clear that partisan gerrymandering can be distasteful and unjust, but that states and Congress have the ability to pass laws to curb excessive partisan gerrymandering.
Justice Elena Kagan wrote the dissenting opinion, joined by Justices Ginsburg, Breyer, and Sotomayor. Kagan's opinion was critical of the majority: "Of all times to abandon the Court's duty to declare the law, this was not the one. The practices challenged in these cases imperil our system of government. Part of the Court's role in that system is to defend its foundations. None is more important than free and fair elections. With respect but deep sadness, I dissent."
 References 
External links
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Gerrymandering in the United States
Category:Congressional districts of Maryland
Category:Congressional districts of North Carolina
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
"""

From "Rummel v. Estelle" ==> """
Rummel v. Estelle, 445 U.S. 263 (1980), (sometimes erroneously cited as Rummel v. Estell) was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld a life sentence with the possibility of parole under Texas' three strikes law for a felony fraud crime, where the offense and the defendant's two prior offenses involved approximately $230 of fraudulent activity.FindLaw|Cases and Codes
Background
Defendant William James Rummel had, prior to the offense in question, twice pleaded guilty to felony charges involving property:
In 1964, Rummel pleaded guilty to fraudulent use of a credit card to obtain $80 worth of goods or services. As the amount in question exceeded $50, under Texas law the offense was classified as a felony punishable by 2–10 years in the (then called) Texas Department of Corrections (TDC). Rummel was sentenced to three years.
In 1969, Rummel pleaded guilty to passing a forged check in the amount of $28.36. The offense was classified as a felony by 2–5 years in the TDC. Rummel was sentenced to four years.
The third offense, in 1973, involved Rummel refusing to return $120.75 received as payment for repairs of an air conditioning unit that were not performed at all. By itself, the crime was designated as "felony theft" and punishable by 2–10 years in the TDC. However, the prosecution sought to enhance the sentence under Texas' three strikes law, citing the 1964 and 1969 convictions as proof of Rummel's being a repeat offender; the law required a mandatory sentence of life with the possibility of parole if the enhancement allegation were found to be true.
A jury found Rummel guilty of felony theft and also found as true the allegation that Rummel had been convicted of two prior felonies; the trial court imposed the mandatory sentence in accordance with the law.
Prior appeals
The Texas appellate courts rejected Rummel's appeal of the conviction as well as subsequent collateral attacks on his sentence. Rummel then filed a federal habeas corpus petition in the United States District Court for the Western District of Texas, which also denied relief, on the basis that the Supreme Court had already ruled on the constitutionality of Texas' three strikes law, as well as agreeing with the State that the sentence was not truly "life" as Rummel would be eligible for parole in 12 years.
However, a divided panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit reversed the sentence on grounds that it "was 'so grossly disproportionate' to his offenses as to constitute cruel and unusual punishment." But the Court of Appeals sitting en banc reversed the panel's ruling, on the basis that Rummel would be eligible for parole; six judges dissented on the basis that Rummel had no enforceable right to parole and that prior Supreme Court rulings mandated overturning the sentence.
Opinions of the Court
Majority opinion
Justice Rehnquist delivered the Court opinion affirming Rummel's life sentence.
At the outset, Rehnquist noted that Rummel did not challenge the general constitutionality of the three strikes law, only its application to his case, nor did Rummel challenge the classification of his current offense or either of his prior two offenses as felonies.
The Court then noted that in Graham v. West Virginia, a 1912 case which involved an individual convicted of three separate counts of horse thievery totaling $235 (only slightly more than the $230 total of Rummel's three offenses), Graham's life sentence was upheld.
Rummel then attempted to challenge his sentence "on an alleged 'nationwide' trend away from mandatory life sentences and toward 'lighter, discretionary sentences'", and provided "detailed charts and tables documenting the history of recidivist statutes in the United States since 1776" in an attempt to show that "[n]o jurisdiction in the United States or the Free World punishes habitual offenders as harshly as Texas." The Court noted, however, that Washington and West Virginia also imposed mandatory life sentences for habitual offenders, so Texas was not as harsh as other states.
The Court also noted that, although Rummel had no Constitutional right to a parole of his sentence, Texas had "a relatively liberal policy of granting "good time" credits to its prisoners, a policy that historically has allowed a prisoner serving a life sentence to become eligible for parole in as little as 12 years." The Court noted that this sentence was still not as harsh as Mississippi law, which imposed a life without parole sentence for three felony convictions where one was a violent felony, and upheld it.
Concurring opinion
Justice Stewart (who also joined the majority opinion) noted that "[i]f the Constitution gave me a roving commission to impose upon the criminal courts of Texas my own notions of enlightened policy, I would not join the Court's opinion", indicating that he would not have upheld the sentence. However, as the question posed was "whether those procedures fall below the minimum level the [Constitution] will tolerate", Justice Stewart was "constrained to join the opinion and judgment of the Court."
Dissenting opinion
Justice Powell delivered a dissenting opinion, arguing that "(i) the penalty for a noncapital offense may be unconstitutionally disproportionate, (ii) the possibility of parole should not be considered in assessing the nature of the punishment, (iii) a mandatory life sentence is grossly disproportionate as applied to petitioner, and (iv) the conclusion that this petitioner has suffered a violation of his Eighth Amendment rights is compatible with principles of judicial restraint and federalism."
Justice Powell focused the majority of his dissent on the second and third points. He noted that prior Court opinions ruled that prisoners had no Constitutional right to parole; thus, consideration of the possibility of parole should not be considered in determining whether a sentence was disproportionate. Justice Powell noted that "parole is simply an act of executive grace", and that in June 1979, the Governor of Texas refused to grant parole to 79% of state prisoners for which the parole board recommended release.
Justice Powell also noted that 3/4 of the state legislatures had never instituted a three strikes law imposing a mandatory life sentence for two or more nonviolent offenses, and of the 12 states that had, only three (Texas, West Virginia, and Washington) still retained the law. Specifically, Justice Powell noted that the states of Kansas and Kentucky changed their laws to a more flexible sentencing scheme. Justice Powell also noted that the federal habitual offender law also did not impose a mandatory life sentence.
Subsequent events
Rummel later filed another habeas corpus challenge to his sentence, this time claiming ineffective assistance of counsel. On October 3, 1980, the United States District Court for the Western District of Texas granted Rummel's petition for a writ of habeas corpus on the grounds of ineffective assistance of counsel.Rummel v. Estelle, 498 F. Supp. 793 (WD Tex. 1980). Rummel then pleaded guilty to theft by false pretenses and was sentenced to time served under the terms of a plea-bargaining agreement.
Texas would later amend its three strikes law to remove the mandatory life imprisonment rule, changing it to permit a jury to return a sentence of life (with the possibility of parole) or a sentence of a term between 25 and 99 years.Texas Penal Code, Section 12.42(d)
The Rummel case is commonly used by Texas courts as a proportionality test (if requested on appeal, usually by the defendant) to determine whether, under the Eighth Amendment, a sentence is excessive. Almost always the ruling is that a sentence is not excessive, given that Rummel's life sentence for a small felony conviction which only involved misappropriation of a small amount of property, enhanced by his two prior convictions both involving similar offenses and both involving small amounts of property, was upheld by the United States Supreme Court.See, for example, Whitaker v. Texas, Texas 12th Circuit Court of Appeals. The case has also been used by Federal courts for proportionality test purposes, again with usually the same ruling that the sentence is not excessive.See, for example, USA v. Taylor Alan Mills, United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit.
See also
 Three strikes law
 Capital punishment
 Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Penal system in Texas
"""

From "Rumsfeld v. Forum for Academic & Institutional Rights, Inc." ==> """
Rumsfeld v. Forum for Academic and Institutional Rights, Inc., 547 U.S. 47 (2006), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that the federal government, under the Solomon Amendment, could constitutionally withhold funding from universities if they refuse to give military recruiters access to school resources. Law schools were unwilling to allow recruiters onto campus because they considered the military's so-called "Don't ask, don't tell" policy discriminatory. The Supreme Court held oral arguments on December 6, 2005, and issued an 8–0 decision March 6, 2006, finding the Solomon Amendment constitutional.
 Background 
In 1993, Congress passed the "Don't ask, don't tell" policy, codified at , which required that the military discharge a member who (with certain exceptions):
[H]as engaged in, attempted to engage in, or solicited another to engage in a homosexual act or acts ... [Or if] the member has stated that he or she is a homosexual or bisexual, or words to that effect, unless there is a further finding ... [made] [t]hat the member has demonstrated that he or she is not a person who engages in, attempts to engage in, has a propensity to engage in, or intends to engage in homosexual acts ... [Or if] the member has married or attempted to marry a person known to be of the same biological sex.
Many law schools had policies denying campus access to recruiters from employers who did not comply with their anti-discrimination policies. Objecting to the military's "Don't ask, don't tell" policy as discriminatory, the schools refused to permit military recruiters on-campus. Congress responded by passing the Solomon Amendment, which required colleges and universities receiving federal money to allow military recruiters onto their campuses in the same manner as recruiters for other employers.
In Fall 2003, Forum for the Academic & Institution Rights, Inc. (FAIR), an association of law schools and law faculty asked the United States District Court for the District of New Jersey to enjoin enforcement of the Solomon Amendment on the grounds it violated their First Amendment rights to free speech and freedom of association. The District Court ruled against FAIR. FAIR then appealed to the United States Circuit Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, which found in November 2004 that FAIR had "demonstrated a likelihood of success on the merits of its First Amendment claims and that it is entitled to preliminary injunctive relief."
Secretary Rumsfeld's position was represented before the Supreme Court by the Solicitor General, Paul Clement. FAIR's oral argument was presented by E. Joshua Rosenkranz.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court, in an 8–0Sandra Day O'Connor heard the case, but retired before the decision was handed down. opinion written by Chief Justice Roberts, held that the government could deny federal funds to schools that do not permit recruitment.The Supreme Court, 2005 Term — Leading Cases, 120 Harv. L. Rev. 253 (2006). The court noted that the Solomon Amendment neither denies the institutions the right to speak, nor requires them to say anything. The opinion also holds that Congress, through the "raise and support Armies" clause, could even directly force schools to allow recruiting without threatening the withholding of funds, if they so desired, and that, as a result, no question of "unconstitutional conditions" arises.
 Footnotes 
External links
Findlaw's archive of the case's petition for certiorari
United States Court of Appeals for The Third Circuit decision on the case (PDF)
Common Dreams article on the counter-recruitment protests coinciding with the oral arguments
All's FAIR in Law and War (in-depth analysis) at Balkinization blog
Yale Daily News: "Court Upholds Recruiting" (News Analysis)
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Rumsfeld V. Forum For Academic And Institutional Rights
Category:Donald Rumsfeld litigation
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Rumsfeld v. Padilla" ==> """
Rumsfeld v. Padilla, 542 U.S. 426 (2004), was a United States Supreme Court case, in which José Padilla, an American citizen, sought habeas corpus relief against Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, as a result of his detention by the military as an "unlawful combatant."
On May 8, 2002, Padilla, a U.S. citizen, flew from Pakistan to Chicago's O'Hare International Airport. As he left the plane, Padilla was apprehended by federal agents executing a material witness warrant issued by the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York in connection with its grand jury investigation into the September 11th attacks by terrorists. Initially Padilla was considered a "material witness," without charges filed and was given very limited access to legal counsel. He was later classified as an "enemy combatant," which, the George W. Bush administration claimed as justification to imprison him indefinitely, and without legal recourse or access, as with non-citizen suspects in the war on terror.
Padilla's attorney, Donna Newman, claiming to act as his next friend and on his behalf, filed a petition for habeas corpus in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York. On December 4, 2002, the court denied the petition and held that the President of the United States, as Commander-in-Chief had the authority to designate as an "enemy combatant" an American citizen captured on American soil, and, through the Secretary of Defense, to detain him for the duration of armed conflict with al-Qaida.
The case was appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, which held that the President lacked the authority to order the military detentions of American citizens captured on American soil.
The case was petitioned to the United States Supreme Court. The principal issue before the Court was whether the Congressional Authorization for Use of Military Force post September 11 gave the president the powers to detain a United States citizen under military custody by classifying the detainee as an "enemy combatant." Otherwise, the president would run afoul of the Non-Detention Act, which provides that "No citizen shall be imprisoned or otherwise detained by the United States except pursuant to an Act of Congress.
The Court did not decide the issue. Instead, the Court held that the habeas corpus petition had been improperly filed. It ruled that because Padilla was being held in a brig (military prison) in South Carolina, the petition should have been filed in the United States District Court for the District of South Carolina, and it should have named the commander of the brig and the Secretary of Defense since the brig commander was Padilla's "immediate custodian". The Court reversed the decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit and remanded the case for dismissal without prejudice. In other words, it overruled the Court of Appeals decision and ordered the dismissal of the case, allowing Padilla to refile the petition. Thus. the principal issue of the case had not been resolved.
Paul Clement, Principal Deputy Solicitor General at the time, gave oral argument for the United States (Rumsfeld); Jennifer Martinez, a law professor and human rights lawyer, gave oral argument on behalf of Padilla and Newman.
 Background 
The case was argued only two days before the Abu Ghraib prison abuse scandal was first shown to the general public in a The New Yorker article by Seymour M. Hersh (April 30), which showed digital photos taken by guards. The story was subsequently taken up by CBS and broadcast on nationwide television.
The timing of the two events is relevant for understanding political context. Before the publicizing of incriminating photographs of abused detainees in Iraq, the US was largely dominated by a political climate in which the charge of abuse was only anecdotal and was weighed lightly compared to appeals for national security. Still, the rendered decision came after news of the scandal broke, and the degree of the Abu Ghraib case influence is speculative.
During the oral argument, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg asked some pointed questions of Clement, some of which directly treated the issue of abuse. An important dialogue features a comment by Deputy Solicitor General Paul Clement which denies the claim that the United States uses torture:
 Justice Ginsburg Suppose the executive says mild torture, we think, will help get this information. It's not a soldier who does something against the Code of Military Justice, but it's an executive command. Some systems do that to get information.
 Clement Well, our executive doesn't. And I think, I mean....
 Justice Ginsburg What's constraining? That's the point. Is it just up to the good will of the executive, or is there any judicial check?
 Supreme Court cases 
Ex Parte Milligan
Ex Parte Quirin
Johnson v. Eisentrager
Hamdi v. Rumsfeld
Rasul v. Bush
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 542
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
 Tatler blog entry noting the issue's connection to Abu Ghraib
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Donald Rumsfeld litigation
Category:Extrajudicial prisoners of the United States
Category:United States Fifth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Runkle v. United States" ==> """
Runkle v. United States, 122 U.S. 543 (1887), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States determined that the president cannot delegate the power vested in him to approve the proceedings and sentence of a court-martial because the president is the only person bestowed with the judicial power of making a final determination.. 
Background
Benjamin Piatt Runkle, a Civil War veteran who was wounded at the Battle of Shiloh, was, from 1867 to 1870, serving as an active duty army major and disbursing officer in the Freedmen's Bureau for the State of Kentucky. In 1870, he was placed on the retired list as a major, but continued as a disbursing officer, until he was arrested and tried before a court-martial. The court-martial found Runkle guilty of  conduct unbecoming an officer and gentleman and of violating the March 2, 1863, c. 67, § 1, Act of Congress. His sentence was imprisonment, payment of a fine, and dismissal from the army, where he had been serving on the retired list and drawing retired pay. The Secretary of War, W. W. Belknap, reviewed the proceedings and in 1873 issued an order approving Runkle's conviction, but in consideration of his war service and wounds, granted Runkle executive clemency in the name of the President and eliminated the fine and prison sentence. However, his dismissal from the army remained in effect. Under the law at that time, any court martial sentence involving an officer's dismissal in peacetime needed to be confirmed by the President and there was no indication in this order that the conviction was confirmed by President Ulysses S. Grant.
On the same day that he was cashiered, Runkle petitioned President Grant, complaining that his sentence had not been confirmed by the President himself. This petition was referred by Grant to the Judge Advocate General for review. It remained open when President Rutherford B. Hayes came into office, as President Grant had done nothing further in the matter. Hayes then picked it up as unfinished business and registered an order of disapproval, revoking the 1873 order dismissing Runkle.
The August 4, 1877 executive order of President Hayes, disapproving the conviction, details the history:
thumb|alt=Benjamin Piatt Runkle|Benjamin Piatt Runkle
On the authority of the executive order, Runkle was given retirement pay – both from the date of the Hayes order going forward and back pay to the date he was dismissed. In 1882, he made a claim for additional longevity pay, which was referred to the Court of Claims. In the Court of Claims the government challenged his right to any pay at all, asserting that Hayes did not have the right to revoke the 1873 order confirming Runkle's dismissal.
Opinion of the Court
The opinion of the Court, delivered by Chief Justice Waite, concludes: 
Subsequent developments
Subsequent cases, United States v. Fletcher, 148 U.S. 84 (1893).  and Bishop v. United States, 197 U.S. 334 (1905),.  both, in effect, repudiate the Runkle decision, in that the Runkle circumstances were so exceptional that it is not a safe precedent.
From the Fletcher decision:
However, according to Joshua Kastenberg, a professor of law at the University of New Mexico, the Supreme court, in 1958 in Harmon v. Brucker, 355 U.S. 579 (1958) reaffirmed a basic tenet of Runkle without citing to the case.  A president, as well as the Department of Defense, is bound by its own internal rules.  (The Court, in Vitarelli v. Seaton and Service v. Dulles also determined this rule applied to civil service positions outside of the military establishment).  Thus, Runkle remains an important part of the military law.  Moreover, there is a corollary rule in Runkle that a president must also follow statutory law in regard to courts-martial.
See also
 United States v. Fletcher, 
 Bishop v. United States, 
References
External links
Category:1887 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Courts-martial in the United States
Category:Court-martial cases
Category:Freedmen's Bureau
"""

From "Runyon v. McCrary" ==> """
Runyon v. McCrary, 427 U.S. 160 (1976), was a landmark case by the United States Supreme Court, which ruled that private schools that discriminate on the basis of race or establish racial segregation are in violation of federal law.. Whereas Brown v. Board of Education barred public segregation by schools, this case barred private segregation in schools. This decision is built on Jones v. Alfred H. Mayer Co. another landmark civil rights case that affirmed the federal government's ability to penalize racist acts by private actors.
Dissenting Justice Byron White and Chief Justice William Rehnquist (who allegedly opposed Brown v. Board of Education for parts of his life) argued that the legislative history of  (popularly known as the Civil Rights Act of 1866) indicated that the Act was not designed to prohibit private racial discrimination, but only state-sponsored racial discrimination (as had been held in the Civil Rights Cases of 1883).
Background
Two African American students filed suit believing that they were denied admission to private schools in Virginia based on their race. Michael McCrary and Colin Gonzales were denied admission to Bobbe's School; Gonzales was also denied admission to Fairfax-Brewster School. A class action was filed against the schools by the parents of both students. A federal district court ruled for McCrary and Gonzales, finding that the school's admission policies were racially discriminatory. The United States Court of Appeals affirmed the decision.
Russell and Katheryne Runyon d.b.a Bobbe's School and Fairfax-Brewster School were schools in Northern Virginia. Bobbe's was founded in 1958 as a segregation academy with five European-American students.  By 1972 it had grown to 200, but had never admitted a black child. Fairfax-Brewster had a similar history from 1955.
Questions before the Court
 Were the admission policies of the private schools in violation of 42 U.S.C. § 1981?.
 Did the Ku Klux Klan Act violate the Constitutional right to privacy and free association?
Decision of the Supreme Court
In a 7–2 decision Justice Stewart wrote the opinion for the Court. The Court determined that the Ku Klux Klan Act prohibited the racially discriminatory policies of the schools. While the schools were private, Jones v. Alfred H. Mayer Co. held that the Ku Klux Klan Act applied to "purely private acts of racial discrimination". Further, Stewart wrote that the school's admission policies were "classical violation[s] of Section 1981". The Court acknowledged that parents had the right to send their children to schools that "promote the belief [of] racial segregation", but that neither parents' nor students' freedom of association was violated by the application of 42 U.S.C. §1981. The Court cited Pierce v. Society of Sisters and the right of the State "reasonably to regulate all schools" to further justify the decision.
Dissenting opinion
Justice White was concerned about the potential far-reaching impact of holding private racial discrimination illegal, which, if taken to its logical conclusion, might ban many varied forms of voluntary self-segregation, including social and advocacy groups that limited their membership to blacks.See : "Whether such conduct should be condoned or not, whites and blacks will undoubtedly choose to form a variety of associational relationships pursuant to contracts which exclude members of the other race. Social clubs, black and white, and associations designed to further the interests of blacks or whites are but two examples."
Runyon'''s holding was severely limited by Patterson v. McLean Credit Union,. which narrowly construed Section 1981 as not applying to any discrimination occurring after the making of a contract, such as racial harassment on the job (although the Patterson majority expressly claimed that they were not overruling Runyon).  In turn, Patterson was legislatively overruled by the Civil Rights Act of 1991.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 427Jones v. Alfred H. Mayer Co., Brown v. Board of Education'' (similar case, but involved public schools)
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States school desegregation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1976 in United States case law
"""

From "Rush Prudential HMO, Inc. v. Moran" ==> """
Rush Prudential HMO, Inc. v. Moran, 536 U.S. 355 (2002), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States, which ruled that the federal Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) et seq. did not preempt an Illinois medical-review statute..
ERISA envisions a national standard for welfare and pension plans so state laws which "relate to" ERISA plans are preempted under Section 514 of ERISA.  However, ERISA contains a "savings" clause which saves state laws which regulate insurance under Section 514(b).  The statute at issue in Moran regulated insurance, which is one of the functions HMOs perform. Although HMOs provide healthcare as well as insurance, the statute does not require choosing a single or primary function of an HMO. Congress has long recognized that HMOs are risk-bearing organizations subject to state regulation. Finally, allowing States to regulate the insurance aspects of HMOs will not interfere with the desire of Congress for uniform national standards under ERISA. 
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 536
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974
Category:2002 in United States case law
Category:Prudential Financial
"""

From "Rust v. Sullivan" ==> """
Rust v. Sullivan, 500 U.S. 173 (1991), was a case in the United States Supreme Court that upheld Department of Health and Human Services regulations prohibiting employees in federally funded family-planning facilities from counseling a patient on abortion. The department had removed all family planning programs that involving abortions. Physicians and clinics challenged this decision within the Supreme Court, arguing that the First Amendment was violated due to the implementation of this new policy.  The Supreme Court, by a 5–4 verdict, allowed the regulation to go into effect, holding that the regulation was a reasonable interpretation of the Public Health Service Act, and that the First Amendment is not violated when the government merely chooses to "fund one activity to the exclusion of another."
 Background 
The case concerned the legality and constitutionality of Department of Health and Human Services regulations on the use of funds spent by the U.S. federal government to promote family planning (Title X). With Title X of the Public Health Service Act, Congress prohibited the funds from being "used in programs where abortion is a method of family planning." In 1988, the Republican-appointed Secretary of Health and Human Services issued new regulations that prohibited projects receiving these funds from not only providing abortions, but also counseling, advising, or promoting the idea that a woman seek an abortion. These regulations were challenged on the grounds that they were not permissibly within the scope of the statute and that they violated the First and Fifth Amendments. In Rust v. Sullivan (1991), the petitioners stated that they had experienced an infringement of their First Amendment constitutional rights, as grantees of federal funds for family-planning services under Title X of the Public Health Service Act (the "Act"). Under Section 1008 of the Act, the grantees are prohibited from using any of the funds for family-planning services related to abortion. Further compliance by the Act requires the grantees to provide written policies to their sub-recipients on the prohibition of the funds for any abortion-related services. Planned Parenthood and the state and city of New York sued on the grounds that not receiving government funding meant that abortions in turn would not be funded.Joan Biskupic "Rust v. Sullivan in Supreme Court Yearbook" 1991
Rust v. Sullivan began on the issue of abortion counseling. In February 1988, the Reagan administration added regulations that focused specifically on discussing abortion practices.Leslie Friedman Goldstein "Contemporary Cases in Women's Rights" 1994 Planned Parenthood and the state and city of New York said that these regulations infringed on doctors’ First Amendment rights, interfered with a woman's privacy right when it comes to abortion, and prevented a woman from being able to hear competent and sound medical advice. Arguers protested that if a facility receives government funding, it does not mean that the government can regulate the services in that facility. For example, a library that receives funds through the Library Services and Construction Act does not permit the Federal Government to say that the books in that library can or cannot have certain books. Additionally, universities that receive Federal funds do not have their curriculum dictated by the Federal Government."First Amendment Implications of the Rust v. Sullivan decision: hearing before the Subcommittee on the Constitution of the Committee on the Judiciary, United States Senate, One Hundred Second Congress, first session" 1991
 Opinion of the Court 
Chief Justice Rehnquist wrote the majority opinion, which was joined by Justices White, Scalia, Kennedy, and Souter. The court ruled that "a doctor employed by the project may be prohibited in the course of his project duties from counseling abortion or referring for abortion. This is not a case of the government suppressing a dangerous idea, but of a prohibition on a project grantee or its employees from engaging in activities outside of its scope.""First Amendment Implications of the Rust v. Sullivan decision" 1991 The court found that "Title X of the Public Health Service Act of 1970 may be read to bar not only abortions but also abortion counseling." Rehnquist wrote for the majority in finding that the regulations were based upon a permissible interpretation of the statute under the Chevron test, that they did not violate First Amendment free speech rights, and that they did not violate the right of women to terminate a pregnancy as established in Roe v. Wade under the Fifth Amendment substantive due process doctrine.
In the dissenting opinion, Justice Blackmun said "the Court for the first time upholds viewpoint-based suppression of speech, solely because it is imposed on those dependent upon the government for economic support. I conclude that the Secretary’s regulation of referral, advocacy and counseling activities exceeds his statutory authority, and also that the regulations violate the First and Fifth Amendments of our Constitution."“First Amendment Implications” 1991 Justices Marshall, Stevens, and O’Connor joined Blackmun's dissenting opinion. Stevens wrote separately that "not a word in the statute...authorizes the (HHS) Secretary to impose any restrictions on the dissemination of truthful information or professional advice by grant recipients."
 Reasoning 
Section 1008 of the Public Health Service Act specified that none of the federal funds appropriated under the Act's Title X for family-planning services "shall be used in programs where abortion is a method of family planning." In 1988, respondent Secretary of Health and Human Services issued new regulations requiring, inter alia, that recipients of the federal funding 
(1) not engage in any counseling regarding abortion as a method for family planning; and
(2) maintain an objective integrity and independence from abortion activities by the use of separate facilities, personnel, and accounting records.
The Court held that the regulations were a permissible construction of the statute and consistent with the First and Fifth Amendments.
(1) The regulations were a permissible construction of Title X. The regulations did not violate the First Amendment free-speech rights of private Title X fund recipients, their staffs, or their patients by impermissibly imposing viewpoint-discriminatory conditions on government subsidies. Section 1008's abortion prohibition was constitutional because the government might make a value judgment favoring childbirth over abortion and implement that judgment by using subsidies of public funds. Maher v. Roe, 432 U.S. 464, 474 (1977). The use of public subsidies by the government was not rendered “discrimination” simply by the government's favoring one viewpoint over another.
(2) The Secretary's construction of Title X must be accorded substantial deference by this Court because: (a) HHS was the agency charged with administering Title X, and (b) the Court could not look to § 1008 of Title X for interpretation. Section 1008 was ambiguous because it did not speak directly to abortion issues regarding counseling, and did not provide any guidance as to what was meant by “program integrity”. Moreover, the title neither defined § 1008's "method of family planning" phrase, nor enumerated what types of medical and counseling services were entitled to funding. The Secretary's construction of § 1008 would not be disturbed since (a) it was a plausible construction of the statute's plain language, (b) it did not conflict with Congress' expressed intent, and (c) the legislative history either was ambiguous as to Congress' intent on those issues or supported the Secretary's interpretation. The legislative history demonstrated that Congress had intended that Title X funds be kept separate and distinct from abortion-related activities. An agency must be given ample latitude to adapt its rules to changing circumstances. Thus, an interpretation that was different from previous interpretations deserved deference if it complimented the changes in circumstances. The Secretary's change of interpretation was amply supported by a "reasoned analysis" as the new regulations were more in keeping with Title X's original intent, which was supported by the testimony of client experience under the prior policy.
(3) The Doctors' argument, that if the Government chooses to subsidize one viewpoint over a subject (here, abortion), then it must also balance that viewpoint by subsidizing its opposite, had clearly been rejected by the Court. Comparing, e.g., Regan v. Taxation with Representation of Washington, 461 U.S. 540 (1983). The regulations do not force the Title X grantee, or its employees, to give up abortion-related speech; they merely require that such activities be kept separate and distinct from the activities of the Title X project. F.C.C. v. League of Women Voters of California, 468 U.S. 364, 400 (1984); Regan, 461 U.S. at 546, distinguished.
(4) Although it could be argued that the traditional doctor-patient relationship should enjoy First Amendment protection from government regulation, even when subsidized by the government (comparing, e.g., United States v. Kokinda, 497 U.S. 720, 726 (1990)), that question need not be resolved, since the Title X program's regulations did not significantly impinge on the doctor-patient relationship.
(5) The regulations did not violate a woman's Fifth Amendment right to choose whether to terminate her pregnancy. The government had no constitutional duty to subsidize an activity merely because it was constitutionally protected, and might validly choose to allocate public funds for medical services relating to childbirth but not to abortion. Webster v. Reproductive Health Services, 492 U.S. 490, 510 (1989). Such allocation placed no governmental obstacle in the path of a woman wishing to terminate her pregnancy, and left her with the same choices as if the Government had chosen not to fund family planning services at all. See Harris v. McRae (1980). Nor did the regulations place restrictions on the patient/doctor dialogue which violated a woman's right to make an informed and voluntary choice under City of Akron v. Akron Center for Reproductive Health (1983) and Thornburgh v. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (1986). A doctor's ability to provide abortion-related information and a woman's right to receive such information remained unfettered outside the context of the Title X project.
Implications
The court's ruling was much broader than just abortion and family planning services; if the government pays for a program, it can attach substantive restrictions on speech by employees of the program. Thus federal funds for family planning programs could promote only childbirth options without violating the Constitution. Other views regarding abortion services could not be admitted within Title X's narrowly defined scope.
Clinics
Several family planning clinics challenged the Rust v. Sullivan regulations and requested declaratory judgements before the rules went into effect so that the clinics would not have to choose between receiving government funding or freedom of speech.Leslie Goldstein "Contemporary Cases in Women's Rights" 1994 Many clinics would find it economically unrealistic to separate their family-planning facilities from those for abortion services, and, therefore, would have to eliminate one part of their program.Dorothy Roberts "Rust v. Sullivan and the Control of Knowledge" 1993 Title X projects now must be deemed “physically and financially separate” from facilities that do provide abortion counseling or services. Title X Projects can not provide counseling that deals with abortion as a method of family planning, provide referrals for abortion as a method of family planning, advocate abortion in any manner (including lobbying for its legalization or taking legal action to make abortion more accessible), or provide public speakers who promote abortion as a method of family planning.
Aftermath
Women and health organizations tried to force Congress to pass legislation that would overturn the regulations on abortions. An amendment to Title X was passed by Congress that said all pregnancy counseling, including family planning with abortion services, should be allowed at a government funded clinic when a pregnant patient wants it. However, President Bush vetoed this bill. The House narrowly failed to override the veto, so the bill failed.
The Bush administration decided to modify the regulations anyway. Among other things, the changes would have made it so that physicians could refer patients for abortions if it would prevent serious medical harm to the patient. However, the Bush administration did not follow proper administrative procedures that are required for issuing new regulations. As a result, Bush's changes was declared void by the Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit. Before any new policy could be made, Arkansas governor Bill Clinton was elected to be the next President of the United States. Clinton promised during his campaign that his administration would eliminate the rule. President Bush did not try to reenact these policies between November and his last days as President of the United States in January 1993. The Rust v. Sullivan precedent stands as the current precedent on federal government leeway in utilizing funding policy to restrict the discussion of disfavored topics.
Historical significance
Beginning over abortion rights and women's privacy rights, Rust v. Sullivan was a challenge to whether or not the government could regulate services provided in government funded facilities. Although the regulations were repealed, the Rust v. Sullivan decision remains a powerful defense of government restrictions on speech.Dorothy Roberts "Rust v Sullivan and the Control of Knowledge" 1993
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 500
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
Further reading
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1991 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Rutan v. Republican Party of Illinois" ==> """
Rutan v. Republican Party of Illinois, 497 U.S. 62 (1990), was a United States Supreme Court decision that held that the First Amendment forbids a government entity from basing its decision to promote, transfer, recall, or hire low-level public employees based upon their party affiliation..
 Background 
Illinois Governor James Thompson issued an executive order instituting a hiring freeze, whereby state officials were prohibited from hiring any employee, filling any vacancy, creating any new position, or taking any similar action without the Governor's "express permission." It affected approximately 60,000 state positions. More than 5,000 of these become available each year as a result of resignations, retirements, deaths, expansion, and reorganizations. The order proclaimed that "no exceptions" were permitted without the Governor's "express permission after submission of appropriate requests to [his] office."
Petitioner alleged that requests for the Governor's "express permission" had become routine. Permission had been granted or withheld through an agency expressly created for that purpose, the Governor's Office of Personnel (Governor's Office). Agencies had been screening applicants under Illinois' civil service system, making their personnel choices, and submitting them as requests to be approved or disapproved by the Governor's Office. Among the employment decisions for which approvals had been required are new hires, promotions, transfers, and recalls after layoffs.
By means of the freeze, according to petitioners, the Governor had been using the Governor's Office to operate a political patronage system to limit state employment and beneficial employment-related decisions to those who were supported by the Republican Party of the United States. In reviewing an agency's request that a particular applicant be approved for a particular position, the Governor's Office looked at whether the applicant voted in Republican primaries in past election years, whether the applicant had provided financial or other support to the Republican Party and its candidates, whether the applicant had promised to join and work for the Republican Party in the future, and whether the applicant had the support of Republican Party officials at state or local levels.
Five people brought suit against various Illinois and Republican Party officials in the United States District Court for the Central District of Illinois. They alleged that they had suffered discrimination with respect to state employment because they had not been supporters of the State's Republican Party and that this discrimination violated the First Amendment.
 Issues 
At issue was whether the decision of the governor to make hiring decisions contingent upon party affiliation violated the petitioner's First Amendment rights to freedom of speech and of freedom of association.
 Opinion of the Court 
In an opinion by Justice Brennan and decided 5-4, the Court held that a government agency cannot constitutionally base employment-related decisions upon an employee or prospective employee's party affiliation. Citing Elrod v. Burns, the Court reasoned that conditioning public employment on the provision of support for the favored political party "unquestionably inhibits protected belief and association.".
In Elrod v. Burns, the Court had reasoned that conditioning employment on political activity pressures employees to pledge political allegiance to a party with which they prefer not to associate, to work for the election of political candidates they do not support, and to contribute money to be used to further policies with which they do not agree. The latter, the plurality noted, had been recognized as "tantamount to coerced belief."
The Court acknowledged that a government entity has a significant interest in ensuring that it has effective and efficient employees. However, the Court expressed doubt that the "mere difference of political persuasion motivates poor performance." In any case, the government can ensure employee effectiveness and efficiency through the less drastic means of discharging staff members whose work is inadequate.
Although the preservation of the democratic process "may in some instances justify limitations on First Amendment freedoms," the "process functions as well without the practice, perhaps even better." Patronage "can result in the entrenchment of one or a few parties to the exclusion of others," and "is a very effective impediment to the associational and speech freedoms which are essential to a meaningful system of democratic government."
Citing Speiser v. Randall,. the Court noted that "for at least a quarter-century, this Court has made clear that, even though a person has no 'right' to a valuable governmental benefit, and even though the government may deny him the benefit for any number of reasons, there are some reasons upon which the government may not rely. It may not deny a benefit to a person on a basis that infringes his constitutionally protected interests - especially, his interest in freedom of speech. For if the government could deny a benefit to a person because of his constitutionally protected speech or associations, his exercise of those freedoms would in effect be penalized and inhibited. This would allow the government to `produce a result which [it] could not command directly.' Such interference with constitutional rights is impermissible."
The Court further reasoned that employees who find themselves in dead-end positions due to their political backgrounds would be adversely affected by the Governor's order. They would feel a significant obligation to support political positions held by their superiors, and to refrain from acting on the political views they actually hold, in order to progress up the career ladder. Employees denied transfers to workplaces reasonably close to their homes until they join and work for the Republican Party would feel a daily pressure from their long commutes to do so. And employees who have been laid off may well have felt compelled to engage in whatever political activity was necessary to regain regular paychecks and positions corresponding to their skill and experience. Employees who do not compromise their beliefs stand to lose the considerable increases in pay and job satisfaction attendant on promotions, the hours and maintenance expenses that are consumed by long daily commutes, and even their jobs if they are not rehired after a "temporary" layoff.
In conclusion, the Court determined that promotions, transfers, and recalls after layoffs based on political affiliation or support are an impermissible infringement on the First Amendment rights of public employees. The Court decided that whether the four employees were in fact denied promotions, transfers, or rehire for failure to affiliate with and support the Republican Party was for the District Court to decide in the first instance.
Justice Scalia's dissent
Justice Scalia filed a dissenting opinion, which was joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justice Kennedy; Justice O'Connor joined Parts II and III of Justice Scalia's dissent, but not Part I.
Justice Scalia argued that the restrictions that the U.S. Constitution places upon government in its capacity as a lawmaker are not the same as the restrictions that it places upon the government in its capacity as an employer. "Private citizens perhaps cannot be prevented from wearing long hair, but policemen can."
Justice Scalia wrote that the provisions of the U.S. Bill of Rights were designed to restrain transient majorities from impairing long-recognized personal liberties, but that they did not create by implication novel individual rights overturning accepted political norms. He reasoned that when a practice not expressly prohibited by the text of the Bill of Rights bears the endorsement of a long tradition of open, widespread, and unchallenged use that dates back to the beginning of the American Republic, the Supreme Court has no proper basis for striking it down.
Justice Scalia reasoned that political patronage has a long heritage in the history of the United States. He argued that the "Spoils System" largely enhanced by President Andrew Jackson was a testament to this heritage. Thus, Justice Scalia would have held that, while the First Amendment applies in full force to private individuals, it is severely restricted in its application for government employees. When weighed against the political heritage of the spoils system that was prevalent at the time the Bill of Rights was drafted, the Court had no authority to whittle away at such a method of determining civil service.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 497
 Republican Party of Minnesota v. White (2002)
 References 
External links
Category:Civil service in the United States
Category:Legal history of Illinois
Category:Republican Party (United States) by state
Category:United States freedom of association case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1990 in United States case law
"""

From "Ryan v. Valencia Gonzales" ==> """
Ryan v. Valencia Gonzales, 568 U.S. 57 (2013), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a defendant on death row did not need to be held competent during federal habeas corpus proceedings..
Background
Ernest Valencia Gonzales was convicted in Arizona of felony murder, armed robbery, aggravated assault, first-degree burglary and theft. Gonzales was sentenced to death for the stabbing of Darrel Wagner in front of his seven-year-old son.
District court proceedings
After exhausting appeals in Arizona, Gonzales filed for a writ of habeas corpus in District Court on November 15, 1999. While the petition was pending before the court, the appointed counsel for Gonzales filed the stay proceedings arguing that Gonzales was incapable or communicating rationally or assisting with proceedings. This argument was made under existing precedent with the Ninth Circuit (Rohan v. Wood). In Rohan the Appellate Court held that habeas proceedings could not "be faithfully enforced unless courts ensure that a petitioner is competent". Rohan continues that if the proceedings pending would benefit from the petitioner's competency then proceedings cannot continue as this would deny the right to assistance of counsel. When analyzing Rohan the District Court denied the stay, arguing that the issues before the court was a matter of law and would not benefit from Gonzales' input. Determining also that because the issue was a matter of law that the court did not need to determine whether or not Gonzales was competent. Gonzales then filed an emergency appeal for a writ of mandamus with the Ninth Circuit.
Appellate proceedings
While Gonzales' petition was before the court, the Ninth Circuit issued an opinion in Nash v. Ryan which held that habeas petitioner have a right to competence on appeal, even when the appeals only deal with matters of law. Applying Nash and Rohan the court granted the stay under Section 3599. The State of Arizona appealed to the Supreme Court which granted certiorari.
Opinion of the Court
The Court unanimously reversed the Ninth Circuit with Justice Thomas writing for the Court. The Court found that neither a statutory or a constitutional right exists to a petitioners competence in federal habeas corpus proceedings. Simply put because communication between counsel and defendant is unnecessary in these proceedings the district court cannot stay them. The district court should only stay proceedings if the defendant had a substantial likelihood of regaining competence, otherwise the stay of proceedings would unduly burn the justice system.
References
External links
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Ryder v. United States" ==> """
Ryder v. United States, 515 U.S. 177 (1995), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court concerning the Appointments Clause. 
 References 
 External links 
Category:1995 in United States case law
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "S. D. Warren Co. v. Maine Board of Environmental Protection" ==> """
S. D. Warren Co. v. Maine Board of Environmental Protection, 547 U.S. 370 (2006), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States involving licensing requirements under the Clean Water Act.  The Court ruled unanimously that hydroelectric dams were subject to section 401 of the Act, which conditioned federal licensing for a licensed activity that could result in "any discharge" into navigable waters upon the receipt of a state certification that water protection laws would not be violated.  The Court believed that since the Act did not define the word "discharge" it should be given its ordinary meaning, such that the simple flowing forth of water from a dam qualified.
 Background 
The S. D. Warren Company operates several hydroelectric dams along the course of the Presumpscot River in southern Maine, which generate electricity for its paper mill.  Each dam operates by creating a pond, from which water bypasses part of the river to funnel through turbines before flowing back into the riverbed.  Licenses to operate the dams are granted by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) pursuant to the Federal Power Act.16 U.S.C. §§ 817(1), 792; see also Public Utility Act of 1935, § 210.
In addition to the FERC licenses, the Water Quality Improvement Act of 1970 introduced a specific requirement for activities that could cause a "discharge" into navigable waters.  The license for that activity is conditioned on a certification from the State in which the discharge may originate that it will not violate certain water quality standards, including those set by the State's own laws.  That requirement was subsequently included in section 401 of the Clean Water Act.Codified at .  The relevant text reads: "Any applicant for a Federal license or permit to conduct any activity . . . which may result in any discharge into the navigable waters shall provide the licensing or permitting agency a certification from the State in which the discharge originates . . . ." (a)(1).
"Any certification provided under this section shall set forth any effluent limitations and other limitations, and monitoring requirements necessary to assure that any applicant for a Federal license or permit will comply with [§§ 1311, 1312, 1316, and 1317] and with any other appropriate requirement of State law set forth in such certification, and shall become a condition on any Federal license or permit subject to the provisions of this section." 33 U.S.C. § 1341(d).
In 1999, S. D. Warren sought to renew federal licenses for five of its dams. It applied for water quality certifications from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection, but it filed its application under protest, claiming that its dams did not result in any "discharge into" the river that would trigger the application of section 401.  The Maine agency issued certifications that required Warren to maintain a minimum stream flow in the bypassed portions of the river and to allow passage for various migratory fish and eels.  FERC eventually licensed the five dams subject to the Maine conditions, but the company continued to deny any need for state certification under section 401.
After appealing unsuccessfully to Maine's administrative appeals tribunal, the Board of Environmental Protection, Warren filed suit in Cumberland County Superior Court.  The court rejected Warren's argument that its dams do not result in discharges,S.D. Warren Co. v. Maine Dep't of Envtl. Prot., No. AP-03-70, 2004 Me. Super. LEXIS 115 (Me. Super. Ct. May 4, 2004). and the Maine Supreme Judicial Court affirmed.S. D. Warren Co. v. Board of Environmental Protection, 868 A.2d 210 (Me. 2005).
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court unanimously affirmed the decision of the Maine Supreme Judicial Court.  The Court's opinion was delivered by Justice David Souter, and was joined by the whole Court.  However, Justice Antonin Scalia, a noted critic of the use of legislative history in statutory interpretation, did not join in Part III-C of the opinion, which criticized the company's argument based on legislative history.
The Court observed that the Clean Water Act did not define discharge, but stated that "the term ‘discharge’ when used without qualification includes a discharge of a pollutant, and a discharge of pollutants."(16).  The Act furthermore defined "discharge of a pollutant" and "discharge of pollutants," as meaning "any addition of any pollutant to navigable waters from any point source."33 U.S.C. § 1362(12).  The Court believed this meant "discharge" was broader than these definitions, or else the term was superfluous.  Because of the lack of a statutory definition, and because it is not a term of art, the Court was left to instead construe it "in accordance with its ordinary or natural meaning."
Citing to Webster's New International Dictionary, the Court explained that "discharge" commonly means a "flowing or issuing out," an ordinary sense of the word that the Court had used in prior water-related cases.  A 1994 decision specifically involving section 401 had even used this definition.PUD No. 1 v. Washington Dep't of Ecology, 511 U.S. 700 (1994) ("Petitioners concede that, at a minimum, the project will result in two possible discharges—the release of dredged and fill material during the construction of the project, and the discharge of water...").  The Environmental Protection Agency and FERC had also regularly read "discharge" by this plain meaning, so as to cover releases from hydroelectric dams.  Though Chevron deference did not apply in this context, the Court nevertheless believed that those usages of "discharge" by those agencies "confirms our understanding of the everyday sense of the term."
Notes
References
Category:2006 in the environment
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States environmental case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Sable Communications of California v. FCC" ==> """
Sable Communications of California v. Federal Communications Commission, 492 U.S. 115 (1989), was a United States Supreme Court case involving the definition of "indecent material" and whether it is protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. The Court invalidated part of a federal law that prohibited "dial-a-porn" telephone messaging services by making it a crime to transmit commercial telephone messages that were either "obscene" or "indecent"."Sable Communications of California v. FCC". oyez.org. Retrieved 2011-03-14."Sable Communications of California, Inc. v. Federal Communications Comm'n.". Quimbee.com. Retrieved 2011-04-30.
Obscenity versus indecency
The often tough question of what it is that makes material indecent or obscene was an important aspect of this case. The murky line between these two categories has been difficult to determine. In Butler v. Michigan (1957), when dealing with the sale of books containing adult material, the Court "reversed a conviction under a statute which made it an offense to make available to the general public materials found to have a potentially harmful influence on minors".. This case, however, did not deal with definitions. A case that did, which is one of the most crucial cases to this debate, was Miller v. California (1973), which involved the mailing of sexually explicit advertising brochures.
From this case, the Miller test was established as a way to determine whether a work can be considered obscene. The test has three major criteria:
Whether the average person, applying contemporary community standards, would deem the work as appealing to the prurient interest,
Whether the work depicted sexual conduct, as defined by state law, in a patently offensive way,
Whether the work as a whole lacked serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.
All three parts must be fulfilled for the material to be considered obscenity.
History of Dial-a-Porn
The first attempt to deal with dial-a-porn services occurred with subsection 223(b) in the 1934 Communications Act. With 223(b), it became illegal to make obscene or indecent phone calls to anyone who was either under 18 years old, or had not given consent. To regulate this, the FCC required dial-a-porn services to operate only between 9 p.m. and 8 a.m., and receive payment with a credit card. In 1984, the case of Carlin Communications, Inc. v. FCC, 749 F.2d 113 (2nd Cir. 1984) (Carlin I) deemed the time channeling to not be effective because it did not allow adults access to dial-a-porn services between 8 a.m. and 9 p.m., but still could allow access to minors who could not be stopped from calling between the current legal hours.
After getting rid of these time restrictions in 1985, the FCC began to use a system of user identification access codes, in addition to credit cards, to regulate these dial-a-porn services. They later added message scrambling, which made use of a descrambling device that was only available to adults to actually listen to dial-a-porn phone calls. The combination of these three regulatory practices were finally supported as being effective enough to protect minors after Carlin Communications, Inc. v. FCC, 837 F.2d 546 (2nd Cir.) (Carlin III).
Case
In 1988, Congress amended subsection 223(b) of the Communications Act of 1934 to ban indecent and obscene interstate commercial phone messages, regardless of age. This made the business of Sable Communications, who had been in the dial-a-porn industry since 1983, illegal. The federal parties had argued that the only way to prevent children's access to dial-a-porn messages was through the complete ban of their telephone services. Sable Communications argued that the "legislation creates an impermissible national standard of obscenity, and that it places message senders in a 'double bind' by compelling them to tailor all their messages to the least tolerant community"."Sable Communications of California, Inc. v. Federal Communications Comm'n.". lawschool.courtroomview.com. Retrieved 2011-03-14.
The Court said that if the government wants to protect children in this regard, it must do so by technological means, rather than by a total ban on the transmission of these messages.. Although some children might be able to defeat these devices, a banning these services would have the impermissible effect of "limiting the content of adult telephone conversations to that which is suitable for children to hear".
Ruling
A judge of the United States District Court for the Central District of California upheld the ban on obscene messages, but ordered the Act's enforcement against indecent ones.  The Court upheld the district court ruling. Since the First Amendment does not protect obscene speech, as the Court found in Paris Adult Theatre I v. Slaton (1973), the ban on obscene speech was legitimate. However, sexual expression that is simply indecent is protected."[https://www.oyez.org/cases/1970-1979/1972/1972_71_1051 Paris Adult Theatre v. Slaton]", Oyez.org. Retrieved 2011-04-30.  Therefore, banning adult access to indecent messages "far exceeds that which is necessary" to shield minors from dial-a-porn services.
Words from the Court
Sexual expression which is indecent but not obscene is protected by the First Amendment...The Government may, however, regulate the content of constitutionally protected speech in order to promote a compelling interest if it chooses the least restrictive means to further the articulated interest. We have recognized that there is a compelling interest in protecting the physical and psychological well-being of minors. This interest extends to shielding minors from the influence of literature that is not obscene by adult standards."Action for Children's Television v. Federal Communications Commission, 58 F. 3d 654 (1995) (Edited Version)". cba.uni.edu. Retrieved 2011-03-31.
The Government may serve this legitimate interest, but to withstand constitutional scrutiny it must do so by narrowly drawn regulations designed to serve those interests without unnecessarily interfering with First Amendment freedoms...It is not enough to show that the Government's ends are compelling; the means must be carefully tailored to achieve those ends.
Significance
The court drew a sharp distinction between speech that meets the legal definition of "obscene" and speech that is "indecent" (sexually charged but not rising to the level of "obscene"). The court held that obscene speech could be restricted, but that merely indecent speech was protected by the First Amendment. The court also recognized a real need for governmental interest in shielding children from speech that could be obscene to minors, but not for adults. However, the court stressed that these limitations must be limited so they can distinguish what is and what is not restricted, carefully protecting the rights of adults to receive protected speech, even if that protected speech is indecent.
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1989 in United States case law
Category:Federal Communications Commission litigation
"""

From "Sacher v. United States" ==> """
Sacher v. United States, 343 U.S. 1 (1952), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld the convictions of five attorneys for contempt of court.. Belknap (1994),  p 225.
 Background 
The five attorneys who volunteered to defend the communists in the Smith Act trial of 1949 were familiar with leftist causes and personally supported the defendants' rights to espouse communist views. They were Abraham Isserman, George W. Crockett, Jr.,  Richard Gladstein, Harry Sacher, and Louis F. McCabe.Sabin, p 42.Attorney Maurice Sugar participated in an advisory role."Communist Trial Ends with 11 Guilty", Life, October 24, 1949, p 31.  Defendant Eugene Dennis represented himself.  The ACLU was dominated by anti-communist leaders during the 1940s, and did not enthusiastically support persons indicted under the Smith Act.  However, the ACLU did provide an amicus brief for the Foley Square defendants, endorsing a motion for dismissal.Walker, pp 185–187.  However, many local affiliates of the ACLU  supported communist defendants.
The defense deliberately antagonized the judge by making a large number of objections and motions,Morgan, p 314.Sabin, p 41.  which led to numerous bitter engagements between the attorneys and Judge Medina.Redish, p 82.Sabin, p 46.  Out of the chaos,  an atmosphere of "mutual hostility" arose between the judge and attorneys.Sabin, p 46. Medina came to believe that the defense attorneys were using the trial as an opportunity to publicize communist propaganda, and that they deliberately disrupted the trial using any means they could.Redish, p 82.  Judge Medina attempted to maintain order by removing defendants who were out of order.  In the course of the trial, Medina sent five of the defendants to jail for outbursts, including Hall because he shouted "I've heard more law in a Kangaroo court", and Winstonan African Americanfor shouting "more than five thousand Negroes have been lynched in this country".Sabin, pp 46–47. Sabin writes that only four defendants were cited.Morgan, p 315 (Morgan erroneously quotes Winston as saying 500the correct quote is 5,000).Martelle, p 175.  Several times in July and August, the judge held defense attorneys in contempt of court, and told them their punishment would be meted out upon conclusion of the trial.Martelle, p 190.
Legal scholar Michal Belknap writes that Medina was "unfriendly" to the defense, and that "there is reason to believe that Medina was biased against the defendants", citing a statement Medina made during pretrial activity:  "If we let them do that sort of thing [postpone the trial start], they'll destroy the government".Belknap (1994), p 212.  On page 220 Belknap gives more assertions of Medina's bias.  Medina's hostility towards the defense may have been exacerbated by the fact that another federal judge had recently died of a heart attack during a similar trial involving the Smith Act;Belknap (2001), p 860.  and Medina came to believe that the defense was deliberately trying to provoke him with the goal of achieving a mistrial.Belknap (1994), p 220.    Belknap asserts that the defendants could "insist with complete justification that they were the targets of a political prosecution",  and that "rather than attempting to prove eleven individuals guilty of criminal conduct, the prosecution mounted an attack on the CPUSA."Belknap (1994), p 214.  Legal scholar Arthur Sabin writes that one of the jurors stated that "we must fight communism to the death" and spoke of his desire to "hang those Commies".Walker, p 185.Sabin, pp 44–45.   Juror quoted by Sabin is novelist  Russell Janney.  See also Martelle, pp 189–193.
Immediately after the jury rendered a verdict, Medina turned to the defense attorneys saying he had some "unfinished business" and he held them in contempt of court, and sentenced all of themincluding future Congressman George W. Crockett, Jr.to jail terms ranging from 30 days to six months.Defendant Dennis, acting as his own attorney during the 1949 trial, also received a six-month contempt sentence.  Attorney Maurice Sugar, who participated in an advisory role, was not cited for contempt.  The attorneys had no opportunity to respond,  and were immediately handcuffed and led to jail.Sabin, p 47.Some of the contempt sentences were postponed pending appeal; for instance, Crockett served four months in an Ashland, Kentucky Federal prison in 1952.  See Smith, Jessie Carney, Notable Black American Men, Volume 1,  Gale, 1998, p 236, .
 Opinion of the Court 
The defense attorneys appealed their own contempt sentences, which were handed out by Judge Medina under Rule 42 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.Rule 42(a), Fed.Rules Crim.Proc., 18 U.S.C.A.  The attorneys raised a variety of issues on appeal, including the alleged misconduct of the judge, and the allegation that they were deprived of due process because there was no hearing to evaluate the merits of the contempt charge.   The attorneys also argued that such contempt convictions would prevent future defendants from obtaining counsel, because attorneys would be afraid of judicial retaliation.From Sacher:  "We are urged that these sentences will have an intimidating effect on the legal profession, whose members hereafter will decline to appear in trials where 'defendants are objects of hostility of those in power,' or will do so under a 'cloud of fear' which "threatens the right of the American people to be represented fearlessly and vigorously by counsel." The attorneys' initial appeal to the federal appeals court was  not successful: the court  reviewed the Medina's actions, and reversed some specifications of contempt, but affirmed the convictions.  The attorneys then appealed to the Supreme Court which denied the initial petition, but  later reconsidered and accepted the appeal.The initial  appeal was 341 U.S. 952, 71 S.Ct. 1010, 95 L.Ed. 1374.  The Supreme Court limited their review to the question "was the charge of contempt, as and when certified, one which the accusing judge was authorized under Rule 42(a)  to determine and punish himself; or was it one to be adjudged and punished under Rule 42(b) only by a judge other than the accusing one and after notice, hearing, and opportunity to defend?".   The Supreme Court, in an opinion written by Justice Jackson,  upheld the contempt sentences by a 5–3 vote.Belknap (1994), pp 224–225.  Jackson's opinion stated that "summary punishment always, and rightly, is regarded with disfavor, and, if imposed in passion or pettiness, brings discredit to a court as certainly as the conduct it penalizes. But the very practical reasons which have led every system of law to vest a contempt power in one who presides over judicial proceedings also are the reasons which account for it being made summary."
 See also 
Clear and present danger
Imminent lawless action
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 343
Shouting fire in a crowded theater
Threatening the president of the United States
Abrams v. United States, 
Brandenburg v. Ohio, 
Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 
Dennis v. United States, 
Feiner v. New York, 
Hess v. Indiana, 
Korematsu v. United States, 
Kunz v. New York, 
Masses Publishing Co. v. Patten, (1917)
Schenck v. United States, 
Terminiello v. Chicago, 
Whitney v. California, 
 Footnotes 
References
Auerbach, Jerold S., Unequal Justice: Lawyers and Social Change in Modern America, 	Oxford University Press, 1977, 
Belknap, Michal R., Cold War Political Justice: the Smith Act, the Communist Party, and American civil liberties,	Greenwood Press, 1977, 
Belknap, Michal R., "Foley Square Trial", in American political trials, (Michal Belknap, Ed.), Greenwood Publishing Group, 1994, 
Belknap, Michal R., "Cold War, Communism, and Free Speech", in  Historic U.S. Court Cases: An Encyclopedia (Vol 2),  (John W. Johnson, Ed.), Taylor & Francis, 2001, 
Martelle, Scott, The Fear Within: Spies, Commies, and American Democracy on Trial, 	Rutgers University Press, 2011, 
Morgan, Ted, Reds: McCarthyism in Twentieth-Century America,  Random House Digital, Inc., 2004, 
O'Brien, David M., Congress Shall Make No Law: the First Amendment, Unprotected Expression, and the Supreme Court, Rowman & Littlefield, 2010, 
Navasky, Victor S., Naming Names, 	Macmillan, 2003, 
Redish, Martin H., The Logic of Persecution: Free Expression and the McCarthy Era, Stanford University Press, 2005, 
Sabin, Arthur J., In Calmer Times: the Supreme Court and Red Monday, University of Pennsylvania Press, 1999, 
Starobin, Joseph R., American Communism in Crisis, 1943–1957,	University of California Press, 1975, 
Walker, Samuel, In Defense of American Liberties: A History of the ACLU,  Oxford University Press, 1990, 
 External links 
Category:1952 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
"""

From "Sackett v. Environmental Protection Agency (2012)" ==> """
Sackett v. Environmental Protection Agency, 566 U.S. 120 (2012), also known as Sackett I (to distinguish it from the 2023 case), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that orders issued by the Environmental Protection Agency under the Clean Water Act are subject to the Administrative Procedure Act. The Court ruled that because the Environmental Protection Agency's orders constitute "final agency action" under the Administrative Procedure Act, federal courts may hear appeals from its orders.
 Background 
The plaintiffs, Mike and Chantell Sackett, purchased, approximately, a two-thirds acre parcel of land (0.62) near Priest Lake, Idaho, on which they planned to build a house. Shortly after they began clearing the lot, the Sacketts received a Compliance Order from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, asserting that the property was subject to the Clean Water Act, and that the Sacketts had illegally placed fill material into jurisdictional wetlands on their property. After trying unsuccessfully to obtain a hearing from the EPA, the Sacketts filed suit demanding an opportunity to contest the jurisdictional basis of the Compliance Order. Both the District Court and the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled in favor of the government, holding that the validity of the Compliance Order could be challenged only if and when EPA brings an enforcement action seeking to impose civil and criminal penalties against the Sacketts. The Supreme Court granted certiorari, limited to the following questions: "1. May petitioners seek pre-enforcement judicial review of the administrative compliance order pursuant to the Administrative Procedure Act, 5 U. S. C. §704? 2. If not, does petitioners' inability to seek preenforcement judicial review of the administrative compliance order violate their rights under the Due Process clause?" The Sacketts, technically consulted by wetland experts Ray and Susan Kagel of Kagel Environmental, LLC, and represented by Damien M. Schiff of the Pacific Legal Foundation, filed their opening brief on September 23, 2011. Amicus briefs in support of the petitioners were filed by the Center for Constitutional Jurisprudence, the American Farm Bureau Federation, and the National Association of Homebuilders.  The opposition brief of the Solicitor General of the United States was filed on November 23, 2011.
Opinion of the court
In a unanimous opinion by Justice Scalia issued on March 21, 2012, the Court held that EPA's compliance orders may be challenged in a civil action brought under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA).  The compliance orders are "final agency action" for purposes of the APA, and the Clean Water Act does not preclude judicial review under the APA.
Justices Ginsburg and Alito each filed concurring opinions. Justice Ginsburg stated in her concurrence that the ruling only permitted the Sacketts to challenge EPA's assertion of jurisdiction over their property; the Court did not resolve whether the terms and conditions of the Compliance Order itself were subject to immediate judicial review. Justice Alito recommended that Congress act to clarify issues regarding the reach of the Clean Water Act.
On May 3, 2012, the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit remanded the Sacketts' challenge to the compliance order to the district court, consistent with the Supreme Court's opinion.
Decision after remand
The United States District Court for the District of Idaho ruled against the Sacketts, finding that the area in question was a wetland and had been filled without necessary permits.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 566
 References 
External links
 Cover of the case on SCOTUSblog
 .
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States environmental case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2012 in United States case law
Category:2012 in the environment
"""

From "Sackett v. Environmental Protection Agency (2023)" ==> """
Sackett v. Environmental Protection Agency (Docket 21–454), also known as Sackett II (to distinguish it from the 2012 case), is a pending United States Supreme Court case related to the scope of the Clean Water Act.
 Background 
Chantell and Michael Sackett purchased a 0.63-acre vacant lot near Priest Lake, Idaho, in 2004. They began construction of their home in the spring of 2007, after attaining building permits from local authorities. Shortly after, officials from the United States Environmental Protection Agency informed the Sacketts that their lot might be subject to regulation under the Clean Water Act, as it contained "wetlands" that were "navigable waters". The EPA directed the Sacketts to halt construction until they received a permit from the United States Army Corps of Engineers. The Sacketts received an administrative compliance order from the EPA in the fall of 2007. In 2008, they sued under the Administrative Procedure Act. The lower courts held EPA compliance orders were not subject to the APA, but the Supreme Court reversed in a 2012 decision of the same name.
In the 2006 Rapanos v. United States decision, the Supreme Court decided the scope of the Clean Water Act in a 4–1–4 opinion. Justice Anthony Kennedy's solo concurrence offered a more sweeping interpretation of the Act's jurisdiction over navigable waters; Justice Antonin Scalia's plurality offered the narrowest interpretation. The Sacketts argued to the United States District Court for the District of Idaho on remand from the Supreme Court that their land was not subject to the CWA. In 2019, the district court applied Justice Kennedy's test and held the lot was regulated by the CWA. The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed in August 2021, and rejected an attempt by the EPA to moot the litigation by withdrawing the compliance order.
The Sacketts filed a petition for a writ of certiorari. The petitioners seek to determine whether the Rapanos decision should be revisited to instead adopt the plurality opinion's test to determine whether a wetland fell under the Clean Water Act's jurisdiction. Amici curiae in support of the Sacketts were submitted by the Cato Institute, the US Chamber of Commerce, and Americans for Prosperity, while the Constitutional Accountability Center, Public Citizen, and major American scientific societies like the Association for the Sciences of Limnology and Oceanography, and Society of Wetland Scientists filed amici supporting the EPA.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case on January 24, 2022, and the court heard oral arguments on October 3, 2022.
 Related cases 
Related cases include Rapanos v. United States, Orchard Hill Bldg. Co. v. United States Army Corps of Eng'rs, Sackett v. EPA (2012), and United States v. Riverside Bayview.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2023 in United States case law
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States environmental case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Saenz v. Roe" ==> """
Sáenz v. Roe, 526 U.S. 489 (1999), was a landmark case in which the Supreme Court of the United States discussed whether there is a constitutional right to travel from one state to another.. The case was a reaffirmation of the principle that citizens select states and not the other way round.
Background
In Edwards v. California (1941), the United States Supreme Court unanimously struck down a California law prohibiting the bringing of a non-resident "indigent person" into the state..  The Court's majority opinion by Justice Byrnes declared the law to violate the Constitution's Commerce Clause. In concurring opinions, Justice Douglas (joined by Justices Black and Murphy) and Justice Jackson held that the law violated the Privileges or Immunities Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
In 1992, the state of California enacted a statute limiting the maximum welfare benefits available to newly arrived residents. At the time, California was paying the sixth-largest welfare benefits in the United States. In a move to reduce the state welfare budget, the California State Legislature enacted a statute (Cal. Welf. & Inst. Code Ann. §11450.03) to limit new residents, for the first year they live in the state, to the benefits they would have received in the state of their prior residence.  For the state to comply with the then-existent Aid to Families with Dependent Children program, it needed a waiver from the United States Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) in order to qualify for federal reimbursement. Louis Wade Sullivan, who was HHS Secretary at that point, granted his approval in October 1992.
On December 21, 1992, three California residents who were eligible for AFDC benefits filed an action in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of California, challenging the constitutionality of the durational residency requirement. All of the plaintiffs alleged that they had moved into California to escape abusive family situations. The District Court judge temporarily enjoined the state from enforcing the statute, and the Ninth Circuit affirmed. The state then petitioned the Court for certiorari. In a separate proceeding, the HHS Secretary's approval of the statute was invalidated and so the Court did not reach the merits of the case.
In 1996, President Bill Clinton signed the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act (PRWORA) into law, which created the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program and expressly permitted states to limit aid to people who had been residents for less than a year. No longer requiring the approval of federal authorities, California began enforcing the statute.
Procedural history
In 1997, the two plaintiffs in this case sued in the same court as the prior litigants, this time challenging both the California statute and the PRWORA's durational residency provision.  The district court judge, David F. Levi, certified the case as a class action and issued a preliminary injunction.  While the state argued that the statute was a legitimate use of its police powers (because it was largely a budgetary measure), Judge Levi still found for the plaintiffs and enjoined enforcement of the statute, on the grounds that it discriminated between newcomers to the state and long-time residents.  The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed.
Majority opinion
Justice Stevens, writing for the majority, found that although the "right to travel" was not explicitly mentioned in the Constitution, the concept was "firmly embedded in our jurisprudence." He described three components of the right to travel:
 The right to enter one state and leave another;
 The right to be treated as a welcome visitor rather than a hostile stranger; 
 For those who want to become permanent residents, the right to be treated equally to native-born citizens.
Because the statute did not directly impair entry or exit from the state, Stevens declined to discuss the first aspect of the right to travel although he did mention that the right was expressly mentioned in the Articles of Confederation. He briefly described the scope of the Art. IV Privileges and Immunities Clause, but the main focus of his opinion was the application of the Fourteenth Amendment. For the proposition that this amendment protected a citizen's right to resettle in other states, Stevens cited the majority opinion in the Slaughter-House Cases:.
Justice Stevens further held in Sáenz that it was irrelevant that the statute only minimally impaired the plaintiffs' right to travel. The plaintiffs were new to the state of California, but they had the right to be treated the same as long-time residents, especially given that their need for welfare benefits was unrelated to the amount of time they had spent in the state.  Furthermore, wrote Stevens, there was no reason for the state to fear that citizens of other states would take advantage of California's relatively generous welfare benefits because the proceeds of each welfare check would be consumed while the plaintiffs remained within the state. This distinguishes them from a "readily portable benefit, such as a divorce or a college education", for which durational residency requirements had been upheld in cases such as Sosna v. Iowa and Vlandis v. Kline.
California justified the statute solely on fiscal grounds, and Stevens held that this justification was insufficient. The state could have found another non-discriminatory way to reduce welfare costs, other than conditioning the welfare benefit amounts of new residents by reference to their length of stay within the state, or their state of prior residence. Moreover, the fact that PRWORA authorized states to set their own benefit levels did not assist in the determining the constitutionality of the state statute because Congress cannot authorize states to violate the Fourteenth Amendment.
Rehnquist's dissent
Chief Justice Rehnquist dissented on the grounds that he did not think that the Fourteenth Amendment's Privileges or Immunities Clause required the result reached by the majority, especially considering that the clause had been applied only a few times since the ratification of the amendment. Rehnquist reasoned that although they are related, the right to become a citizen of another state was not the same as the right to travel. Furthermore, he claimed that becoming a citizen of another state required both physical presence within the state and a subjective intent to remain there.  Since residency requirements pertain to the latter factor of citizenship, Rehnquist reasoned they should not be unconstitutional.
Thomas's dissent
Justice Thomas dissented separately, because he felt that the majority attributed a meaning to the Fourteenth Amendment Privileges or Immunities Clause that its framers did not intend.  He lamented the decision of the Slaughterhouse Cases which basically turned the clause into a nullity.  He looked to the historical meaning and use of the language in the clause, citing the Charter of 1606, which guaranteed the citizens of Virginia therein all the "Liberties, Franchises, and Immunities" of a person born in England.  He also noted that the phrase was used in the Articles of Confederation, which was then imported into Article IV of the Constitution.
Finally, he suggested that the meaning of the Privileges or Immunities Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment should be read the same way that Article IV's Privileges and Immunities Clause was interpreted. He cited Justice Bushrod Washington's interpretation of the latter clause in the famous case of Corfield v. Coryell (E.D. Pa. 1823) and stated that this is what the framers of the Fourteenth Amendment had intended. Thomas made a case for the revival of the clause to protect fundamental rights of citizens.
See also
 Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857)
 Shapiro v. Thompson (1969)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 526
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
References
Further reading
Davis, Martha F. (1999). "The Evolving Right to Travel: Saenz v. Roe". Publius: The Journal of Federalism 29 (Spring): 95-110.
External links
Category:Privileges or Immunities case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1999 in United States case law
"""

From "Safford Unified School District v. Redding" ==> """
Safford Unified School District v. Redding, 557 U.S. 364 (2009), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a strip search of a middle school student by school officials violated the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which prohibits unreasonable searches and seizures.
On October 8, 2003, the assistant principal of Safford Middle School in Safford, Arizona, informed 13-year-old Savana Redding that another student had accused her of distributing prescription and over-the-counter pain medication, which were disallowed without prior permission by school rules. Redding denied this accusation, and after a search of her belongings did not reveal any pills, school officials instructed her to remove her outer clothing and pull out her bra and underpants, which also did not reveal any pills.
Redding's mother sued the Safford Unified School District and the school officials who searched her daughter, arguing that they had violated the Fourth Amendment. The district court granted summary judgment in favor of the school officials on the basis that they were entitled to qualified immunity. With the help of the American Civil Liberties Union, Redding appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, which reversed the district court, holding in an en banc session that the search violated the Fourth Amendment and that the assistant principal was not entitled to qualified immunity because he violated clearly established law at the time of the search.
On June 25, 2009, the Supreme Court affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded. In an 8–1 decision authored by Justice David Souter, the Court found that the search failed to meet the "reasonable suspicion" standard for searches of students in a school setting established by the Court in New Jersey v. T. L. O. (1985), stating that the school lacked reasons to suspect either that the drugs presented a danger or that they were concealed in her underwear. However, the Court also found that because there was sufficient doubt as to whether the law was clearly established at the time of the search, the school officials were entitled to qualified immunity. Finally, the Court stated that its conclusions do not resolve the school district's liability and remanded the case for lower courts to consider that issue.
 Background 
 Prior case law 
The Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution prohibits unreasonable searches and seizures by the federal government, and the Fourteenth Amendment extends this prohibition to state governments under the incorporation doctrine. In most cases, the Fourth Amendment requires government officials to have probable cause in order to conduct a search. In the context of searches of children by school officials, however, the U.S. Supreme Court held in New Jersey v. T. L. O. (1985) that the public interest in maintaining the school environment "'is best served by a Fourth Amendment standard of reasonableness that stops short of probable cause'".Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 370 (quoting New Jersey v. T. L. O., 469 U. S., at 341).
Instead, in T. L. O. the Court held that the reasonableness standard for searches conducted by school officials in a school environment is that of "reasonable suspicion".Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 370 (quoting New Jersey v. T. L. O., 469 U. S., at 342, 345). Additionally, the Court stated in T. L. O. that "a school search 'will be permissible in its scope when the measures adopted are reasonably related to the objectives of the search and not excessively intrusive in light of the age and sex of the student and the nature of the infraction'".Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 370 (quoting New Jersey v. T. L. O., 469 U. S., at 342). In general, the doctrine of qualified immunity protects government officials, including school officials, from facing individual liability for unreasonable searches, unless their conduct violated law that was "clearly established" at the time of the search.Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 377 (citing Pearson v. Callahan, 555 U.S. 223, 243–244).
 Facts of the case 
On October 8, 2003, Kerry Wilson, the assistant principal of Safford Middle School in Safford, Arizona, asked 13-year-old student Savana Redding to come to his office. Wilson showed Redding a day planner which had "several knives, lighters, a permanent marker, and a cigarette" inside, and he asked if it was hers.Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 368. Redding stated that the planner belonged to her, but not any of the items inside. She also stated that she had lent the planner to her friend, Marissa Glines, a few days beforehand.
Wilson then showed Redding "four white prescription-strength ibuprofen 400-mg pills, and one over-the-counter blue naproxen 200-mg pill, all used for pain and inflammation but banned under school rules without advanced permission". Wilson informed her that someone had reported her for distributing these pills to other students, which Redding denied. Redding agreed to let Wilson and an administrative assistant named Helen Romero search her backpack, which did not reveal any pills. At Wilson's direction, Romero then took Redding to the office of Peggy Schwallier, the school nurse, where Romero and Schwallier asked Redding to remove her jacket, socks, and shoes. They then asked her to remove her t-shirt and stretch pants, neither of which had pockets. Finally, Redding "was told to pull her bra out and to the side and shake it, and to pull out the elastic on her underpants, thus exposing her breasts and pelvic area to some degree". The search did not reveal any pills.Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 369.
A week before Redding was searched, another student had reported to Wilson that "certain students were bringing drugs and weapons on campus", and furthermore, the student reported becoming sick after taking pills obtained from a classmate. Earlier on the morning of Redding’s search, the same student gave Wilson a white pill, later identified by Schwallier as prescription-strength ibuprofen, and told him that other students were going to take the pills at lunch. The student claimed that Marissa Glines had given him the pills.Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 372–373. He also told the principal that he attended a party at Redding’s house at which alcohol was served to his peers.Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 373.
Wilson then took Marissa Glines out of class and, in the presence of Helen Romero, asked her to "turn out her pockets and open her wallet", which "produced a blue pill, several white ones, and a razor blade".Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 372. Glines identified Savana Redding as the person who had supplied her with the drugs. When Wilson asked Glines about the day planner, she denied knowledge about its contents. Wilson then instructed Romero and Schwallier to search Glines' bra and underpants, which revealed no additional pills. It was at this point when Wilson called Redding into his office.
 Lower court proceedings 
April Redding, Savana Redding's mother, sued Wilson, Romero, Schwallier, and the Safford Unified School District, arguing that they had conducted an unreasonable strip search in violation of the Fourth Amendment. The school officials moved for summary judgment, arguing that they were entitled to qualified immunity. The U.S. District Court for the District of Arizona granted this motion, holding that the school officials did not violate the Fourth Amendment, and a panel of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed on September 21, 2007.Redding v. Safford Unified School District, 504 F. 3d 828 (2007). At this point, the American Civil Liberties Union joined the case as co-counsel for Redding. On July 11, 2008, after rehearing the case en banc, the Ninth Circuit reversed the panel, holding in a closely divided decision that the search violated the Fourth Amendment and that assistant principal Wilson was not entitled to qualified immunity.Redding v. Safford Unified School District, 531 F. 3d 1071, 1081–1087 (2008). The en banc Ninth Circuit affirmed that defendants Romero and Schwallier were entitled to qualified immunity because "they had not acted as independent decisionmakers".Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 369–370 (citing Redding v. Safford Unified School District, F. 3d, at 1089).
Supreme Court
thumb|Justice David Souter authored the majority opinion in Safford Unified School District v. Redding.
The school officials filed a petition for a writ of certiorari with the Supreme Court, which granted certiorari on January 16, 2009, in order to review two questions: (1) "whether the Fourth Amendment prohibits public school officials from conducting a search of a student suspected of possessing and distributing a prescription drug on campus in violation of school policy", and (2) "whether the Ninth Circuit departed from established principles of qualified immunity in holding that a public school administrator may be liable in a damages lawsuit under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 for conducting a search of a student suspected of possessing and distributing a prescription drug on campus".
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice David Souter delivered the opinion of the Court, which affirmed the Ninth Circuit in part, reversed in part, and remanded. Seven justices—all but Justice Clarence Thomas—agreed with Souter that the strip search violated Redding's Fourth Amendment rights, while six justices—all but Justices John Paul Stevens and Ruth Bader Ginsburg—agreed with Souter that the individual school officials were entitled to qualified immunity because the search's unconstitutionality was not clearly established at the time of the violation.Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 367.
 Fourth Amendment 
In his analysis of the Fourth Amendment, Souter reiterated the holding in New Jersey v. T. L. O. that the validity of school searches merely requires a standard of "reasonable suspicion", not the "probable cause" standard ordinarily used by law enforcement officers.Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 370 In terms of the knowledge required to meet that threshold, this calls for only a "moderate chance" of finding the expected evidence, not at "fair probability" or "substantial chance" associated with probable cause.Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 371. Souter then recounted the facts of the case,Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 371–374. and he concluded that the school officials had conducted a "strip search", stating that "both subjective and reasonable societal expectations of personal privacy support the treatment of such a search as categorically distinct, requiring distinct elements of justification on the part of school authorities for going beyond a search of outer clothing and belongings".Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 374.
Souter reiterated that in T. L. O., the Court had held that the scope of a school search "will be permissible ... when it is 'not excessively intrusive in light of the age and sex of the student and the nature of the infraction".Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 375. From this, he concluded that in Redding's case, "the content of the suspicion failed to match the degree of intrusion" because assistant principal Wilson "must have been aware of the nature and limited threat of the specific drugs he was searching for".Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 375–376. Additionally, Wilson could not "have suspected that Savana was hiding common painkillers in her underwear".Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 376. "In sum," wrote Souter, "what was missing from the suspected facts that pointed to Savana was any indication of danger to the students from the power of the drugs or their quantity, and any reason to suppose that Savana was carrying pills in her underwear." For these reasons, the strip search of Redding was unreasonable and violated the Fourth Amendment.Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 376 ("We think that the combination of these deficiencies was fatal to finding the search reasonable.").
 Qualified immunity 
Quoting Pearson v. Callahan (2009), Souter stated that "a school official searching a student is 'entitled to qualified immunity where clearly established law does not show that the search violated the Fourth Amendment'".Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 377 (quoting Pearson v. Callahan, 555 U.S. 223, 243–244 (2009)). Although the Court explicitly held that the strip search of Redding did violate the Fourth Amendment, Souter acknowledged that "lower courts have reached divergent conclusions regarding how the T. L. O. standard applies to such searches",Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 378. such as (but not limited to) the minority of the en banc Ninth Circuit in this case, as well as the Sixth Circuit, which had previously "upheld a strip search of a high school student for a drug, without any suspicion that drugs were hidden next to her body".Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 378 (citing Williams v. Ellington, 936 F. 2d 881, 882–883, 887 (1991)).
Souter commented that "the cases viewing school strip searches differently from the way we see them are numerous enough, with well-reasoned majority and dissenting opinions, to counsel doubt that we were sufficiently clear in the prior statement of law".Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 378–379. Qualified immunity is therefore warranted for the school officials in the case.Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 379. Souter clarified that the Court's "conclusions here do not resolve, however, the question of the liability of petitioner Safford Unified School District #1 under Monell v. New York City Dept. of Social Servs., a claim the Ninth Circuit did not address".Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 379 (citations omitted). The Court remanded the case back to the lower courts in order for them to consider the Monell claim.
Concurrence and dissent
Justice John Paul Stevens filed an opinion that was joined by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, concurring that the search violated the Fourth Amendment, but dissenting from the view that the school officials were entitled to qualified immunity. Stevens would have denied qualified immunity to assistant principal Wilson, writing that "this is, in essence, a case in which clearly established law meets clearly outrageous conduct".Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 380 (Stevens, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). He disagreed that the "seemingly divergent views" among lower courts of appeals about T. L. O.’s application to strip searches justifies extending qualified immunity, stating that "the clarity of a well-established right should not depend on whether jurists have misread our precedents". Justice Stevens would have affirmed the Ninth Circuit's decision "in its entirety".Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 381 (Stevens, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).
In a separate opinion, Justice Ginsburg further elaborated on why she thought qualified immunity was inappropriate in this case. Ginsburg distinguished the facts of Redding from that of T. L. O.: "In contrast to T. L. O., where a teacher discovered a student smoking in the lavatory, and where the search was confined to the student’s purse, the search of Redding involved her body and rested on the bare accusation of another student whose reliability the Assistant Principal had no reason to trust."Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 382 (Ginsburg, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). In Ginsburg's view, "'the nature of the [supposed] infraction,' the slim basis for suspecting Savana Redding, and her 'age and sex', establish beyond doubt that Assistance Principal Wilson's order cannot be reconciled with this Court's opinion in T. L. O. Wilson's treatment of Redding was abusive, and it was not reasonable for him to believe that the law permitted it."
Justice Clarence Thomas filed an opinion concurring in the judgment with respect to granting qualified immunity and dissenting with respect to the Fourth Amendment. Thomas would have held that the search did not violate the Fourth Amendment. All parties agreed that the school had "reasonable suspicion that Redding was in possession of drugs in violation of these policies," and whereas the majority believed this justified only the first search, Thomas concluded it "justified a search extending to any area where small pills could be concealed."Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 382 (Thomas, J., concurring in the judgment in part and dissenting in part). In his opinion, Thomas warned that the majority's decision could backfire: "Redding would not have been the first person to conceal pills in her undergarments.  Nor will she be the last after today's decision, which announces the safest place to secrete contraband in school."Redding, 557 U.S. 364, 390 (Thomas, J., concurring in the judgment in part and dissenting in part).
 Analysis 
Lewis R. Katz, a professor at Case Western Reserve University School of Law, and Carl J. Mazzone jointly wrote an analysis published by the Case Western Reserve Law Review, where they commented that T. L. O. had "opened the floodgates for school strip searches" because "some schools and lower courts stopped considering strip searches to be different in kind or more serious intrusions than other school searches of a student's possessions". Katz and Mazzone described the Court's decision in Redding as "a step in the right direction, clarifying T. L. O. and instructing that school strip searches are to be treated as extraordinary intrusions supported by individualized reasonable suspicion and subject to the proportionality standard".
 Effect on school administrators 
Dennis D. Parker, the Director of the ACLU Racial Justice Program, wrote an article published in the New York Law School Law Review, in which he commented that "the Redding majority elected not to provide unbridled discretion to school authorities in the name of establishing school safety, and by doing so, provided for a means of examining the reasonableness of individual decisions by school administrators". Parker added, "For the children seeking to escape the 'school-to-prison pipeline', a collection of policies that direct children out of the classroom and into the courthouse and the jail cell, the Redding decision is a first step in achieving positive educational outcomes."
In an analysis published by the Seton Hall Law Review, Timothy J. Petty stated that Redding had "clarified T. L. O. by adding two factors to the second prong, requiring that the item in question present a threat and that the school officials have a reasonable belief that the item is located in the student's undergarments". Petty concluded that "the application of these factors to the reasonableness requirement indicate that strip searches should rarely be found reasonable under the Fourth Amendment". Katz and Mazzone also commented on this clarification of T. L. O., stating that the Court had done so "by acknowledging that 'reasonable suspicion' is a sliding scale".
 Definition of a strip search 
Although they acknowledged Redding as a "step in the right direction", Katz and Mazzone stated that the Supreme Court "left unanswered some key questions regarding strip searches that will not only lead to uncertainty among both school administrators and lower courts but also guarantee future litigation". One such question posed by Katz and Mazzone was "what actually constitutes a strip search", arguing that the Court failed to provide a clear definition and suggesting that "the definition of a strip search necessarily differs between a boy and a girl". Additionally, Katz and Mazzone stated that "Redding, however, did not address the reasonableness of conducting a strip search when officials fail to find the object in the course of a less intrusive search". Strip searches, they acknowledged, "remain a tool available to schools" under the Court's decision.
The Harvard Journal of Law & Gender published a commentary by Laura Jarrett, who stated that "although the majority correctly found the strip search of Savana Redding excessively intrusive under the circumstances, one major aspect of the standard set forth in T. L. O. was neither fully explained nor applied by the Court in Redding—namely, the role sex plays in evaluating the legality of a strip search". According to Jarrett, "One is left to wonder if the Justices would have reached the same outcome if Savana had been a 13-year-old boy, because the majority does not provide any indication whether adolescent boys and girls are equally vulnerable to such intrusive searches". Jarrett commented that the Court's "failure to address in Redding the sex prong required under T. L. O. might leave the case open to potentially undesired interpretations in the future" and that this may "place school officials in a position to again receive immunity for such abuses of students' rights".
 Effect on qualified immunity 
In an article published in the Brigham Young University Journal of Public Law, Eric W. Clarke wrote that "a likely result of Safford is that school officials now have more protections than qualified immunity normally grants". However, Clarke stated that this is not necessarily inappropriate, arguing that school officials "should have a broader shield than other government actors because their principal role is not law enforcement but rather educating the youth", but adding that "courts should explicitly state that school officials are granted a higher protection from civil suit than other government officials", as this "could cause a slippery slope where other government officials asserting qualified immunity could be granted the additional protections of [school officials]".
Clarke commented that T. L. O. had granted teachers "near-absolute immunity" because "qualified immunity is based on a reasonable understanding of the law, and under T. L. O., school officials are not expected to have any understanding of the law". However, Clarke concluded that "Safford may change the rule" such that it "would solve the near-absolute-immunity problem, but would also be bad law because it would unrealistically expect school officials to remain abreast of Fourth Amendment law". According to Clarke, "It is now unclear how the new standard for school searches will affect qualified immunity. The best solution is to grant school officials absolute immunity regarding school searches." Katz and Mazzone, on the other hand, directly criticized the Court's decision to grant qualified immunity to the assistant principal as "misguided", stating that "Wilson's actions defied the common sense one would expect in an experienced administrator".
 Reception 
 Reactions 
After the decision was announced, Adam Liptak wrote an article published in The New York Times, in which he stated that the case "had attracted national attention and gave rise to an intense debate over how much leeway school officials should have in enforcing zero-tolerance policies for drugs and violence". According to Liptak, "Some parents were outraged by the intrusiveness of the search, while others worried about tying the hands of school officials charged with keeping their children safe." Savana Redding commented in an interview with Liptak that she was "'pretty excited'" by the Court's decision. "'It makes me feel good,' she said,  'that they recognized that it was against my rights and that it most likely won’t happen to anyone else.'" Redding had previously stated in an affidavit that "the strip search was the most humiliating experience I have ever had" and that "I held my head down so that they could not see that I was about to cry".
Matthew W. Wright, the lawyer that argued for the school district in the Supreme Court, "said that the decision 'offers little clarification' concerning when such searches are allowed and that it could have dangerous consequences". According to Wright, "The decision unduly limits 'the ability of school officials to protect students from the harmful effects of drugs and weapons on school campuses.'" Adam Wolf, the attorney for the American Civil Liberties Union who argued for Redding in the Supreme Court, praised the Court's decision, commenting, "When parents send their kids to school, they can now breathe a sigh of relief they will not end up naked before school officials." On the other hand, Francisco Negron, general counsel for the National School Boards Association, criticized the decision as lacking clarity, stating that "The home medicine cabinet now poses a serious threat to students, who may take those medications for abusive purposes. That's a problem schools are trying to stem. How they determine now whether the drug is dangerous, whether it's not dangerous – that kind of clarity and that kind of guidance, the court did not give us."
 Role of Justice Ginsburg 
thumb|Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg (photographed here circa 2006) was the only female member of the Supreme Court that decided Redding. Some journalists later described her role in the case as emphasizing the need for a more diverse Court.At the time the Supreme Court decided Redding, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg was the only female member of the Court. Liptak commented that the case had "revealed a gender fault line at the court", referring to an article published in USA Today, where journalist Joan Biskupic stated Ginsburg's "status as the court's lone woman was especially poignant" in the case of Redding. Biskupic recalled that at the oral argument for the case, Justice Stephen Breyer had said he "had a hard time understanding the girl's claim that her rights had been violated"; in response, "Ginsburg retorted that school officials had directed Redding 'to shake (her) bra out, to shake, shake, stretch the top of (her) pants.'"
In an interview with USA Today in May 2009, while a decision in the case was still pending, Ginsburg stated that her colleagues had "never been a 13-year-old girl" and that "It's a very sensitive age for a girl. I didn't think that my colleagues, some of them, quite understood." Ginsburg added: "Maybe a 13-year-old boy in a locker room doesn't have that same feeling about his body. But a girl who's just at the age where she is developing, whether she has developed a lot ... or ... has not developed at all (might be) embarrassed about that." Justice Sonia Sotomayor, who joined the Court in August 2009, has also pointed to the case as emphasizing the need for more diversity on the Supreme Court. 
In September 2020, following Ginsburg's death, Valerie Strauss wrote an article published in The Washington Post, which described the Redding case as serving "to underscore the humanity with which [Justice Ginsburg] approached her decisions and why many court watchers say it is so important for the Supreme Court to include a diverse group of justices with different experiences and points of view".
See also
 Vernonia School District 47J v. Acton (1995)
 Board of Education v. Earls (2002)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 557
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
Footnotes
References
 References
 Sources
 Safford Unified School District v. Redding, 557 U.S. 364 (2009)
External links
 SCOTUSblog (briefs, documents, and analysis)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:Education in Safford, Arizona
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:History of Graham County, Arizona
Category:2009 in education
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Student rights case law in the United States
Category:United States children's rights case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Strip search
"""

From "Saia v. New York" ==> """
Saia v. New York, , was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that an ordinance which prohibited the use of sound amplification devices except with permission of the Chief of Police was unconstitutional on its face because it established a prior restraint on the right of free speech in violation of the First Amendment..
 Facts of the case 
Saia, a minister of the Jehovah's Witnesses, obtained from the Lockport Chief of Police permission to use sound equipment mounted on his car to amplify lectures on religious subjects. The lectures were given at a fixed place in a public park on designated Sundays. When this permit expired, he applied for another one but was refused on the ground that complaints had been made. Saia nevertheless used his equipment as planned on four occasions, but without a permit. Fines and jail sentences were imposed, which were affirmed without opinion by the County Court for Niagara County and by the New York Court of Appeals.Saia, 334 U.S. at 559, citing New York Court of Appeals decision, 297 N.Y. 659, 76 N.E.2d 323.
 Prior history 
Saia was tried in Police Court for violations of the ordinance. It was undisputed that he used his equipment to amplify speeches in the park and that they were on religious subjects. Some witnesses testified that they were annoyed by the sound, though not by the content of the addresses; others were not disturbed by either. The court upheld the ordinance against the contention that it violated appellant's rights of freedom of speech, assembly, and worship under the Federal Constitution. Fines and jail sentences were imposed. His convictions were affirmed without opinion by the County Court for Niagara County and by the New York Court of Appeals, 297 N.Y. 659, 76 N.E.2d 323.
Decision of the Court
Justice Douglas delivered the opinion of the Court, writing:
We hold that 3 of this ordinance is unconstitutional on its face, for it establishes a previous restraint on the [334 U.S. 558, 560]    right of free speech in violation of the First Amendment which is protected by the Fourteenth Amendment against State action. To use a loud- speaker or amplifier one has to get a permit from the Chief of Police. There are no standards prescribed for the exercise of his discretion. The statute is not narrowly drawn to regulate the hours or places of use of loud-speakers, or the volume of sound (the decibels) to which they must be adjusted. The ordinance therefore has all the vices of the ones which we struck down in Cantwell v. Connecticut, 310 U.S. 296, 128 A.L.R. 1352; Lovell v. Griffin, 303 U.S. 444; and Hague v. C.I.O., 307 U.S. 496.Saia, 334 U.S. at 559-60
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 334
Sources
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Confrontation Clause case law
Category:1970 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:1948 in United States case law
Category:Niagara County, New York
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:1948 in religion
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
"""

From "Saint Francis College v. al-Khazraji" ==> """
Saint Francis College v. al-Khazraji, 481 U.S. 604 (1987), is a United States labor law case decided by the United States Supreme Court..
Facts
Al-Khazraji, a professor and U.S. citizen born in Iraq, filed suit against his former employer and its tenure committee for denying him tenure on the basis of his Arabian race in violation of 42 U.S.C. Section 1981. The District Court held that while Al-Kharzraji had properly alleged racial discrimination, the record was insufficient to determine whether he had been subjected to prejudice.
The question posed was "Does 42 U.S.C. Section 1981 apply to Arab minorities?"
Judgment
In response to this question the Court held that persons of Arabian ancestry were protected from racial discrimination under Section 1981. Writing for a unanimous Court, Justice White maintained that section 1981 encompassed discrimination even among Caucasians. Justice White noted that history did not support the claim that Arabs and other present-day "Caucasians" were considered to be a single race for the purposes of section 1981.
Justice Brennan, in a separate concurrence, said the following.
Significance
In the companion case, Shaare Tefila v. Cobb, a unanimous Court ruled that the Civil Rights Act of 1866 likewise applies to discrimination against Jews..
See also
 United States labor law
 Civil Rights Act of 1866
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 481
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court.
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States labor case law
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Sakraida v. Ag Pro Inc." ==> """
Sakraida v. Ag Pro Inc., 425 U.S. 273 (1976),.  was a unanimous 1976 Supreme Court decision holding a claimed invention obvious because it "simply arranges old elements with each performing the same function it had been known to perform, although perhaps producing a more striking result than in previous combinations."425 U.S, at 282.
Background
The patent in this case covered "a water flush system to remove cow manure from the floor of a dairy barn."425 U.S. at 274. The system was a combination of conventional, well-known elements, using flowing water to flush cow manure from a barn. "Systems using flowing water to clean animal wastes from barn floors have been familiar on dairy farms since ancient times."425 U.S. at 275. The Court cited the fifth labor of Hercules (cleaning the Augean stables) as an example.425 U.S. at 275 n.1. It was conceded that each element of the claimed combination was found in the prior art.425 U.S. at 275-77. "The only claimed inventive feature of the [patented] combination of old elements is the provision for abrupt release of the water from the tanks or pools directly onto the barn floor, which causes the flow of a sheet of water that washes all animal waste into drains within minutes and requires no supplemental hand labor."425 U.S. at 277.
Ruling of Supreme Court
thumb|right|150px|Justice Brennan
Speaking for a unanimous Court, Justice William J. Brennan held that the claimed invention was obvious under the standards set out in prior Supreme Court decisions. Not only were each of the claimed elements old and well known, but what the inventor said was "the essence of the patent, to-wit, the manure flush system, was old, various means for flushing manure from dairy barns having been used long before the filing of the application."425 U.S. at 280. Moreover, "there is no change in the respective functions of the elements of the combination; this particular use of the assembly of old elements would be obvious to any person skilled in the art of mechanical application."425 U.S. at 282.
The Court concluded that although "doubtless a matter of great convenience, producing a desired result in a cheaper and faster way, and enjoying commercial success," the claimed system "did not produce a new or different function" and therefore was not patentable.425 U.S. at 283.
Commentary
One commentator expressed extreme disappointment with this decision and the trend of Supreme Court patent decisions away from a hoped-for "brief exultant moment" of decisions favorable to patenting:
Sakraida coupled with the Black Rock decision, will send the conceptual clarity of inventors, lawyers, and judges, plummeting into the confusion that was earlier prevalent. Section 103 and the Trilogy, which for a brief exultant moment cleared away the debris produced by the preexisting case law, are again being grossly misinterpreted by a bar seemingly cemented into its pre-1952 habits. All persons involved should become more familiar with the fine distinctions produced in this area and recognize the intent of the United States Congress when its enacted Section 103 into law. If the courts, in particular the Supreme Court, do not have any "in house" expertise in the specialized areas of engineering, science, and chemistry, they should make use of the many experts available and receive full and knowledgeable explanations of any baffling intricacies.James F. Porcello, Sakraida v. Ag Pro, Inc.: Confusion between Invention and Nonobviousness, 6  111, 121 (1976).
Commentator Hal Wegner asserted that "the Federal Circuit sub silentio but clearly repudiated the Supreme Court’s
holding in Sakraida just seven years after it was decided,Harold C. Wegner, Federal Circuit Exclusive Appellate Patent Jurisdiction: A Response to Chief Judge Wood, 13  394, 399 (2014). in the Federal Circuit's decision in Stratoflex, Inc. v. Aeroquip Corp. In the same vein, a much used patent law casebook said in 2003 that "in its early decisions, the Federal Circuit essentially repudiated the holding[]" of Sakraida. 345 (2d ed. 2003).
Chris Cotropia maintained that in its 2007 decision in KSR International Co. v. Teleflex Inc.,. the Supreme Court "reaffirmed and further explained its holding[]" in Sakraida, while turning back the Federal Circuit's rejection and opposition to that precedent.Christopher A. Cotropia, Predictability and Nonobviousness in Patent Law After KSR, 20  391, 404 (2014).
References
External links
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1976 in United States case law
"""

From "Salazar v. Ramah Navajo Chapter" ==> """
Salazar v. Ramah Navajo Chapter, 567 U.S. 182 (2012), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the United States government, when it enters into a contract with a Native American Indian tribe for services, must pay contracts in full, even if Congress has not appropriated enough money to pay all tribal contractors. (hereafter cited as Ramah Navajo Chapter).  The case was litigated over a period of 22 years, beginning in 1990, until it was decided in 2012.
 Background 
thumb|left|350px|alt=map of Arizona & New Mexico showing locations of Indian Reservations|Location of Ramah Navajo Indian Reservation (Navajo reservations shown by orange color; green, red, and purple are Apache.)
The Ramah Navajo Chapter is a political subdivision of the Navajo tribe that resides on the Ramah Navajo Indian Reservation in the western part of New Mexico, just east and southeast of the Zuni Indian Reservation.  This is the eastern part of the Navajo Nation, which extends westward into Arizona and Utah.  The Navajo Nation is divided into five "Agencies" and further sub-divided into "Chapters", which are comparable with county governments.,  103 (2003).  The Navajo Nation has approximately 300,000 enrolled members.Bill Donovan, Census: Navajo Enrollment Tops 300,000, , Jul. 7, 2011.  The Ramah Chapter, due to its location, is the only Navajo Chapter with its own Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) agency and a semi-autonomous government., at 13; Kathryn D. Manuelito, A Dine (Navajo) Perspective on Self-Determination: An Exposition of an Egalitarian Place, , Spring-Summer 2006, at 7, 10.  "[T]he Ramah Navajos played a leadership role in defending indigenous self-determination efforts in the United States",Manuelito, at 13. beginning with the establishment of a reservation school over the protests of local non-Indians.Manuelito, at 10-13.
 Legislative background 
In 1975, Congress passed the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (IDEAA).Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act, ,  (codified at ); Mary Jensen, Contracts Formed under the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act Are as Binding as Any Other Government Agreements with a Contractor: Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma v. Leavitt,  (2005-2006).  IDEAA authorized the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Health and Human Services to contract with Native American tribes to take over services that had, in the past, been provided by the BIA and the Indian Health Service (IHS), among others.Ramah Navajo Chapter v. Lujan, 112 F.3d 1455, 1456 (10th Cir. 1997) (hereafter cited as RNC v. Lujan); Lloyd B. Miller, A Most Unusual Alliance: Indian Tribes and Military Contractors Vindicate First Principles in the Ramah Litigation  (2012).  The stated intent of IDEAA was to improve tribal self-determination in planning and managing federally funded programs for tribal members.Ramah Navajo Tribe v. Salazar, 644 F.3d 1054, 1058 (10th Cir. 2011) (hereafter cited as RNC v. Salazar); RNC v. Lujan, 112 F.3d at 1456-57; Miller,  at 48.  The Secretary of the Interior was responsible for administering these contracts out of monies appropriated by Congress.  The contracts required two parts, first the direct cost of the program being administered by the tribe, and second, indirect costs of administering the program, subject to funds being appropriated by Congress.Remah Navajo Chapter, 132 S.Ct at 2187; ,  16 (1999); Miller,  at 48.  When there were shortfalls in the amounts paid by BIA to the tribe, the agency would underpay the tribe for indirect costs, forcing the tribes to cut services to tribal members to pay the indirect costs.Miller,  at 48.
 Procedural history 
In 1989, the Ramah Navajo Chapter had five contracts with the BIA to administer programs relating to real estate, natural resources, law enforcement, the Aid to Tribal Government program, and water rights programs.Jensen,  at 413.  Additionally, the Chapter had two contracts with the State of New Mexico to administer a juvenile justice restitution program and a criminal justice program.  In determining the indirect costs to be reimbursed to the Chapter, the BIA used both the federal and state grants, which came to $336,317.65.  This was about $28,000 less than the amount that would be reimbursed using only the BIA grants.RNC v. Lujan, 112 F.3d at 1458-59.  The BIA used this method to artificially reduce the amount of indirect costs that it would have to pay to the tribes.  Due to the dispute over indirect costs, the Chapter filed a contract appeal with the BIA in 1990.RNC v. Lujan, 112 F.3d at 1459.  The BIA denied the appeal, noting even so that the Chapter was correct that including the state grants in the calculation was contrary to law.
 District court 
On October 4, 1990, the Chapter filed a lawsuit for breach of contract in the New Mexico Federal District Court.Remah Navajo Chapter, 132 S.Ct at 2188; RNC v. Lujan, 112 F.3d at 1459.  The suit asked for compensatory damages and injunctive relief, and for certification as a class action case.  In 1993, the district court granted the United States summary judgment and denied the Chapter's motion for summary judgment.  A final judgment was entered on October 19, 1994, and the Chapter appealed.
 Circuit court of appeals 
The appeal was heard by the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals.  The circuit court held that the 1988 amendment to IDEAA was intended to correct the chronic underfunding of BIA and IHS contracts with tribes, especially in regards to indirect costs.RNC v. Lujan, 112 F.3d at 1457-58; ,  at 34-35.  The circuit court noted that normally, when dealing with an ambiguous federal statute, courts will defer to the administrative agency charged with implementing the statute.RNC v. Lujan, 112 F.3d at 1461; Scott C. Hall, The Indian Law Canons of Construction v. The Chevron Doctrine: Congressional Intent and the Umambiguous Answer to the Ambiguous Problem  (2004-2005).  Indian tribes are treated differently—the court noted that it has long been a principle of American jurisprudence that ambiguous statutes are to be construed in favor of the tribes.RNC v. Lujan, 112 F.3d at 1461; ,  (2007); Jensen,  at 413-14.  The circuit court ruled on May 8, 1997, that the government's interpretation of the statute was unreasonable, and reversed and remanded the case to the district court.Remah Navajo Chapter, 132 S.Ct at 2188; RNC v. Lujan, 112 F.3d at 1457-58; ,  at 20 n.5; Jensen,  at 413.
 District court on remand 
On remand, both the United States and the Chapter entered into settlement talks, eventually settling a portion of the claims.  On May 25, 1999, the district court entered a final judgment on the partial settlement, finding for the Chapter and the other tribes in the class for $79,903,529 on the partial claim, $8,338,000 in attorney's fees, and $170,036 in costs.Ramah Navajo Chapter v. Babbitt, 50 F. Supp. 2d 1091 (D.N.M. 1999) (hereafter cited as RNC v. Babbitt); Dean,  at 374.  On December 6, 2002, the district court entered a final judgement on most of the remaining issues, finding for the Chapter and the other tribes in the class for $29,000,000 on the claims, $5,800,000 in attorney's fees, and $243,496 in costs.Ramah Navajo Chapter v. Norton, 250 F. Supp. 2d 1303, 1317-18 (D.N.M. 2002) (hereafter cited as RNC v. Norton).  This narrowed the dispute to whether the plaintiff tribes could collect on the underpaid amounts and the way the statute was interpreted.  The district court granted summary judgment to the government, and the Chapter appealed.RNC v. Salazar, 644 F.3d at 1062.
 Circuit court, second appeal 
The circuit court noted that this was an issue on how the statute was to be interpreted.  First, the court noted that the statute required the Secretary of the Interior to add the full amount of indirect, contract support costs to the contract.RNC v. Salazar, 644 F.3d at 1058. Beginning in 1994, Congress began to cap the total amount of funds that could be used for IDEAA contracts.  This amount was insufficient to cover the contracts with all Indian tribes, but was sufficient to cover each individual contract that was entered into by BIA.  The court noted that when construing a statute dealing with Indian tribes, the statute is to be construed to the favor of the tribe over the more general canon requiring deference to agency determinations.  The court then held that since there were sufficient funds to pay each individual contract in full, the government was obligated to do so.  The circuit court reversed and remanded the decision of the district court, ruling in favor of the Chapter.RNC v. Salazar, 644 F.3d at 1077.
 Supreme Court 
The BIA appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States, which granted certiorari to hear the case in order to settle a circuit split.Salazar v. Ramah Navajo Chapter, 132 S.Ct. 995 (2012).
 Arguments of the parties 
 United States 
The United States was represented by Mark R. Freeman, Assistant to the Solicitor General.  Freeman argued that Congress had placed a cap on IDEAA contract funds beginning in 1994, and the BIA did not have the authority to spend more than the capped amount on all of the IDEAA contracts.Pet'r's Br. 7, available as 2012 WL 596117 (U.S.) (Appellate Brief); Miller,  at 49.  Due to the lack of sufficient funding, the Secretary of the Interior has distributed the available funds on a pro rata basis among all of the IDEAA contracts.  The United States also pointed out that the Constitution prohibits payments unless those payments have been appropriated or authorized by Congress. Art. I, § 9, cl. 7; Pet'r's Br. at 19.  Freeman argued that the government's liability does not extend past the amount of money that Congress has appropriated for all of the contracts.Pet'r's Br. at 30.  The government also stated that the contract did not create a binding promise to pay the tribes the full amount of the contract.Pet'r's Br. at 45.
 Ramah Chapter 
The Ramah Navajo Chapter was represented by Carter G. Phillips, who argued that this was a simple contract case to which the Ferris doctrine applied.  The Chapter contracted with the United States to perform a service and completed its obligations, and the United States breached the contract by refusing to pay according to the terms of the contract.Appellant's Br. 1-2, available as 2012 WL 957502 (U.S.) (Appellate Brief).  The statute, in addition to establishing that contract support costs were to be paid, also mandated the use of a model contract, reducing the BIA's ability to modify the terms of the contract.Appellant's Br. at 7.  To allow the government to breach would be bad public policy, where no contractor to the government could be assured of receiving payment.Appellant's Br. at 15-16.  Phillips noted that the statute was clear, and if it was not, the canons of statutory construction required that the ambiguity be resolved in the tribes favor.Appellant's Br. at 24.
 Amicus curiae 
Amicus curiae briefs were filed in support of the Chapter by the National Congress of American Indians (joined by the Coalition of Indian Tribes and Tribal Organizations), the Arctic Slope Native Association, and the Chamber of Commerce of the United States of America (joined by the National Defense Industrial Association).  No amicus briefs were filed in support of the United States.Salazar v. Ramah Navajo Chapter,  (last visited October 15, 2015).
 Opinion of the court 
thumb|left|250px|alt=photograph of Justice Sonia Sotomayor|Justice Sonia Sotomayor, author of the majority opinionJustice Sonia Sotomayor delivered the opinion of the Court.  Sotomayor first noted that this was not a case of first impression, and that the court had ruled on a similar issue only seven years previously.Ramah Navajo Chapter, 132 S.Ct. at 2188.  Sotomayor stated that Cherokee Nation of Okla. v. LeavittCherokee Nation of Okla. v. Leavitt, . held that when the government makes a contractual promise to pay in return for services, the government is bound to pay for those services.Ramah Navajo Chapter, 132 S.Ct. at 2188; Miller,  at 49.  This was a long-standing principle of contract law, dating back to Ferris, and the "principle safeguards both the expectations of Government contractors and the long-term fiscal interests of the United States."Ramah Navajo Chapter, 132 S.Ct. at 2189; Miller,  at 49.  If the appropriation exceeds the amount of the individual contract, then the government is bound to honor the contract.Ramah Navajo Chapter, 132 S.Ct. at 2190-91.  Sotomayor stated that although the situation that Congress placed the BIA in is frustrating, but it is an issue for Congress to resolve.Ramah Navajo Chapter, 132 S.Ct. at 2195.  The Court affirmed the decision of the Tenth Circuit Court.Debra Cassens Weiss, Supreme Court Supports Tribes in Reimbursement Dispute in Ruling with Unusual Lineup,  (online), Jun. 18, 2012; Rob Capriccioso, Supreme Court: Government Must Pay Tribal Contract Support Costs, , Jul. 19, 2012.  Justices Antonin Scalia, Anthony Kennedy, Clarence Thomas, and Elena Kagan joined Justice Sotomayor's opinion.Ramah Navajo Chapter, 132 S.Ct. at 2186, 2195.
 Dissent 
thumb|right|200px|alt=photograph of Chief Justice John Roberts|Chief Justice John Roberts, author of the dissentChief Justice of the United States John Roberts dissented from the majority opinion.  Roberts asserted that the Court's decision would cause the BIA to exceed the monetary limits for the IDEAA contracts, which were set by Congress under its appropriation authority.  In addition, Roberts noted that Congress expressly forbade the BIA from reducing payments to other tribes and programs to pay an IDEAA contract.Ramah Navajo Chapter, 132 S.Ct. at 2195-96 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting).  Roberts would have distinguished Cherokee Nation from this case because Cherokee Nation did not have a similar restriction on reducing other payments.Ramah Navajo Chapter, 132 S.Ct. at 2197 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting).  Consequently, Chief Justice Roberts wrote that he would have reversed the decision of the Tenth Circuit Court.Ramah Navajo Chapter, 132 S.Ct. at 2199 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting).  Roberts was joined in his dissent by Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen Breyer, and Samuel Alito.Ramah Navajo Chapter, 132 S.Ct. at 2195, 2199 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting).
 Subsequent developments 
Immediately after the decision was reached in the Supreme Court, tribes began to press the United States for payments.  The Principal Chief of the Cherokee Nation, Bill John Baker, met with U.S. President Barack Obama on July 20, 2012 to discuss the issue.Chase Cook, Cherokee Leaders Meet with President Obama, , Jul. 20, 2012. After several years of negotiations, the federal government agreed to pay $940,000,000 to settle the remaining claims in the lawsuit.Summary Notice of Final Settlement, Ramah Navajo Chapter v. Jewell, No. 1:90-CV-00957-JAP/KBM (D.N.M. 2015).
 Footnotes 
 References 
 External links 
Oral argument, Salazar v. Ramah Navajo Chapter, courtesy of Oyez.org
Opinion announcement, Salazar v. Ramah Navajo Chapter, courtesy of Oyez.org
Brief of the United States (petitioner), courtesy of the American Bar Association.
Brief of the Ramah Navajo Chapter (appellant), courtesy of the American Bar Association.
Category:2012 in United States case law
Category:United States contract case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:Navajo history
Category:Ramah Navajo Indian Reservation
"""

From "Sale v. Haitian Centers Council, Inc." ==> """
Sale v. Haitian Centers Council, 509 U.S. 155 (1993), is a case in which the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the President's executive order that all aliens intercepted on the high seas could be repatriated was not limited by the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 or Article 33 of the United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees.
Originally, the United States and the Haitian government made an agreement in 1981 to stop all vessels coming to the United States and return any undocumented aliens who were not refugees and would not be harmed upon return.
After a regime change in Haiti, American policy changed and was interpreted that all undocumented aliens would be sent back unless they landed and made an entry onto the territory of the United States.
The case came before the court on March 2, 1993, and was decided on June 21, 1993. The oral argument for the plaintiff was made by then Yale law professor Harold Koh (from 2009 to 2013, Koh was the Legal Adviser of the Department of State).
The 8–1 decision was delivered by Justice John Paul Stevens with Justice Harry Blackmun dissenting, and overturned a decision of the Second Circuit Court of Appeals.
Criticizing the majority decision in his dissent, Justice Blackmun wrote, "Today's majority ... decides that the forced repatriation of the Haitian refugees is perfectly legal, because the word "return" does not mean return, because the opposite of "within the United States" is not outside the United States, and because the official charged with controlling immigration has no role in enforcing an order to control immigration." (citations omitted)
A slightly different case with the name Haitian Centers Council v. Sale was argued and won by Koh's team of law students from Yale before Judge Sterling Johnson of the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York. Lead counsel was provided on a pro bono basis by Joe Tringali of Simpson Thacher & Bartlett. However, this decision was later vacated due to a negotiated settlement deal made by the Clinton Administration and Yale Law School. The full background and details of both cases are found in the book Storming the Court by Brandt Goldstein.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 509
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
Further reading
 'Storming the Court', Goldstein, Brandt, 2005 (Scribner, paperback) 
References
External links
URL for the current Haitian Centers Council Inc. Website.
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1993 in United States case law
Category:1993 in international relations
Category:Haiti–United States relations
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Salinas v. Railroad Retirement Board" ==> """
Salinas v. Railroad Retirement Board, 592 U.S. ___ (2021), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the court held that the United States Railroad Retirement Board choice to refuse to reopen the prior, adverse benefits determination of a former railroad worker was subject to judicial review.
Facts and procedural history
Manfredo M. Salinas was an employee of the Union Pacific Railroad for a fifteen-year period and was injured twice while working. In 1992, due to his injuries, Salinas began the process of seeking disability benefits provided under the Railroad Retirement Act of 1974. His application was denied three times, the final denial occurring in 2006. Salinas was granted benefits after a fourth application in 2013. After the board granted Salinas benefits, he appealed for reconsideration of the "amount and start date" of the benefits. 
This reconsideration was denied. In response, Salinas appealed, arguing that the final denied application should be reopened, as the Railroad Retirement Board had not been given access to pertinent medical records in 2006. A Board hearing officer determined that the 2006 application could not be reopened as the Board’s standard four-year window for reopening had closed. After this determination, Salinas asked the U.S. Court of Appeals to review the decision. The Fifth Circuit dismissed Salinas’ petition, citing lack of jurisdiction.
Supreme Court
In a 5–4 ruling, The Supreme Court reversed the Fifth Circuit's decision. The Supreme Court held that the Board's choice not to reopen the prior benefits review was subject to judicial review.
References
 External links 
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Salman v. United States" ==> """
Salman v. United States, 580 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that gifts of confidential information without any compensation to relatives for the purposes of insider trading are a violation of securities laws. The Court relied on its decision in , which held that "that a tippee is exposed to liability for trading on inside information only if the tippee participates in a breach of the tipper's fiduciary duty."Salman v. United States, No. 15–628, 580 U.S. ____ (2016).
Background
A jury convicted Bassam Yacoub Salman of securities fraud and U.S. District Judge Edward M. Chen then denied Salman's motion for a new trial.  On July 6, 2015, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed the conviction, in which Judge Jed S. Rakoff was joined by Judges Morgan Christen and Paul J. Watford.United States v. Salman, 792 F.3d 1087 (9th Cir. 2015).
On October 5, 2016, oral arguments were heard, where Deputy Solicitor General Michael Dreeben appeared for the government.
 Opinion of the Court 
On December 6, 2016, the Supreme Court delivered judgment in favor of the government, voting unanimously to affirm the lower court. Justice Samuel Alito authored the opinion of the Court.The Supreme Court, 2016 Term — Leading Cases, 131 Harv. L. Rev. 383 (2017).
 References 
 Further reading 
External links
 SCOTUSblog coverage
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:United States securities case law
Category:Insider trading
"""

From "Samantar v. Yousuf" ==> """
Samantar v. Yousuf, 560 U.S. 305 (2010), is a decision by the United States Supreme Court concerning whether Muhammad Ali Samatar, prime minister of Somalia (during the dictatorship of Siad Barre) from 1987 to 1990, could be sued in United States courts for allegedly overseeing killings and other atrocities. Samatar then lived in Virginia, and some of his victims had sued him under the Torture Victim Protection Act of 1991.
In a previous decision, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit held that the former Somalian government official is not covered by, and therefore not entitled to immunity under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act. The Court remanded to District Court to determine whether defendant is entitled to common law immunity.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 560
Jones v. Ministry of Interior for the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (comparable 2006 decision of the House of Lords)
References
Further reading
.
.
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:Foreign Sovereign Immunity Act case law
Category:Somalia–United States relations
"""

From "Samson v. California" ==> """
Samson v. California, 547 U.S. 843 (2006), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court affirmed the California Court of Appeal's ruling that suspicionless searches of parolees are lawful under California law and that the search in this case was reasonable under the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution because it was not arbitrary, capricious, or harassing..The Supreme Court, 2005 Term — Leading Cases, 120 Harv. L. Rev. 183 (2006).
This case answered in the affirmative a variation of the question the Court left open in United States v. Knights, 534 U.S. 112, 120 n.6 (2001), "whether a condition of release can so diminish or eliminate a released prisoner's reasonable expectation of privacy that a suspicionless search by a law enforcement officer would not offend the Fourth Amendment."
 Background 
 Police search 
In the afternoon of September 6, 2002, San Bruno Police Officer Alex Rohleder observed "two adults and a little baby walking down the street."  One of the adults, whom Rohleder recognized "from a prior contact" was the defendant in the case, Donald Curtis Samson. Rohleder knew that Samson was on parole and had heard from other officers that Samson "might have a parolee at large warrant." Rohleder then parked his police vehicle and approached Samson and "made contact" with him.
When Rohleder asked Samson if he had a warrant, Samson replied that he did not and "was in good standing with his parole agent." Rohleder confirmed over his police radio that Samson was not subject to a parole warrant, but was on parole for a prior parole violation. Rohleder conducted a search of Samson due to his status as a parolee. One of Samson's conditions of parole stated that he had agreed to "search and seizure by a parole officer or other peace officer at any time of the night or day, with or without a search warrant or with or without cause." This condition is required by California Penal Code Section 3067.(a).
Rohleder found a cigarette box in Samson's left breast pocket that held a plastic baggie containing methamphetamine. Samson was arrested and later charged with violating California Health and Safety Code Ann. §11377(a), for possessing the methamphetamine.
State court trial and appeal
At trial, Samson moved to suppress the methamphetamine evidence, which was denied by the trial court. The court found that Cal. Penal Code Ann. §3067(a) authorized the search and that the search was not "arbitrary or capricious." The jury convicted Samson and the trial court sentenced him to seven years in prison. 
Samson appealed his conviction on the grounds the trial court improperly admitted the evidence from the search. The California Court of Appeal affirmed the trial court's ruling, relying on People v. Reyes, 19 Cal. 4th 743, 968 P. 2d 445 (1998), in which the court held that: suspicionless searches of parolees are lawful under California law; that " '[s]uch a search is reasonable within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment as long as it is not arbitrary, capricious or harassing' "; and that the search in this case was not arbitrary, capricious, or harassing.
References
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:2006 in United States case law
"""

From "Samuels v. McCurdy" ==> """
Samuels v. McCurdy, 267 U.S. 188 (1925), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding the application of ex post facto in the case where an object was legally purchased and possessed, but was then later banned by statute.  
 Background 
In 1917, Georgia's prohibition law became effective prior to federal prohibition with the Eighteenth Amendment. Sig Samuels legally purchased alcohol for personal use prior to the ban which the DeKalb County Sheriff seized with a valid search warrant after the law became effective.. Samuels sued for a return of his property for violating his due process. He also claimed the law was being applied in an ex post facto fashion because consumption per se was not forbidden by Georgia's law.
 Opinion of the Court 
The court found that ex post facto does not apply, because possession is an ongoing condition.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 267
References
External links
Category:1925 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:Legal history of Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:United States ex post facto case law
Category:Prohibition in the United States
Category:United States due process case law
Category:DeKalb County, Georgia
Category:United States Eighteenth Amendment case law
"""

From "San Antonio Independent School District v. Rodriguez" ==> """
San Antonio Independent School District v. Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1 (1973), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that San Antonio Independent School District's financing system, which was based on local property taxes, was not a violation of the Fourteenth Amendment's equal protection clause.San Antonio Indep. Sch. Dist. v. Rodriguez, .
The majority opinion, reversing the District Court, stated that the appellees did not sufficiently prove a textual basis, within the U.S. Constitution, supporting the principle that education is a fundamental right. Urging that the school financing system led to wealth-based discrimination, the plaintiffs had argued that the fundamental right to education should be applied to the States, through the Fourteenth Amendment. The Court found that there was no such fundamental right and that the unequal school financing system was not subject to strict scrutiny.
Background
The lawsuit was brought by members of the Edgewood Concerned Parent Association representing their children and similarly situated students. The suit was filed on June 30, 1968, in the District Court for the Western District of Texas. In the initial complaint, the parents sued San Antonio ISD, Alamo Heights ISD, and five other school districts; the Bexar County School Trustees; and the State of Texas. They contended that the "Texas method of school financing violated the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U. S. Constitution." The lawsuit alleged that education was a fundamental right and that wealth-based discrimination in the provision of education (such as a fundamental right), created in the poor, or those of lesser wealth, a constitutionally suspect class, who were to be protected from the discrimination.
Eventually, the school districts were dropped from the case, leaving only the State of Texas as the defendant. The case advanced through the courts system, providing victory to the Edgewood parents until it reached the Supreme Court in 1972.
The school districts in the San Antonio area, and generally in Texas, had a long history of financial inequity. Rodriguez presented evidence that school districts in the wealthy, primarily white, areas of town, most notably the north-side Alamo Heights Independent School District, were able to contribute a much higher amount per child than Edgewood, a poor, minority area.
From the trial brief, Dr. Jose Cardenas, Superintendent of Schools, Edgewood Independent School District testified to the problem in his affidavit, the following information:
Edgewood is a poor district with a low tax base. As a result, its ad valorem tax revenue falls far short of the monies available in other Bexar County school districts. With this inequitable financing of its schools, Edgewood cannot hire sufficient qualified personnel, nor provide the physical facilities, library books, equipment, and supplies afforded by other Bexar County Districts.
To illustrate, the Edgewood residents are making a high tax effort, have burdened themselves with one of the highest proportion of bonded indebtedness in the county to pay for capital improvements and, never, in the history of the district have they failed to approve a bond issue.
Cardenas cites a study, "A Tale of Two Districts," which makes the following comparisons in 1967-68 between Edgewood and the North East Independent School District:
Classroom space: North East had  per student; Edgewood had  per student
Library books: North East had 9.42 books per student; Edgewood had 3.9 books per student
Teacher/Pupil Ratio: North East's ratio was 1/19; Edgewood's was 1/28
Counselor/Pupil Ratio: North East's was 1/1,553 children; Edgewood's was 1/5,672 (the nearby Alamo Heights district had a 1/1,319 ratio)
Dropout rate, secondary students: North East's rate was 8%; Edgewood's was 32%
In fact, the financial disparity between Edgewood and Alamo Heights increased in the four years that it took for Rodriguez to work its way through the court system "from a $310 total per-pupil disparity in 1968 in state and local support between the districts to a $389 disparity in 1972."
Decision
In the Supreme Court, a new group of justices had been appointed since the filing of the case. The most significant new member was Justice Lewis Powell, who proved to be the swing vote in the Rodriguez case. Powell led the narrow majority in deciding that the right to be educated (as a child of school age or an uneducated adult), was neither 'explicitly or implicitly' textually found anywhere in the U.S. Constitution. It was therefore, not anywhere protected by the Constitution.
He also found that Texas had not created a suspect class related to poverty. The two findings allowed the state to continue its school financing plan as long as it was "rationally related to a legitimate state interest."
Dissent
Justices Brennan, Douglas, White, and Marshall dissented. In his dissent, Justice Marshall argued that in cases involving unenumerated rights, the Court's "task...should be to determine the extent to which constitutionally guaranteed rights are dependent on interests not mentioned in the Constitution," and "[a]s the nexus between the specific constitutional guarantee and the nonconstitutional interest draws closer, the nonconstitutional interest becomes more fundamental and the degree of judicial scrutiny applied when the interest is infringed on a discriminatory basis must be adjusted accordingly."411 U.S. at 102-03 (Marshall, J., dissenting).
Reaction and aftermath
In a 2015 TIME interview of over 50 legal scholars, University of California, Berkeley Law School Dean Erwin Chemerinsky and Cornell Law Professor Steven Shiffrin both named Rodriguez the "worst Supreme Court decision since 1960," with Chemerinsky noting that the decision has "played a major role in creating the separate and unequal schools that exist today."
Partially in response to the Court's ruling in Rodriguez, Justice William Brennan wrote an article in the Harvard Law Review urging lawyers and litigants to turn to their State Supreme Courts — rather than the U.S. Supreme Court — to litigate their constitutional claims, as the conservative Burger Court would likely be unreceptive to claims made by racial minorities, the poor, or other "politically powerless groups whose members have historically been subjected to purposeful discrimination."William J. Brennan, State Constitutions and the Protection of Individual Rights, 90 Harv. L. Rev. 489, 491 (1977). Since Brennan's article was published, a number of State Supreme Courts have held that substantially unequal public school funding violates their State Constitutions.
In April 2020 a three judge panel of the United States Sixth District Court of Appeals voted 2–1 in Gary B. v. Whitmer to recognize that children have a US constitutional right to basic literacy education.  The panel decision distinguished San Antonio Independent School District v. Rodriguez, which did not address the fundamental right to basic education.  After an appeal for an en banc review, the case was settled and the panel's precedential decision vacated.    
See also
Abbott District, a legal doctrine in New Jersey state constitutional law resulting from a series of cases holding that the education of children in certain poor, urban communities was unconstitutionally inadequate.
Edgewood Independent School District v. Kirby, a 1993 Texas decision recognizing that unequal funding of public school districts violated the Texas State Constitution. 
Roosevelt Elementary School Dist. v. Bishop,179 Ariz. 233, 877 P.2d 806 (1994). a 1994 Arizona Supreme Court decision holding that substantially unequal school funding violates the Arizona Constitution. 
Serrano v. Priest, a post-Rodriguez decision in which California courts found that the method of funding schools violated the California Constitution's equal protection clause.
Gannon v. State,306 Kan. 1170, 402 P.3d 513 (2017). a 2017 Kansas Supreme Court decision ruling that Kansas' school-funding framework violates the Kansas Constitution. 
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 411
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States education case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:History of Latino civil rights
Category:Economic inequality in the United States
Category:Social inequality
Category:Taxation and redistribution
Category:1973 in United States case law
Category:1973 in education
"""

From "San Diego Building Trades Council v. Garmon" ==> """
San Diego Building Trades Council v. Garmon, 359 U.S. 236 (1959), is a US labor law case, concerning the scope of federal preemption against state law for labor rights..
 Background 
Garmon had a business selling lumber in California. The San Diego Building Trades Council was a labor union that wanted Garmon only to hire workers who were union members, or applied to join the union within 30 days of beginning a job. Garmon refused, the union sent peaceful pickets to persuade customers and suppliers to stop dealing with Garmon. Garmon claimed that state law applied to grant damages against the Building Trades Council for picketing his business, and federal law did not apply. 
The Superior Court for the County of San Diego found that the union had acted unlawfully under state law, and enjoined the union from picketing until they had won an election and become a collective bargaining agent, awarding $1000 in damages. The NLRB declined jurisdiction for a representation hearing, "presumably because the amount of interstate commerce involved did not meet the Board's monetary standards in taking jurisdiction." The California Supreme Court held, because the NLRB declined jurisdiction, California courts had power over the dispute and the union committed an unfair labor practice under § 8(b)(2) of the National Labor Relations Act of 1935. The US Supreme Court then decided in Guss v. Utah Labor Relations Board,. that the refusal of the National Labor Relations Board to assert jurisdiction did not mean the states had power, and vacated the judgment of the California court. The California court set aside the injunction, but still granted an award of damages.Garmon v. San Diego Bldg. Trades Council, 49 Cal.2d 595, 320 P.2d 473 (three judges dissenting). It said this was based on tort for unfair labor practices under the Civil Code.California Civil Code, §§ 1667, 1708 The case was granted certiorari again to decide if the California court had jurisdiction to award damages arising out of peaceful union activity which it could not enjoin.
Judgment
The Supreme Court held that the California Supreme Court was not entitled to award remedies against a union for picketing, because if "an activity is arguably subject to §7 or §8 of the Act, the States as well as the federal courts must defer to the exclusive competence of the National Labor Relations Board". This was true, even though the NLRB had not given any ruling on the dispute "because the amount of interstate commerce involved did not meet the Board's monetary standards in taking jurisdiction..."
Frankfurter J gave the court's judgment.
See also
United States labor law
 References 
External links
Category:United States labor case law
Category:1959 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "San Francisco Arts & Athletics, Inc. v. United States Olympic Committee" ==> """
San Francisco Arts & Athletics, Inc. v. United States Olympic Committee, 483 U.S. 522 (1987), is a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States interpreting the trademark rights of the United States Olympic Committee (USOC) to regulate the use of the word "Olympic" under the Amateur Sports Act of 1978. San Francisco Arts & Athletics, Inc. (SFAA) attempted to organize a sporting events it called the Gay Olympic Games, and the USOC sought to enjoin the games under that name. SFAA claimed that the First Amendment overrode the rights that the Act gave the USOC to control the word Olympic.
The Supreme Court rejected SFAA's First Amendment claim,.  and the SFAA renamed its event the Gay Games.
Background
Historically, both the Olympic movement as well as the United States' participation evolved without government participation, with the Amateur Athletic Union (AAU) coordinating the United States teams.  However, the AAU was criticized for its actions. The AAU had adopted arbitrary rules which prohibited women from participating in running events and prohibited any runner who had raced in the same event as a runner with a shoe-company sponsorship. Congress adopted the Act in response to criticisms of the AAU, effectively removing that organization from any governance role. Accordingly, the United States Congress chartered a United States Olympic Committee and gave it exclusive rights to coordinate United States participation in international competitions.    In addition, the Amateur Sports Act provided:(a)  Exclusive Right of Corporation.— Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, the corporation has the exclusive right to use— ... 
(4) the words "Olympic", "Olympiad", "Citius Altius Fortius", "Paralympic", "Paralympiad", "Pan-American", "America Espirito Sport Fraternite", or any combination of those words.36 U.S.C. § 220506(a)(4).
SFAA is a non-profit organization that sought to organize the "Gay Olympic Games" patterned after the Olympic Games.  There were numerous other organizations that used "Olympics" in their name, including the Junior Olympics, Special Olympics, Eskimo Olympics, and the Olympics of the Mind.
SFAA used "Gay Olympics" on its letterheads and mailings, in local newspapers, and on various merchandise sold to cover the costs of the planned Games.483 U.S. at 525.  The USOC asked SFAA to stop using the word "Olympics" to name its games, and SFAA refused.483 U.S. at 527.
Event organizers were sued by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) under the U.S. Amateur Sports Act of 1978, which gave the USOC exclusive rights to the word Olympic in the United States. Defendants of the lawsuit contended that the law was capriciously applied and that if the Special Olympics were not similarly prohibited, the Gay Olympics should not be either.
Others, like Daniel Bell, cite the IOC's long history of protecting the Olympics brand as evidence that the lawsuit against the "Gay Olympics" was not motivated by discrimination against gays. Since 1910 the IOC has taken action, including lawsuits and expulsion from the IOC, to stop certain organizations from using the word "Olympics."  Annual "California Police Olympics" were held for 22 years, from 1967 through 1989, after which, the word Olympics was no longer used for the event. The Supreme Court ruled for the USOC in San Francisco Arts & Athletics, Inc. v. United States Olympic Committee.
Proceedings below
In August 1982, the USOC sued SFAA in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California to enjoin the SFAA's use of the word "Olympic". The District Court granted a temporary restraining order and then a preliminary injunction against SFAA shortly before the scheduled date of the first "Gay Olympics". The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed the District Court. After further proceedings, the District Court granted the USOC summary judgment and a permanent injunction as well as ordered SFAA to pay the USOC's attorneys fees.
The Ninth Circuit affirmed the judgment of the District Court, but reversed the attorneys fee award, in a January 1986 ruling. It found that the Act granted the USOC exclusive use of the word "Olympic" without requiring the USOC to prove that the unauthorized use was confusing and without regard to the defenses available to an entity sued for a trademark violation under the Lanham Act. It did not reach the SFAA's contention that the USOC enforced its rights in a discriminatory manner (which it termed a "difficult issue") because the court found that the USOC is not a state actor bound by the constraints of the Constitution. The court also found that the USOC's "property righ[t] [in the word 'Olympic' and its associated symbols and slogans] can be protected without violating the First Amendment."781 F.2d at 737.
In April 1986, the Ninth Circuit denied the SFAA's petition for rehearing en banc. Three judges strongly dissented with that decision, finding that the panel's interpretation of the Act raised serious First Amendment issues.483 U.S. at 527–28.  The SFAA appealed the case to the U.S. Supreme Court in August 1986.
The arguments
The Supreme Court granted certiorari;479 U.S. 913 (1986) it was the first explicitly homosexual rights case to be heard before the Court since 1967 in the pre-Stonewall era (although the Bowers v. Hardwick sodomy laws case had been heard the year before).  The SFAA was represented before the court by openly gay San Francisco attorney Mary C. Dunlap. It was also represented by the American Civil Liberties Union.  The USOC was represented by well-known Washington trial lawyer Edward Bennett Williams.
During the March 24, 1987, oral arguments, the SFAA said it was denied use of the word "Olympic" due to its being a gay organization, and that the USOC as an agent of the U.S. government could not do so.  Dunlap felt that she was likely to lose the case going in, a pessimism that increased when her planned line of argument was derailed by questioning from the bench.
The decision
The opinion of the Court was delivered by Justice Lewis F. Powell, joined by Justices William Rehnquist, John Paul Stevens and Antonin Scalia. Justices Harry Blackmun and Sandra Day O'Connor joined in Parts I, II, and III of the opinion. Justice O'Connor joined by Justice Blackmun filed an opinion concurring and dissenting in part. Justice William J. Brennan filed a dissenting opinion joined by Justice Thurgood Marshall.
In the 7–2 parts, the Court rejected arguments that the USOC's Congressionally-authorized legal rights over use of the word "Olympic" constituted a First Amendment violation.  The Court additionally rejected the notion that the SFAA possessed a constitutional right to use the word "Olympics" as a verbal vehicle for portraying their view about the state of gays in America.
In the 5–4 portion, the Court denied that the USOC had violated SFAA's right to equal protection under the laws via a discriminatory ban, vis à vis there having been many other groups staging games of various kinds under the moniker "Olympic".
As a defense, SFAA had claimed that an injunction was unwarranted because there was no likelihood of confusion between the Gay Olympics and the real Olympic Games. In response, the opinion found, the "legislative history demonstrates that Congress intended to provide the USOC with exclusive control of the use of the word 'Olympic' without regard to whether an unauthorized use of the word tends to cause confusion."483 U.S. at 530. In general, the opinion found that the defenses that are normally available in Lanham Act cases do not apply to the trademarks protected by the Amateur Sports Act. The majority argued that the USOC and the Olympic movement had devoted considerable effort over time to build up the reputation of the Olympics that SFAA was trying to use.483 U.S. at 534. In rejecting SFAA's First Amendment claim because prohibiting the use of the "Olympics" did not prevent SFAA from conveying its message, the Court noted that SFAA was able to conduct its game under a different name.483 U.S. at 536.
The dissent
Justice O'Connor joined by Justice Blackmun filed an opinion concurring and dissenting in part. They had joined the first three parts of the majority opinion but dissented from Part IV that dealt with SFAA's claim that the injunction violated the Fifth Amendment because the USOC allowed other events to use the word "Olympics" but refused SFAA because the athletes were gay.  The majority found that the government did not control how the USOC enforced its trademark rights and that the Fifth Amendment did not apply.483 U.S. at 544. However, O'Connor and Blackmun agreed with Brennan on the equal protection claim based on the Fifth Amendment.483 U.S. at 548 (O'Connor, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).
Justice Brennan filed a dissenting opinion joined by Justice Marshall. The dissent argues that "The USOC performs a distinctive, traditional governmental function: it represents this Nation to the world community."483 U.S. at 550 (Brennan, J., dissenting). The dissent also argued that the government forced the USOC to boycott the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow was further evidence of the USOC being a state actor.483 U.S. at 552.
The dissent also finds the trademark provision of the Act overly broad. "The statute is overbroad on its face, because it is susceptible of application to a substantial amount of noncommercial speech, and vests the USOC with unguided discretion to approve and disapprove others' noncommercial use of 'Olympic'."483 U.S. at 561. The dissent views the injunction as violating SFAA's First Amendment rights. The dissent noted, "Here, the SFAA intended, by use of the word 'Olympic', to promote a realistic image of homosexual men and women that would help them move into the mainstream of their communities." Preventing the SFAA from calling its games the "Gay Olympics" prevents the SFAA from expressing this idea.483 U.S. at 569. The dissent also argued that the Act regulated speech in a manner that was not content neutral. The Act allows the USOC to endorse particular non-commercial messages while prohibiting others.483 U.S. at 570. Accordingly, the dissent would have found for SFAA.
Aftermath
thumb|250px|U.S. Olympic Committee headquarters in Colorado Springs, Colorado.
A lawyer representing the SFAA rued the ruling, noting that "Olympics" had been applied to contests involving rats and cockroaches and saying, "I guess the moral is that if you're gay, in the next life you'd better be born a rat if you want to use the word 'Olympic'."
Based upon the earlier injunction, the SFAA had renamed its project, redoing its posters, literature, and T-shirts, and conducted the first Gay Games in San Francisco from August 28 to September 2, 1982. It drew 1,300 people from 12 countries.  Gay Games II had taken place in August 1986, and indeed among the 3,500 athletes participating in it was SFAA attorney Dunlap, a goalkeeper. 
Former U.S. Olympian Tom Waddell, who was the founder of the Gay Games, died of AIDS complications on July 11, 1987, a few months after the Supreme Court decision.
The Gay Games retains many similarities with the Olympics, including the Gay Games flame which is lit at the opening ceremony. The USOC issued "Guidelines for Using Olympic Symbols, Marks, and Terminology". 
Although the Gay Games have been conducted in many countries since 1982, they have not tried to use the word "Olympics" in those other countries.  This is consistent with the existence of special trademark laws in countries other than the United States that also give special protection to the Olympic movement.For example, in Australia, Olympic Insignia Protection Act 1987 amended by the Olympic Insignia Protection Amendment Act 1994.
In the years since the lawsuit, the Olympics and the Gay Games have set aside their initial hostilities and worked cooperatively together, successfully lobbying to have HIV travel restrictions waived for the 1994 Gay Games in New York and the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta.
A 2009 documentary film called Claiming the Title: Gay Olympics on Trial was created in the United States and was previewed at several film festivals. The subject was also included in a 2005 film by David Sector, called Take the Flame! Gay Games: Grace Grit & Glory.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 483
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
Further reading
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States trademark case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:Gay Games
Category:United States Olympic Committee
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Sanchez v. Mayorkas" ==> """
Sanchez v. Mayorkas, 593 U.S. ___ (2021), was a United States Supreme Court case dealing with the ability for immigrants legally residing under temporary protected status to apply for permanent resident status through a green card. In a unanimous decision, the Court ruled in June 2021 that for immigrants who had entered the U.S. unlawfully, simply having temporary protected status did not make them eligible to apply for permanent resident status.
Background
With the Immigration Act of 1990 and other laws passed since then, Congress gave the United States Attorney General authority to designate temporary protected status (TPS) for immigrants, regardless of how they arrived in the U.S., from countries where they would unable to return safely due situations to such as warfare or environmental disasters, as a humanitarian effort. One's TPS status remains active as long as the country is maintained on the Attorney General's list. As of 2021, about 400,000 immigrants have TPS status.
Jose Sanchez and Sonia Gonzales unlawfully entered the U.S. from El Salvador in 1997 and 1998, respectively. Following the January and February 2001 earthquakes in their native country, the couple applied for and received TPS. They continued to live in the U.S. in New Jersey, raising a family of four, with their youngest becoming a U.S. citizen. In 2014, the couple opted to apply for their green cards to become permanent residents. Citizenship and Immigration Services denied their application, stating that as the couple did not enter the country lawfully, they could not apply for permanent status.
The couple appealed this ruling to the United States District Court for the District of New Jersey. In 2018, the judge ruled for the couple, stating that the virtue of gaining TPS meant the couple was "maintaining lawful status" as immigrants and thus could qualify for permanent residence. The government appealed to the Third Circuit, which reversed the District Court's decision. There, the Third Circuit said that the TPS does not "constitute an admission" of legal immigration status.
Supreme Court
The couple petitioned to the Supreme Court to review the Third Circuit's decision. The Court certified the case in January 2021, and held oral arguments on April 19, 2021.
The Court issued its unanimous decision on June 7, 2021, upholding the Third Circuit's ruling. Justice Elena Kagan wrote the opinion, denoting that the relevant immigration laws worked on two tracks. One track, applying for permanent resident status, "imposes an admission requirement twice over", as described by Kagan, requiring both inspection and admission into the U.S., and application pursuant this lawful admission. The other separate track is related to TPS, which Kagan wrote "That status protects them from removal and authorizes them to work here for as long as the T.P.S. designation lasts." Kagan wrote that the two tracks may meet if the immigrant entered the country lawfully, but this was distinctly different from lawful status to remain in the country: "Lawful status and admission, as the court below recognized are distinct concepts in immigration law: Establishing one does not necessarily establish the other."
References
 External links 
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
"""

From "Sanchez-Llamas v. Oregon" ==> """
Sanchez-Llamas v. Oregon, 548 U.S. 331 (2006), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that a state court did not have to exclude evidence that was admitted into court in violation of Article 36 of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations.
 Background 
Moises Sanchez-Llamas, a national of Mexico, was convicted of attempted murder in Oregon after engaging police in an armed confrontation.  Mario Bustillo, a national of Honduras, was convicted of murder in Virginia for beating a man to death with a baseball bat. Neither man had his consulate informed of the charges against him, as is required by Article 36 of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations.
Both Sanchez-Llamas and Bustillo filed state habeas petitions in their respective cases arguing that their right to consular notification had been violated. In both Oregon and Virginia, the courts ruled that because the claims were not argued at the trial court level they were procedurally barred. The supreme courts of Oregon and Virginia both upheld the states' procedural bars. The two cases were then consolidated and argued before the United States Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
In an opinion by Chief Justice John Roberts, the Court held that states could admit evidence against defendants even if the evidence was obtained in violation of the Vienna Convention.The Supreme Court, 2005 Term — Leading Cases, 120 Harv. L. Rev. 303 (2006).  The Court reasoned that the exclusionary rule is idiosyncratic to American jurisprudence and so could not have been in contemplation by other nation-states when they ratified the Vienna Convention.
The Court also held that Article 36 claims not timely brought could be procedurally barred by state procedural default rules.
However, the Supreme Court was unwilling to rule whether or not Article 36 created individual rights that had to be honored in state criminal proceedings.
 See also 
 Breard v. Greene (1998)
 Medellin v. Texas (2008)
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2006 in United States case law
"""

From "Sandstrom v. Montana" ==> """
Sandstrom v. Montana, 442 U.S. 510 (1979), is a United States Supreme Court case that reaffirmed the prosecution's burden of proof of the mental element of a crime by striking down a jury instruction that "the law presumes that a person intends the ordinary consequences of his voluntary acts".Criminal Law Cases and Materials, Seventh Edition, 2012; John Kaplan, Robert Weisberg, Guyora Binder In Francis v. Franklin,  471 U.S. 307 (1985), Justice Brennan wrote about "Sandstrom and the wellspring due process principal from which it is drawn" as follows: 
References
External links
Category:1979 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific Railroad Co." ==> """
Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific Railroad Company, 118 U.S. 394 (1886), is a corporate law case of the United States Supreme Court concerning taxation of railroad properties. The case is most notable for a headnote stating that the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment grants constitutional protections to corporations.
The case arose when several railroads refused to follow a California state law that gave less favorable tax treatment to some assets owned by corporations as compared to assets owned by individuals. The Court's opinions in earlier cases such as Dartmouth College v. Woodward had recognized that corporations were entitled to some of the protections of the Constitution. Associate Justice John Marshall Harlan's majority opinion held for the railroads, but his opinion did not address the Equal Protection Clause. However, a headnote written by the Reporter of Decisions and approved by Chief Justice Morrison Waite stated that the Supreme Court justices unanimously believed that the Equal Protection Clause did grant constitutional protections to corporations. The headnote marked the first occasion on which the Supreme Court indicated that the Equal Protection Clause granted constitutional protections to corporations as well as to natural persons. 
Facts
At the California Constitutional Convention of 1878–79, the state legislature drew up a new constitution that denied railroads "the right to deduct the amount of their debts [i.e., mortgages] from the taxable value of their property, a right which was given to individuals.". Southern Pacific Railroad Company refused to pay taxes under these new changes. The taxpaying railroads challenged this law, based on a conflicting federal statute of 1866 which gave them privileges inconsistent with state taxation (14 Stat. 292, §§ 1, 2, 3, 11, 18).
San Mateo County, along with neighboring counties, filed suit against the railroads to recoup the massive losses in tax revenue stemming from Southern Pacific's refusal to pay. After hearing arguments in San Mateo County v. Southern Pacific Railroad Company, the California Supreme Court sided with the county.
The Supreme Court of the United States issued an opinion consolidating three separate cases: Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific Railroad Company, California v. Central Pacific Railroad Company, and California v. Southern Pacific Railroad Company. 
Headnote
thumb|right|Bancroft Davis, the Reporter of Decisions and former president of Newburgh and New York Railway
The headnote, which is "not the work of the Court, but is simply the work of the Reporter, giving his understanding of the decision, prepared for the convenience of the profession",United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., , (Syllabus). was written by the Reporter of Decisions, former president of the Newburgh and New York Railway Company J.C. Bancroft Davis. He said the following:
One of the points made and discussed at length in the brief of counsel for defendants in error was that 'corporations are persons within the meaning of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States.' Before argument, Mr. Chief Justice Waite said: The court does not wish to hear argument on the question whether the provision in the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution, which forbids a State to deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws, applies to these corporations. We are all of the opinion that it does.According to the official court Syllabus in the United States Reports, Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific Railroad Company .
So the headnote was a reporting by the Reporter of Decisions of the Chief Justice's interpretation of the Justices' opinions. But the issue of applicability of "Equal Protection to any persons" to the railroads was not addressed in the decision of the Court in the case.
Before publication in United States Reports, Davis wrote a letter to Chief Justice Morrison Waite, dated May 26, 1886, to make sure his headnote was correct:
Dear Chief Justice,
I have a memorandum in the California Cases Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific &c
As follows. In opening the Court stated that it did not wish to hear argument on the question whether the Fourteenth Amendment applies to such corporations as are parties in these suits. All the Judges were of the opinion that it does..
Waite replied:
I think your mem. in the California Railroad Tax cases expresses with sufficient accuracy what was said before the argument began. I leave it with you to determine whether anything need be said about it in the report inasmuch as we avoided meeting the constitutional question in the decision.
C. Peter Magrath, who discovered the exchange while researching Morrison R. Waite: The Triumph of Character, writes "In other words, to the Reporter fell the decision which enshrined the declaration in the United States Reports...had Davis left it out, Santa Clara County v. Southern Pac. R. Co. would have been lost to history among thousands of uninteresting tax cases.". At the same time, the correspondence makes clear that the headnote does reflect the Court's thinking, at least before hearing any arguments to the contrary.
Author Jack Beatty wrote about the lingering questions as to how the reporter's note reflected a quotation that was absent from the opinion itself.
Why did the chief justice issue his dictum? Why did he leave it up to Davis to include it in the headnotes? After Waite told him that the Court 'avoided' the issue of corporate personhood, why did Davis include it? Why, indeed, did he begin his headnote with it? The opinion made plain that the Court did not decide the corporate personality issue and the subsidiary equal protection issue..
Defense argument
While the decision of the Court did not rest on the Fourteenth Amendment, an argument on this ground had been delivered by the defense:
That the provisions of the Constitution and laws of California in respect to the assessment for taxation of the property of railway corporations operating railroads in more than one county, are in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution insofar as they require the assessment of their property at its full money value without making deduction, as in the case of railroads operated in one county and of other corporations and of natural persons, for the value of the mortgages covering the property assessed, thus imposing upon the defendant unequal burdens, and to that extent denying to it the equal protection of the laws.
Judgment
A unanimous decision, written by Justice Harlan, ruled on the matter of fences, holding that the state of California illegally included the fences running beside the tracks in its assessment of the total value of the railroad's property. As a result, the county could not collect taxes from Southern Pacific that it was not allowed to collect in the first place.118 US Reports 412-17. This meant that the more significant question of the Equal Protection Clause was never actually addressed.
Significance
Thus the Supreme Court's actual decision never hinged on the equal protection claims. Nevertheless, the case has been allowed to have clear constitutional consequences, as it has been subsequently cited as affirming the protection of corporations under the Fourteenth Amendment. At the very least, this is an unusual exception to the normal understanding of the workings of the Court's rule of stare decisis – the reliance on precedent. It is an instance in which a statement which is neither part of the ruling of the Court, nor part of the opinion of a majority or dissenting minority of the Court has been cited as precedent in subsequent decisions of the Court.
In his dissent in the 1938 case of Connecticut General Life Insurance Company v. Johnson, Justice Hugo Black wrote 
in 1886, this Court in the case of Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific Railroad, decided for the first time that the word 'person' in the amendment did in some instances include corporations. [...] The history of the amendment proves that the people were told that its purpose was to protect weak and helpless human beings and were not told that it was intended to remove corporations in any fashion from the control of state governments. [...] The language of the amendment itself does not support the theory that it was passed for the benefit of corporations.Connecticut General Life Insurance Company v. Johnson , (Black, J. dissenting).
Justice William O. Douglas wrote in 1949, 
the Santa Clara case becomes one of the most momentous of all our decisions. [...] Corporations were now armed with constitutional prerogatives..
See also
United States corporate law
Corporate personhood
Juristic person
Johnson v. Southern Pacific Co.: U.S. Supreme Court case involving Southern Pacific's unsuccessful challenge to a federal safety law
Southern Pacific Company v. Arizona: U.S. Supreme Court case involving Southern Pacific's successful challenge to a state safety law
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 118
Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission
McCutcheon v. FEC
Notes
References
External links
 Library of resources on Corporate Personhood, including many addressing the Santa Clara decision (ReclaimDemocracy.org).
 Barry Yeoman, When Is a Corporation Like a Freed Slave?, Mother Jones
"Unequal Protection: The Rise of Corporate Dominance and the Theft of Human Rights" by Thom Hartmann
Category:Railway litigation in 1886
Category:1886 in United States case law
Category:Southern Pacific Railroad
Category:United States corporate case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Corporate personhood
Category:History of Santa Clara County, California
Category:Legal history of California
"""

From "Santa Clara Pueblo v. Martinez" ==> """
Santa Clara Pueblo v. Martinez, 436 U.S. 49 (1978), was a landmark case in the area of federal Indian law involving issues of great importance to the meaning of tribal sovereignty in the contemporary United States. The Supreme Court sustained a law passed by the governing body of the Santa Clara Pueblo that explicitly discriminated on the basis of sex. In so doing, the Court advanced a theory of tribal sovereignty that weighed the interests of tribes sufficient to justify a law that, had it been passed by a state legislature or Congress, would have almost certainly been struck down as a violation of equal protection.
Along with the watershed cases, United States v. Wheeler and Oliphant v. Suquamish Indian Tribe, Santa Clara completed the trilogy of seminal Indian law cases to come down in the 1978 term.Ezekiel J.N. Fletcher, Trapped in the Spring of 1978: The Continuing Impact of The Supreme Court's Decision in Oliphant, Wheeler, and Martinez, 55 APR Fed. Law 36 (2008).
Facts
The Petitioners were the Santa Clara Pueblo, an Indian tribe that is known to have existed for more than 600 years, and its Governor, Lucario Padilla.. Respondents were Julia Martinez, a full-blooded member of the Santa Clara Pueblo, and her daughter. Martinez brought suit in federal court against the tribe and Padilla, asking the court to strike down a tribal ordinance denying membership in the tribe to children of female members who marry outside the tribe, while extending membership to children of male members who marry outside the tribe.
Martinez was married to a member of the Navajo Nation, and, according to the ordinance her children were ineligible for membership in the Santa Clara Pueblo. While her children could live with her on the reservation, they were not permitted to vote in tribal elections, hold secular office in the tribe, possess a right to remain on the reservation if their mother died, nor inherit their mother's home or her possessory interests in communally held land.Santa Clara, 436 U.S. 51-53. The Petitioner's Brief observed that this exclusion from Pueblo membership had no bearing on whether Martinez's children (and others similarly situated) could receive federal benefits provided to Indians generally. In fact, her children were all receiving federal Indian educational and medical benefits.Brief of the Petitioners, Santa Clara Pueblo v Martinez, No 76-682, at 9.
Martinez claimed that the tribe's membership ordinance discriminated on the basis of both sex and ancestry in violation of Title I of the Indian Civil Rights Act of 1968 (ICRA)           (Pub.L. 90–284, 82 Stat. 73, enacted April 11, 1968), which provides in relevant part that no "Indian tribe in exercising powers of self-government shall ... deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of its laws." The case was brought in the United States District Court for the District of New Mexico. The District Court found for the Petitioners, because membership rules are critical to the "social . . . self-definition" of tribes and thus vital to the tribe's survival as a distinct community. To that end, it found that striking the proper balance between equal protection and tribal self-determination was best left to the Pueblo's judgment.Santa Clara, 436 U.S. at 54.
The 10th Circuit Court of Appeals reversed, holding that no "compelling tribal interest" justified the ordinance's sex-based classification. The Petitioners appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which ultimately reversed the 10th Circuit's holding and sustained the tribal ordinance.Santa Clara, 436 U.S. at 55.
 Central holdings 
 Suits against tribes under the Indian Civil Rights Act of 1968 (ICRA) are barred by tribal sovereign immunity, since nothing on the face of ICRA purports to subject tribes to the jurisdiction of federal courts in civil actions for declaratory or injunctive relief.
 ICRA does not authorize a private cause-of-action for declaratory and injunctive relief against the Pueblo's Governor. Congress' failure to provide remedies other than habeas corpus for enforcement of ICRA was deliberate, as is manifest from the structure of the statutory scheme and the legislative history of ICRA.
 Reasoning 
Justice Thurgood Marshall began the majority opinion by discussing general principles of tribal sovereignty relevant to the case. He noted that tribes are distinct, sovereign political communities existing within the United States, which retain powers of self-government. These include the authority to pass substantive laws governing internal matters, such as tribal membership. Furthermore, because tribes are separate sovereigns that existed prior to the ratification of the U.S. Constitution, constitutional protections such as those provided by the Fourteenth Amendment, do not constrain tribes on their own terms.Santa Clara, 436 U.S. at 56.
Instead, Congress must exercise its plenary power over tribes to abridge tribal sovereignty.Santa Clara, 436 U.S. at 56-57.  The substantive rights guarantees of the Indian Civil Rights act, such as the guarantee of equal protection under the law, represent such an abridgment. It is unclear, however, if Congress intended to permit federal suits against tribes, by individuals such as Martinez, to enforce those rights.Santa Clara, 436 U.S. at 57-58. Two doctrines of law, sovereign immunity and implied causes-of-action, were examined to decide if Congress intended to permit such suits.
Part III of the opinion addressed why the Pueblo was immune from suit. Tribes, like states and the federal government, are generally entitled to sovereign immunity, which means they cannot be sued in court without their consent. Congress may, however, abrogate a tribe's sovereign immunity pursuant to its plenary power. Finding that nothing in the text of ICRA appeared to waive tribal immunity, Justice Marshall held the Pueblo immune from suit in federal court. This meant the tribe could not be sued for passing the membership ordinance, which indirectly protected the law from being struck down under ICRA.Santa Clara 436 U.S. at 58-59.
Part IV analyzed whether the case may proceed against the other Petitioner, Governor Padillo. Padillo, being an officer of the tribe, does not receive the protection of tribal sovereign immunity. The obstacle for Martinez was that ICRA did not explicitly authorize suits against tribes in federal court. For her case to be lawful, the Court would need to find an implied cause-of-action that permitted federal suits against tribes.
To emphasize the importance of this decision, Justice Marshall observed that finding a private cause-of-action would interfere with tribal sovereignty in a way the text of the statute does not, on its own terms, allow. It would disrupt the ability of tribes to govern themselves. Out of respect for tribal sovereignty, the Court decided to "tread lightly", given the lack of express Congressional direction as to whether it has exercised its plenary power to diminish tribal sovereignty.Santa Clara, 436 U.S. at 59-60.
Justice Marshall proceeded to analyze the statute's legislative history and structure under the Supreme Court's implied cause-of-action case law. This case law requires consideration of factors including, whether a cause-of-action is supported by the legislative history of the statute and whether a cause-of-action would be consistent with the statute's purpose. While ICRA was designed to secure Constitutional rights to tribal members as against their tribal governments, it did not include all rights citizens enjoy under the Constitution. For example, ICRA made no mention of a prohibition on the establishment of religion or require the appointment of counsel for indigent criminal defendants. These exceptions reflect the other purpose of ICRA: to safeguard and promote tribal sovereignty. ICRA imposed an obligation on tribal governments to respect the rights enumerated, but it was tribal courts that were intended to vindicate those rights, not federal ones. Creating a cause-of-action would undermine the latter goal of ICRA and, in addition, impose significant financial burdens on the already economically disadvantaged tribes.Santa Clara, 436 U.S. at 60-65.
This decision to not imply a cause-of-action was further supported by how ICRA specifically permits habeas corpus petitions in federal court. This is a less intrusive form of review than Congress otherwise could have prescribed. Additionally, the legislative history of ICRA indicated that Congress considered, but rejected, proposals that would have permitted federal review of civil ICRA violations by the Attorney General and the Secretary of the Interior. In light of this history, Justice Marshall decided it would be "highly unlikely" that Congress intended to create a private cause-of-action in federal courts to enforce ICRA.Santa Clara, 436 U.S. at 66-69.
Justice Marshall concluded his opinion with an affirmation of tribal self-determination, the quasi-sovereign status of tribes, and how threatening federal review of ICRA claims would be to the cultural and political survival of tribes. He reiterated that Congress may authorize such federal review, but "unless and until Congress" acts, the Court would not imply a private cause-of-action for it.Santa Clara, 436 U.S. at 123-124.
 Dissent 
Justice Byron White wrote a solo dissent, disagreeing with the majority's opinion. He acknowledged the importance of tribal culture but did not think concern for it should protect arbitrary or unconstitutional tribal official action. He was unpersuaded by the majority's position that Congress's rejection of federal review of ICRA violations, indicated Congress did not intend to create a private federal cause-of-action for ICRA violations. Those proposals would have primarily affected off-reservation violations of Indian rights by non-Indians, like illegal detentions by state officials. They had nothing to do with whether a tribal member can sue a tribe in federal court.Santa Clara, 436 U.S. at 72-79 (J. White, dissenting).
For Justice White, the most important consideration was whether the private cause-of-action would be consistent with the purpose of ICRA. That was clearly the case because ICRA was designed, first and foremost, to safeguard to Indians the same constitutional rights other Americans enjoy. A private cause-of-action is necessary to effectuate those rights. He cited legislative history suggesting Congressional concern regarding the lack of remedies for violations of Indian rights. Justice White argued that it would be inconsistent with this purpose of ICRA to limit review of ICRA violations to tribal institutions. For instance, the judicial and legislative powers of the Santa Clara Pueblo are both vested in the Pueblo Council. This means the same body that passed the allegedly unlawful ordinance would be deciding if it violates ICRA. A private federal cause-of-action is necessary to avoid this conflict-of-interest.Santa Clara, 436 U.S. at 79-82 (J. White, dissenting).
Finally, Justice White addressed the competing purpose of ICRA: to protect and promote tribal sovereignty. He stated that ICRA and its attendant imposition of rights on the tribes was already a major intrusion on tribal sovereignty. A federal cause-of-action would simply give meaning to those rights, as there cannot be a right without a remedy.Santa Clara, 436 U.S. at 82-83.
 Significance 
 Doctrinal effects 
The case greatly limited the influence of the Indian Civil Rights Act of 1968 outside of tribal courts. In finding no private cause-of-action, the ability of individual tribe members to bring cases in a federal court for alleged violations of their rights under ICRA, was greatly diminished. As the Court recognized in Santa Clara, the only express means to bring ICRA claims in a federal court is through a habeas corpus petition, an action explicitly authorized by the Indian Civil Rights Act.Santa Clara, 436 U.S. at 58. The Court's reasoning also reflects an attitude of solicitude for tribal sovereignty with respect to implied causes-of-action. It was because of the importance of tribal sovereignty that the factors the Court used to decide whether to find a cause-of-action militated against finding one.
 Subsequent cases 
Santa Clara has been cited and discussed by the Supreme Court in a diverse set of subsequent Indian law decisions. Notable examples include:
Merrion v. Jicarilla Apache Tribe, 455 U.S. 130 (1982): In upholding a tribal tax tax of on-reservation oil and gas production as an exercise of the inherent sovereignty of a tribe to govern its internal affairs, the Court (in an opinion by Justice Marshall) cited the passage in Santa Clara stating that it will "tread lightly" where Congress has not expressly indicated its intent as to whether it has used its plenary power to abridge tribal sovereignty.. In his dissent in the case, Justice Stevens cited Santa Clara for the proposition that the equal protection principles of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments do not limit tribal power in the same way they limit state and federal power.Merrion, 455 U.S. at 170. This means, according to Justice Stevens, tribal sovereignty over members is, in some ways, greater than a state's power over its citizens.
Rice v. Cayetano, 528 U.S. 495 (2000): In this case, the majority struck down a Hawaii state law that restricted voting in elections for Trustees of the Office of Hawaiian Affairs to persons with a specific degree of Native Hawaiian ancestry, for being an unconstitutional, race-based classification.. Justice Breyer, concurring in the judgment, cited Santa Clara to illustrate the principle that tribes possess broad authority to define their membership.Rice, 528 U.S. at 527. He nevertheless agreed with the majority's conclusion that the "race-based" classification was unconstitutional. This was in part because it was the state of Hawaii, rather than Native Hawaiians, who created the problematic classification.
Nevada v. Hicks, 533 U.S. 353 (2001): The Hicks Court held that tribal courts do not have jurisdiction over state officials who act on a reservation to investigate off-reservation violations of state law.. Justice Souter, concurring in the judgment, cited Santa Clara to illustrate a tension in the Court's Indian law jurisprudence on the role of tribal courts. He first observed that Santa Clara affirmed the appropriateness of tribal courts as the exclusive forum for adjudicating disputes involving "important personal and property interests of both Indians and non-Indians."Hicks, 533 U.S. at 376. He contrasted this holding of Santa Clara with cases like Oliphant and Montana, which suggest tribes and their courts lack jurisdiction over non-members.Hicks, 533 U.S. at 376-77.
Michigan v. Bay Mills Indian Community, 572 U.S. 782 (2014): The Supreme Court held that tribal sovereign immunity protects a tribe from suit for operating a casino outside Indian lands.Michigan v. Bay Mills Indian Community, 572 U.S. 782 (2014). In her majority opinion, Justice Kagan cited Santa Clara for the proposition that in spite of federal plenary power, tribes remain separate sovereigns who pre-exist the Constitution. She further cited Santa Clara's holding that tribes enjoy sovereign immunity and that any Congressional abrogation of tribal sovereign immunity must be explicit.Bay Mills Indian Community, 572 U.S. at 788-790. Justice Kagan, like Justice Marshall in Merrion, cited the "tread lightly" language of Santa Clara to emphasize the importance of demanding an express Congressional statement as to whether it is changing the extent of tribal sovereignty.Bay Mills Indian Community, 572 U.S. at 803.
United States v. Bryant, 136 U.S. 1954 (2016): In this case, the Court held that tribal criminal court convictions for domestic violence that were obtained against a defendant not represented by counsel, were admissible in a subsequent federal criminal case (where they empowered prosecutors to seek a higher sentence for the defendant). This was because the Sixth Amendment right to counsel does not apply to the tribes., 136 S.Ct. 1954, 1958-59 (2016). Justice Ginsburg, writing for the majority, cited Santa Clara for the principle that the Constitution and its limits on state and federal power do not apply to the tribes, as they are separate sovereigns pre-existing the Constitution. This was critical in reaching the conclusion that the Sixth Amendment does not apply to tribes.Bryant, 136 S.Ct. at 1962.
 Administrative Law 
The Supreme Court's decision in Santa Clara has also been cited in administrative agency rules and decisions. Notable examples include:
Indian Child Welfare Act Proceedings.  (2016). 25 CFR 23. This Final Rule improves implementation of the Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA), including requirements imposed on State courts to fully comply with ICWA and to maintain certain records. The Final Rule cites Santa Clara to affirm that delineating membership requirements is a sovereign function of tribes.
Procedures for Reestablishing a Formal Government-to-Government Relationship With the Native Hawaiian Community.  (2016). 43 CFR 50. This Final Rule establishes an administrative process and criteria for the Secretary of the Interior to use to re-establish a formal government-to-government relationship with the Native Hawaiian Community if the Community ever forms a government and seeks such a relationship. The Final Rule cites Santa Clara for the principle that Native communities may define their own membership. and concludes that the Native Hawaiian community can decide what "tests" they wish to use to ascertain whether an individual can be a member.
Secretary of Labor v. Navajo Forest Products Industries, 8 O.S.H. Cas. (BNA) 2094 (1980). Shortly after Santa Clara was decided, the Occupational Safety Health Review Commission decided that a Navajo Nation tribal enterprise was exempt from the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, including the application of citations and penalties levied against the enterprise pursuant to the Act. The Commission cited Santa Clara for the proposition that tribes retain the sovereign authority to establish substantive law and regulate their own internal affairs. This understanding of tribal sovereignty was considered in connection with a treaty between the Navajo Nation and the United States limiting the kinds of federal officials who could be present and act on the reservation. The treaty was read to preserve, rather than cede, the tribal sovereignty affirmed in Santa Clara. The Commission thus concluded that the treaty precluded enforcement of the Act against the tribal enterprise.Secretary of Labor v. Navajo Forest Products, 8 O.S.H. Cas. (BNA) 2094 (1980).
Larry Martin v. Billings Area Director, Bureau of Indian Affairs, 19 IBIA 279 (1991): The Interior Board of Indian Affairs (IBIA), which reviews decisions by the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) involving Indian affairs, was asked to consider an appeal by a subcontractor who was performing home renovations on the Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes of the Fort Peck Indian Reservation, under an Indian Self-Determination Act (ISDA) contract.Larry Martin, 19 IBIA at 281. The IBIA cited the discussion of the dual purposes of ICRA in Santa Clara to find that, like ICRA, ISDA does not have an implied cause-of-action to challenge tribal action. The Indian Self-Determination Act has only one purpose: promoting tribal sovereignty. This means the reasoning of Santa Clara applies even more forcefully, as there are no countervailing purposes that might support an implied cause-of-action. Finding a cause-of-action would undermine the purpose of ISDA, just like how finding a cause-of-action in Santa Clara would have undermined the purpose of ICRA.Larry Martin, 19 IBIA at 286-87.
Welmas and Dukic v. Sacramento Area Director, Bureau of Indian Affairs, 24 IBIA 264 (1993): The BIA was asked by members of the Cabazon Band of Mission Indians to review sanctions imposed on them by the Band's tribal council.Weimas, 24 IBIA at 265-67. The IBIA analyzed Santa Clara in its determination that ICRA did not grant the BIA authority to review the tribal action at issue. The IBIA referenced Santa Clara's discussion of an administrative review process that Congress rejected in passing ICRA as evidence that the review sought by the Band members was "specifically rejected" by Congress and thus not authorized by ICRA.Weimas, 24 IBIA at 271-72.
 Equal Protection 
As the Court did not reach the merits, the questions of whether a "compelling tribal interest" is required to justify tribal laws that discriminate on the basis of sex, and if one is, what constitutes such an interest, were not resolved. The Briefs did, however, present arguments on this important issue.
The Petitioners' Brief emphasized how ICRA rights guarantees are not as strong as constitutional ones and so the standard in equal protection cases should be lower than strict scrutiny (the standard signalled by the 10th Circuit's use of the "compelling tribal interest" phrase).Brief of the Petitioners at 23-24. It contended for the lowest established standard of review, the "rational relation" test, which would only require a rational relationship to exist between the law and its intended purpose. This was the case here, as the tribe's political and cultural independence depended on its ability to maintain its patrilineal social order. This interest in the tribe's survival was "compelling," and certainly "rationally related" to the ordinance.Brief of the Petitioners at 27-29.
The Respondents' Brief argued for a higher form of review as the tribal law at issue involved a sex-based discrimination. The Brief pointed to the fact that recent Supreme Court precedent established a higher standard for state and federal sex-based classifications: intermediate scrutiny.Brief of the Respondents, Santa Clara Pueblo v Martinez, No 76-682, at 27-28. Additionally, the mere fact that the Pueblo had a tradition of treating male and female members differently, is not sufficient to justify the classification.Id. at 35.
 Scholarly commentary 
The decision spurred a robust debate within legal academia. For example, Catherine MacKinnon wrote that the tribal ordinance was patriarchal, aimed at perpetuating male supremacy in the Pueblo.Catherine A. MacKinnon, Feminism Unmodified 68-69 (1987). While she recognized the importance of tribal sovereignty, she contended that by disadvantaging women, the ordinance ultimately undermined the tribe's autonomy as a distinct community. This was because, to MacKinnon, the law was a concession to male-supremacist, colonialist United States policy. MacKinnon believed the law was passed because the tribal council feared the U.S. government might impose allotment on the tribe. MacKinnon asserted that in many other tribes whose land had been allotted, much of the land passed out of tribal hands when female members married male non-members, as the husbands would acquire control of the land. This would not happen when male members married female non-members. Thus, the ordinance was aimed at protecting the integrity of the tribe's land holdings. Yet, by giving preference to male intermarriage while punishing female intermarriage, the tribe was cowing to the U.S. government's threat of allotment, thereby undermining tribal autonomy.MacKinnon, supra at 66-68.
Francine Skenandore responded to MacKinnon's position with an account of Indian feminism that presents tribal identity and tribal women's identity as deeply linked. This results in an emphasis less on gender equality and more on tribal survival and autonomy. Skenandore argues that MacKinnon is trying to force Native women to choose between their identity as women and identity as tribal members, whereas she believes the two work together. Thus, the decision in Santa Clara advanced Indian feminism insofar as it preserved tribal sovereignty and the ability of the tribe to work through its understanding of gender equality outside the control of United States law and empire. She points out that MacKinnon does not understand how tribal membership is a privilege, not a right and that MacKinnon uses rights language to wholly dismiss tribal culture and tradition. The Petitioners' Brief provides support for Skenandore's critique. The Brief noted that the membership ordinance simply codified an unwritten tribal rule that had existed from time immemorial.
Rina Swentzell, a Santa Clara Pueblo member, wrote of how the decision affirming the tribe's self-determination to decide who is a member was critical to the Pueblo's continuance as an independent community. It was a community issue that ought be handled internally by the members, not imposed on them by the Supreme Court. In her article, "Testimony of a Santa Clara Woman," she discusses how balance, in life and between the sexes, is an important part of Santa Clara Pueblan culture and tradition. She notes that the 1936 Santa Clara Constitution, pursuant to which the membership ordinance was passed, was primarily written by non-pueblo individuals.Swentzell, supra at 99.
Judith Resnik provides a similar critique of the decision as MacKinnon. She questions the role of tradition and history in the rule, instead identifying the ordinance as a product of U.S. influence, if not encouragement. It reflects the long-standing U.S. tradition of subjugating women. Skenandore responded to Resnik as well, noting that her argument suggests tribes have been assimilated into the dominant legal culture of the United States and questions their existence as distinct communities. This ignores the long, and continuing, history of tribal resistance to assimilation. Skenandore reiterates that Native feminists understand the connection between gender identity and tribal identity and how critical the preservation of tribal sovereignty is to their feminism.
Note: Canadian policy under the Indian Act of 1951
Santa Clara's membership ordinance was similar to Canadian policy governing the status of First Nations or Indian women under the Indian Act of 1951. This was different from the Santa Clara Pueblo case, in that the government was imposing rules on all Indians or First Nations. But it was discriminatory against Indian women and their children. The Act said that First Nations/Indian women who married a non-First Nations man or non-status man, would lose their status as Indians. If they married a man from another tribe, they would lose rights in their birth tribe, as would their children. They could not return to their original tribe and get benefits they had received before. But First Nations men who married a non-Indian or non-status woman, or a woman from another First Nation, suffered no such loss or change in status.
Women organized and finally got this law changed, challenging it in court and appealing to the United Nations Human Rights Committee. In 1981, the UN found Canada in breach of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. In 1982 Canada amended its constitution, establishing the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. In 1985 it passed Bill C-31, which "revised Indian status to address the gender discrimination of the Indian Act."
See also
 Santa Clara Indian Reservation
 Indian Civil Rights Act of 1968
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 436
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States tribal sovereign immunity case law
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:Santa Clara Pueblo
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:History of women's rights in the United States
Category:Kinship and descent
Category:Native American women
Category:Women in New Mexico
"""

From "Santa Fe Independent School District v. Doe" ==> """
Santa Fe Independent School Dist. v. Doe, 530 U.S. 290 (2000), was a case heard before the United States Supreme Court. It ruled that a policy permitting student-led, student-initiated prayer at high school football games violates the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment. Oral arguments were heard March 29, 2000. The court announced its decision on June 19, holding the policy unconstitutional in a 6–3 decision.. 
Background of the case
Santa Fe Independent School District (SFISD) is a rural school district in Texas between the cities of Houston and Galveston. Two sets of students and their mothers — one a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the other Catholic —filed suit against the school district. The lawsuit alleged various violations of the Establishment Clause and asked for an injunction to prevent prayers from being offered at the graduation ceremony. In his decision, Judge Samuel B. Kent of the United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas ordered the school to eliminate all denominational activity in the classroom. Religion may only be discussed in a "non-denominational and non-judgmental" manner. He also permitted students to offer a non-denominational prayer at graduation ceremonies and football games. In allowing prayer at certain school functions, Judge Kent relied on Jones v. Clear Creek ISD, another school prayer case in a Houston area school district. 
The school then adopted a policy in which the students would first vote by secret ballot whether to have a benediction at the graduation. If they voted yes, then they would elect students to deliver "nonsectarian, nonproselytizing invocations and benedictions." The students voted in favor of school prayer, and two students delivered nonsectarian benedictions at the graduation ceremony.  Following the ceremony, the school removed the requirement that the prayer be nonsectarian and non-proselytizing. A similar policy was adopted for football games.
Fifth Circuit decision
Both the SFISD and Doe appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit. The SFISD appealed because it claimed the words "nonsectarian and non-proselytizing" should not be necessary. The Does wanted prayer at school events to be found unconstitutional altogether.
In a 2–1 decision, Jacques L. Wiener, Jr., and Carl E. Stewart agreed with the District Court that "the words 'nonsectarian, non proselytizing' are constitutionally necessary components" of a policy governing prayer at graduations. However, the Appeals Court struck down the part of the decision that permitted prayer at football games. Graduation was a once-in-a-lifetime event that deserved to be solemnized with prayer, while football games were "far less solemn and extraordinary." E. Grady Jolly dissented, objecting that now "the majority expressly exerts control over the content of its citizens' prayers."
The Supreme Court granted certiorari, limited to the following question: "Whether petitioner's policy permitting student-led, student-initiated prayer at football games violates the Establishment Clause."
Opinion of the Court
It held that these pre-game prayers delivered "on school property, at school-sponsored events, over the school's public address system, by a speaker representing the student body, under the supervision of school faculty, and pursuant to a school policy that explicitly and implicitly encourages public prayer" are not private, but public speech. "Regardless of the listener's support for, or objection to, the message, an objective Santa Fe High School student will unquestionably perceive the inevitable pregame prayer as stamped with her school's seal of approval."
A dissenting opinion was written by Chief Justice Rehnquist, joined by Justices Scalia and Thomas. His dissent asserted that the majority opinion "bristles with hostility to all things religious in public life". His material objections were, first that the policy on which the Court has now ruled had not yet been put into practice. "[T]he question is not whether the district's policy may be applied in violation of the Establishment Clause, but whether it inevitably will be." Second, Rehnquist also stated that the speech in question would be private, chosen and delivered by the speaker, rather than public, school-sponsored speech.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 530
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:United States education case law
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:2000 in religion
Category:2000 in education
Category:Prayer
Category:Religion in Texas
Category:Santa Fe, Texas
Category:Education in Galveston County, Texas
"""

From "Santobello v. New York" ==> """
Santobello v. New York, 404 U.S. 257 (1971), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that the sentence of the defendant should be vacated because the plea agreement specified that the prosecutor would not recommend a sentence, but the prosecutor breached the agreement by recommending the maximum sentence.
 Case background 
The defendant was charged with two felony counts of gambling; the district attorney agreed to a plea agreement where the defendant would plead guilt to the lesser offense of "possession of gambling records", with a maximum sentence of one year in jail. The prosecutor also agreed to not make a recommendation to the court regarding the sentence. The Court accepted the plea in June 1969 and set a date for subsequent sentencing. However, there was significant delay and Santobello did not appear for sentencing until January 1970. By this time, the original presiding judge had retired and the prosecutor had been replaced. The second prosecutor was ignorant of the plea agreement made by the predecessor and recommended, against the terms of the agreement, the maximum one-year sentence. However the new sentencing judge declared that his decision of the maximum one-year sentence was not influenced by the district attorney, and therefore there was no need to adjourn the sentencing, given the Santobello's probation report, showing him as a "professional criminal". The Court subsequently upheld that the prosecutor had breached the agreement.
 References 
External links
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:United States plea bargaining case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1971 in United States case law
"""

From "Santosky v. Kramer" ==> """
Santosky v. Kramer, 455 U.S. 745 (1982), is a Supreme Court case involving the burden of proof for the revocation of parental rights. The case arose when the Ulster County, New York, Department of Social Services sought to revoke John Santosky II and Annie Santosky's parental rights to their three children. Under Section 622 of the New York State Family Court Act, the state was permitted to revoke parental rights to a natural child if, after a fair preponderance of the evidence, a court found "permanent neglect." The New York State Family Court found such neglect by using the "fair preponderance" standard. The Appellate Division of the New York Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the burden of proof used.
In a 5–4 opinion written by Justice Harry Blackmun, the Supreme Court of the United States vacated the Appellate Division's ruling, holding that states seeking to sever parental rights irrevocably must show at least clear and convincing evidence of neglect. Justice William Rehnquist, joined by three others, dissented, on the grounds that the majority's focus on a single aspect of the law disregarded the fairness of the scheme as a whole. The ruling has since been criticized for its intrusion into state affairs. Because of the ruling, all states previously using the fair preponderance standard changed to the clear and convincing standard, but California has since abandoned the clear and convincing standard and returned to the fair preponderance standard.
Background
Due Process and the 14th Amendment
The Supreme Court has previously held that citizens have certain fundamental rights upon which the government cannot infringe, unless the deprivation of that right is necessary to achieve a compelling government interest. This doctrine, arising from the "liberty clause" of the Fourteenth Amendment, is known as substantive due process. The right to privacy was found to be fundamental under this doctrine, and a number of rights to choice came out of it, such as in Roe v. Wade, where the Court found a right to have an abortion and in Meyer v. Nebraska, where the court found a parental right to raise their children as they wish. In Griswold v. Connecticut the Court extended this doctrine to the right to procure contraception. Substantive due process was further expanded to encompass children with In re Gault establishing that children have a right to procedural due process when the state attempts to take custody of them.
Procedural due process, arising from the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments, is minimally the right to notice and a hearing, but has been held to include in some circumstances rights to counsel and rights to confrontation. Procedural due process is required any time a person faces the deprivation of life, liberty, or property. As substantive due process arises from the liberty clause, a deprivation of a substantive due process right is a deprivation of liberty and thus requires procedural due process.
The deprivation of rights secured by substantive due process requires some amount of procedural due process, but procedural due process can range from an administrative hearing to a jury trial. In Mathews v. Eldridge, the Court explained the level of due process required for the termination of Social Security benefits and, in doing so, established a method for determining the level of procedural due process required in depriving a person of life, liberty, or property. The Court did so by balancing state interests against the procedural due process rights of an individual. The Mathews test takes into account three factors: "the private interests affected by the proceeding", "the risk of error created by the State's chosen procedure", and "the countervailing governmental interest supporting use of the challenged procedure."
Facts of the Case
The Ulster County Department of Social Services received reports from neighbors and physicians of Tina Santosky regarding her injuries: a broken femur, bruises, and cuts. Suspecting child abuse, Bernhardt S. Kramer, the Commissioner of the Ulster County Department of Social Services, initiated parental neglect proceedings and removed Tina Santosky from the custody of her parents, John and Annie Santosky, in November 1973. 10 months later, the Santoskys' second child, John II, was removed after he was found to be suffering from malnutrition. On that same day, Annie Santosky gave birth to Jed, the couple's third child. Three days after Jed's birth, he was removed from their custody and placed in a foster home.
About four years later, Kramer petitioned the Ulster County Family Court to revoke parental rights. Under section 622 of the New York State Family Court Act, Kramer was only required to satisfy a "fair preponderance of the evidence" burden and show that permanent neglect is more likely than not. The Santoskys challenged the constitutionality of this burden, but the Family Court rejected their challenge and found permanent neglect under the fair preponderance standard.
The Santoskys appealed, and the Appellate Division of the New York Supreme Court affirmed the ruling of the Family Court. Their next appeal to the New York Court of Appeals was dismissed as lacking a substantial constitutional question. The Santoskys appealed again, and the Supreme Court of the United States granted certiorari.
At oral argument, Martin Guggenheim argued for the petitioners that the burden of proof under New York law was unconstitutional, stating "[T]he Constitution requires that the finder of fact be reasonably convinced that the result of permanent destruction of the family is appropriate before the state may force such an irrevocable and fundamental deprivation of liberty on an individual." Respondents argued that raising the burden of proof would not have affected the outcome of the case, and that "if the Court should raise the burden, it would frustrate a specific intent of the legislature."Oral Arguments, 
Opinion of the Court
thumb|right|Justice Blackmun delivered the opinion of the Court|alt=photo of Justice Blackmun
Writing for a majority of the Court, Justice Harry Blackmun held that natural parents have a right to due process under the Fourteenth Amendment, and that the burden of proof used by New York State is not stringent enough to satisfy the constitutional requirements of the due process clause. In striking down New York's burden, the Court utilized the Mathews test to determine what burden of proof was due.
The Mathews test employed consists of three considerations: the private interests affected, the risk posed by erroneous judgement, and the government interest affected. The Court found that private interests were substantially affected by the law noting that "[w]hen the State initiates a parental rights termination proceeding, it seeks not merely to infringe that fundamental liberty interest, but to end it" and that such a termination was irreversible. In analyzing the second factor, the Court stated that the interests of the parents and the child in their natural relationship are not distinct and thus the balancing factors are between the parents and the State. The Court then found that the "fair preponderance" burden did not fairly allocate risk and that a higher burden would be practically and symbolically important. The Court found that while the State had an interest, a higher burden would have little impact on the ability for the State to achieve its goal. Following from this review, the Court held that "the State [must] support its allegations by at least clear and convincing evidence."
Dissenting opinion
The dissent, written by Justice Rehnquist, opposed the ruling of the Court on two main points: matters of family law should be left to the states, and that the Court's analysis was too narrow. While the dissent agreed with the Court's determination that parents have a due process right, they disagreed in the application of Mathews v. Eldridge. Quoting that case, the dissent clarified stating, "substantial weight must be given to the good faith judgments of the individuals [administering a program] ... that the procedures they have provided assure fair consideration of the ... claims of individuals.", quoted in  (J. Rehnquist dissenting) The dissent further argued that, by focusing narrowly on only the burden of proof in the statute, the majority failed to take into account the fairness of New York's scheme as a whole.
Subsequent developments
By the early 1990s, all states previously using the "fair preponderance" standard had adapted to using the "clear and convincing" standard in termination proceedings. New York, among other states, did not apply the elevated burden of proof to the fact-finding phase of the proceedings, but rather only to the termination proceedings. The Colorado Supreme Court, conducting its own Mathews test, found that such a burden need not be applied to the fact-finding portion of the case. In the 1990s, California, a state that had previously used the clear and convincing standard, lowered its burden in termination proceedings. The constitutionality of this scheme was challenged and brought before the California Supreme Court in 1993. The court specifically rejected Santosky, citing substantial differences between California's procedures and New York's in Santosky, and upheld the constitutionality of the statute.
Seven years after the Santosky decision, the United States Supreme Court held in Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins that Santosky's higher burden of proof is an exception to the "conventional rules of civil litigation [...] that parties to civil litigation need only prove their case by a preponderance of the evidence." The Court later extended Santosky'''s finding of governmental interest in "preserving and promoting the welfare of the child" when it held in Reno v. Flores that children with no available guardians may be held in custody pending deportation hearings. In 2000, the right of parents to choose how to raise their child, one of the main constitutional interests at issue in Santosky, was affirmed in Troxel v. Granville when the Court struck down a Washington law that allowed for third parties to petition for visitation rights over parental objections. In his dissent, Justice John Paul Stevens rebutted the assumption of Santosky that interests of the parent and the interests of the child do not diverge, arguing that "the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment leaves room for States to consider the impact on a child of possibly arbitrary parental decisions that neither serve nor are motivated by the best interests of the child." (Justice Stevens dissenting)
Impact
The Court made clear that the interests of children should be assumed to be covered as part of the interests of the parent, not treated as separate, but this doctrine has been less clear in practice as termination proceedings still focus on the fitness of the parent. This has resulted in further constitutional protections for parents and increasingly formal termination proceedings that limit the contribution of the child's interests in the proceedings. Santosky has also contributed to the role of parental rights of undocumented immigrants as the constitutionally protected parental rights may apply to non-citizens as well as United States citizens.
The ruling has been criticized for its intrusion into state affairs and its basis in previous rulings. Prior to Santosky, the realm of family life had been left to the states. Because of this, Santosky's direct intervention into the affairs of state interests was seen as contrary to United States v. Yazell, which held that federal courts should only overturn state statutes when those statutes cannot adequately serve a clear and substantial federal interest.
See alsoAddington v. TexasIn re Winship''
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1982 in United States case law
Category:United States family case law
Category:History of Ulster County, New York
Category:United States due process case law
"""

From "SAS Institute Inc. v. Iancu" ==> """
SAS Institute Inc. v. Iancu, 584 U.S. ___ (2018), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held the United States Patent and Trademark Office, when conducting an inter partes review, must make judgement on all patent claims contested by the petitioner.
The case extended from an inter partes review of a patent granted to ComplementSoft by the SAS Institute. SAS had challenged all sixteen claims in the ComplementSoft patent. The Patent Office determined that SAS's petition has merit to find at least one of the claims to be invalid, sufficient to begin the inter partes review. However, the Patent Office issued a "partial institution" power that only reviewed a subset of the claims, denying review of the rest. The Patent Office's final determination only issued judgments on the subset of claims that were actually instituted. The Patent Office found eight of the nine reviewed claims to be invalid.
SAS asserted that under the statute granting inter partes review, , that the Office was required to review all of the claims they had identified in their petition, and took action in the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit to challenge the Office's ruling. The Federal Circuit ruled against SAS, rejecting SAS's argument. After being denied an en banc review by the Court, SAS petitioned the Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari, which the Court accepted in March 2017. The Court arranged to hear the case alongside Oil States Energy Services, LLC v. Greene's Energy Group, LLC,. another case related to inter partes review.
The Court gave its decision on April 24, 2017, in a 5–4 ruling that reversed and remanded the decision of the Federal Circuit Court, stating that an inter partes review must rule on each claim challenged by the petitioners. Justice Neil Gorsuch wrote the majority opinion, joined by Justices John Roberts, Anthony Kennedy, Clarence Thomas, and Samuel Alito. Gorsuch wrote that the language of the inter partes statute as passed by Congress was clear, in that there was no "partial institution" power enjoyed by the Director.
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justices Stephen Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor, and Elena Kagan. Ginsburg argued that as they have already determined from Cuozzo Speed Technologies, LLC v. Lee. that the Director is not mandated to grant an inter partes review, the language of the statute could allow the Director of the Patent Office to refuse a petition that includes challenges to claims that they do not believe likely to be invalid, allowing the petitioner to file an amended petition. Another dissenting opinion was written by Justice Breyer, joined by Justices Ginsburg and Sotomayor, and by Kagan in part. Breyer wrote in his dissent related to the interpretation of the language of the statute, and believed that the majority decision mistook the intent of Congress, and that partial inter partes review is appropriate under the statute.
 References 
External links
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Saucier v. Katz" ==> """
Saucier v. Katz, 533 U.S. 194 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court considered the qualified immunity of a police officer to a civil rights case brought through a Bivens action.
 Background 
In 1994, the Presidio Army Base in San Francisco, California, was the site of an event to celebrate the conversion of the base to a national park. Elliot Katz, the president of a group called In Defense of Animals, brought a cloth banner, approximately 4 by 3 feet, that read "Please Keep Animal Torture Out of Our National Parks," to voice opposition to the possibility that the Letterman Army Hospital might be used for experiments on animals.
While Vice President Al Gore began giving a speech, Katz removed the banner from his jacket, started to unfold it, and walked toward the fence and speakers' platform. Petitioner Donald Saucier, a military police officer on duty that day, had been warned by his superiors of the possibility of demonstrations with Katz being previously identified as a potential protester. Saucier and Sergeant Steven Parker, another military police officer, moved to intercept Katz as he walked toward the fence. As Katz reached the barrier and began placing the banner on the other side, the officers grabbed Katz from behind, took the banner, and rushed him out of the area. Each officer had one
of Katz's arms, half-walking, half-dragging him, with his feet "barely touching the ground". Saucier and Parker took Katz to a nearby military van, where, Katz claims, he was shoved or thrown inside. 
Katz brought an action in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California against Saucier and other officials pursuant to Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents,. alleging that defendants had violated his Fourth Amendment rights by using excessive force to arrest him.
 Decision 
The Supreme Court in an opinion delivered by Justice Kennedy held that Saucier was entitled to qualified immunity..
The Supreme Court held that qualified immunity analysis must proceed in two steps. A court must first ask whether "the facts alleged show the officer’s conduct violated a constitutional right."  Then, if a constitutional right was violated, the court would go on to determine whether the constitutional right was "clearly established."Saucier, 533 U.S. at 201.
In its 2009 decision in Pearson v. Callahan. the Supreme Court modified the two-step immunity analysis imposed in Saucier to make its application less restrictive. Saucier required courts to confront the first prong of the analysis before they move on to the second, but Pearson says "the Saucier protocol should not be regarded as mandatory in all cases."
Pearson goes on to say, "Our decision does not prevent the lower courts from following the Saucier procedure; it simply recognizes that those courts should have the discretion to decide whether that procedure is worthwhile in particular cases."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 533
List of United States Supreme Court cases
 References 
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States constitutional torts case law
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Saudi Arabia v. Nelson" ==> """
Saudi Arabia v. Nelson, 507 U.S. 349 (1993), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court considered the term "based upon a commercial activity" within the meaning of the first clause of 1605(a)(2) of the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976.
Background
A U.S. citizen Nelson filed suit against Saudi Arabia for alleged abuse and torture suffered while under arrest in Saudi Arabia.
A married couple of United States citizenry filed a tort action against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, King Faisal Specialist Hospital in Riyadh owned by the Saudi government, and the hospital's corporate agent in the US, Royspec Purchasing Services. The tort claim against these three entities collectively referred to as the Saudi government alleged that Mr. Nelson, a hospital engineer in Riyadh, was subjected to illicit incarceration, routine torture spanning a four-day period, and failure to admonish him as to the potential risks incurred by whistle-blowing. Based on the Saudi government's alleged wrongful actions,  Mr. Nelson believed the US Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976 (FSIA) authorized the court jurisdiction to hear the case.
The Hospital Corporation of America, Ltd. (HCA), a career recruiting firm based in the US, placed ads in various media outlets for the position of monitoring systems engineer at the King Faisal Specialist Hospital in Riyadh. Mr. Nelson interviewed for the job in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, and later entered into an employment contract with the hospital through HCA. Mr. Nelson's family was informed Royspec Purchasing Services, based in the US, was the designated agent through which to contact Mr. Nelson in an emergency.
Mr. Nelson began his new job in December 1983, which entailed monitoring “facilities, equipment, utilities, and maintenance systems to ensure the safety of patients, hospital staff, and others” (Saudi Arabia v. Nelson). Shortly after employment began he discovered numerous safety violations and defects throughout the hospital, of which he promptly informed his superiors and a Saudi government commission of the infractions. He was asked to ignore the problems by the hospital, but he persisted.
On September 27, 1984, Mr. Nelson was detained and subsequently tortured until signing a coerced statement, of which was in Arabic, a language he did not understand. Two days later he was imprisoned at Al Penitentiary without being charged with a crime. Mr. Nelson's wife was informed of her husband's whereabouts several days later but could not condition a release. On November 5, 1984, Mr. Nelson was released from prison through the plea of a US senator and left the country shortly thereafter through the permission of the Saudi Government. Mr. Nelson's employment contract was shortly terminated thereafter. 	
The plaintiff, Mr. Nelson, asserted the defendant, Saudi Arabia, was not immune to prosecution under the FSIA, which enumerates exceptions of which any must exist in order to deny a sovereigns’ foreign immunity. The list of exceptions refer to a State's conduct only. A State is denied sovereign foreign immunity if the State's conduct is private not public, private not sovereign, commercial not non-commercial or trade-related not political (Slomanson, 100). Specifically, the commercial activity immunity exception was used by Mr. Nelson. The plaintiff asserted job recruitment, contract of employment, and employment itself constituted the commercial activity that led to and associates the wrongful injury claim with the Saudi Government's commercial activity. Therefore, the plaintiff claims that the process of recruiting, hiring, and subsequent employment led to or indirectly are associated with his tortious injuries.
This case was first heard by a federal trial court that dismissed the case for lack of subject-matter jurisdiction because the FSIA did not define commercial activity as imprisonment and torture. The case traveled to an appellate court, which held recruiting, hiring, and employing all entailed commercial activities that led to the wrongful injury thus establishing jurisdiction to hear the case under FSIA. The appellate court overturned the district court's dismissal, but the Supreme Court reached the final, conclusive ruling.
Opinion of the Court
The Court's majority opinion, delivered by Justice Souter, held that the wrongful injury claim brought by Mr. and Mrs. Nelson was not “based upon a commercial activity” according to the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976 (section 1605(a)(2)). The Court of Appeals judgment was thereby reversed, thus restoring the trial courts dismissal based upon a “lack of subject-matter jurisdiction”.
The court reasoned that the tortious acts of the defendant were not “based upon a commercial activity”, therefore not in violation of the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976. The defendant's conduct, however heinous, could not be classified as being “based upon a commercial activity”. The tortious conduct rather is a gross abuse of state police power, which is an act only performed by sovereign states. Only States perform acts such as unlawful detention of private citizens, torture, conduct foreign engagements, and diplomatic relations. Private citizens cannot participate in acts of State.
Concurrences
Justice White and Justice Blackmun concur with Justice Souter's majority opinion with one caveat. The justices disagree that the defendant's tortious conduct was not “based upon a commercial activity”, but nonetheless concur with the majority judgment because the commercial acts did not occur in the US.
Dissents
Justice Kennedy believes the wrongful acts perpetrated by the defendant do constitute commercial activity. Under FSIA, the Saudi Government's operation of the hospital, employment practices, and disciplinary procedures were “based upon commercial activity” and therefore the plaintiff has proven the court does have jurisdiction.
Additionally, unlike Justice White, he believes the defendant's commercial activities did have adequate contact within the United States to fulfill an immunity exception under the FSIA.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 507
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1993 in United States case law
Category:Foreign Sovereign Immunity Act case law
Category:Saudi Arabia–United States relations
Category:Torture in Saudi Arabia
Category:HCA Healthcare
"""

From "Scales v. United States" ==> """
Scales v. United States, 367 U.S. 203 (1961), was a 1960 decision of the United States Supreme Court that upheld the conviction of Junius Scales for violating of the Smith Act on the basis on his membership in the Communist Party of the United States (CPUSA).
Decision
Junius Scales was the leader of the North Carolina branch of the CPUSA. He was convicted in 1955, but the sentence was overturned on appeal due to procedural mistakes by the prosecution. He was retried and convicted again in 1958. Prosecutors pursued Scales' case because he specifically advocated violent political action and gave demonstrations of martial arts skills.Daniel Levin, "Smith Act," in Paul Finkelman, Encyclopedia of American Civil Liberties, vol. 1 (Routledge, 2006), 1488, available online, accessed June 13, 2012
Scales appealed his conviction to the Supreme Court. He contended that the 1950 McCarran Internal Security Act rendered the Smith Act's membership clause ineffective, because the McCarran Act explicitly stated that membership in a communist party does not constitute a per se violation of any criminal statute. Scales v. United States, Oyez, retrieved March 20, 2012. On June 5, 1961, the Supreme Court, in a 5–4 decision, upheld the conviction of Scales, finding that the Smith Act membership clause was constitutional because it required prosecutors to prove that there was direct advocacy of violence and that the membership was substantial and active, not passive or technical.Willis, Clyde, Student's guide to landmark congressional laws on the First Amendment, Greenwood,  2002, p 47, . Justices Harlan and Frankfurter, who joined the 1957 Yates decision that held that free speech is protected unless it poses a "clear and present danger", joined the majority in Scales.Belknap, Michal, "Communism and Cold War", in Oxford Companion to the Supreme Court, 2005, pp 199.
A New York Times editorial a few days after the decision said that the Court had departed from the "Holmes-Brandeis" view by punishing "membership in a party that advocates violent overthrow" rather than "conspiring to advocate". It continued:New York Times: ""The Court on Communism," June 7, 1961, accessed June 20, 2012
In a letter to the Times, Rep. Francis E. Walter, chair of the House Un-American Activities Committee, countered:New York Times: Francis E. Walter, "Letters to the Editor: Party Threat to Freedom," June 14, 1961, accessed June 20, 1961. Walters' letter is dated June 8, 1961
President John F. Kennedy commuted Scales' sentence on Christmas Eve, 1962. Scales was the last person convicted under the Smith Act to be released from prison.New York Times: Ari L. Goldman, "Junius Scales, Communist Sent to Prison, Dies at 82," August 7, 2002, accessed April 23, 2011; New York Times: "Clemency for Scales," December 28, 1962, accessed April 23, 2011. . See also Arthur J. Sabin, In Calmer Times: The Supreme Court and Red Monday (University of Pennsylvania Press, 1999), 60
Scales was the last member of the CPUSA convicted under the Smith Act and the only person convicted under its membership clause whose conviction was not overturned on appeal. Others were convicted under the Act for conspiring to overthrow the government. Scales is the only Supreme Court decision to uphold a conviction based solely upon membership in a political party.Tate, Cindy L., Mersky, Roy M., Hartman, Gary R., "Scales v. United States", in Landmark Supreme Court Cases, Infobase Publishing, 2004, pp 428–429, .
See also
Dennis v. United States,  
Noto v. United States, 
Yates v. United States, 
 Smith Act trials of communist party leaders
References
External links
Category:1951 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States due process case law
Category:McCarthyism
Category:Communist Party USA litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
zh:丹尼斯诉合众国案
"""

From "Schacht v. United States" ==> """
Schacht v. United States, 398 U.S. 58 (1970), was a United States Supreme Court case, which ruled that actors could wear accurate military uniforms—regardless of the production's portrayal of the military—on First Amendment grounds..
Background
On December 4th, 1967, Daniel Jay Schacht and his friend, Jarrett Vandon Smith Jr., along with a third party, participated in a nationally coordinated protest of the Vietnam War by participating in a skit demonstrating the murder of Vietnamese civilians by the U.S. Military.  The skit "was composed of three people. There was Schacht who was dressed in a uniform and cap. A second person [Smith] was wearing ‘military colored’ coveralls. The third person was outfitted in typical Viet Cong apparel. The first two men carried water pistols. One of them would yell, ‘Be an able American,’ and then they would shoot the Viet Cong with their pistols. The pistols expelled a red liquid which, when it struck the victim, created the impression that he was bleeding. Once the victim fell down the other two would walk up to him and exclaim, ‘My God, this is a pregnant woman.’ Without noticeable variation this skit was reenacted several times during the morning of the demonstration."414 F.2d 630, 632.
"That night, armed FBI agents cornered Danny's car and arrested him as he left his father's electronics plant.  One of them bragged to Danny that he had spent the entire day trying to identify a federal crime they could charge him with . . . . [T]he statute he and Vandon Smith were charged with violating—designed to preclude civilians from impersonating members of the armed forces—had an exception: an actor in a theatrical or motion picture production could wear an armed forces uniform but . . . . only if the portrayal did not discredit that branch of the military.  Put another way, it was okay to wear an army uniform so long as you spoke lovingly of the army. . . . During closing argument the assistant U.S. Attorney, 'Moose' Hartman, pointed at Danny and yelled, 'If Schacht comes to my house and expresses himself like this he won't be able to walk into this courtroom to stand trial.' Then he moved toward both boys: 'The only thing I gather from these defendants is that they are displeased with the government and the war.  But I have a single answer to that.  There is a plane and boat [sic] leaving two or three times a day for other parts of the world.  I can probably name you gentlemen the place to go.  If you don't like it, get out.' "Berg, David (Schacht's attorney) (2013). Run Brother Run. Scribner. pp. 132–134.
Smith and Schacht were indicted, tried by a jury and convicted of violating 18 U.S.C.A. § 702.  U.S. District Judge James Noel sentenced Vandon Smith to probation.  Then, while punching holes in a piece of paper with a pencil, Noel glared at Danny and said, "Schacht's express purpose was to discredit the United States, of this army in Vietnam, to leave the impression to all watching that the soldiers of the country were attacking innocent people who were being killed by shooting . . . In my opinion, the defendant acted heedlessly and he has not expressed the slightest bit of remorse."  Noel sentenced Danny to the maximum possible term under the statute: a $250 fine and six months in a federal penitentiary. Sixteen days later, on March 15, 1968, US Army Lieutenant William Calley led his troops into the tiny village of Mai Lai, where they slaughtered at least 347 unarmed men, women, and children.Run Brother Run, p. 134.
The Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed Danny's and Vandon Smith's convictions.  Vandon Smith did not seek Supreme Court review.  Schacht thought his ACLU lawyers had filed a petition for writ of certiorari in the Supreme Court, but they had failed to do so, and soon after the expiration of the time for filing the petition, a mandate was issued for his arrest. Danny surrendered to the U.S. Marshal Service just after Labor Day, 1969 and was sent to the federal penitentiary in Seagoville, Texas.  A few days before, Schacht's father, also a political activist once arrested for displaying a sign in his yard supporting a black candidate for Houston's City Council, retained Berg.  Berg and his lifelong friend, Stuart Nelkin, drafted a brief and filed the petition for writ 101 days late.  The Supreme Court, which makes the rules, relaxed the rule setting deadlines for filing an appeal there, and, on December 15, 1969, granted certiorari, with three judges dissenting.  Judge Noel, aware that the Court's decision granting cert signaled a likely reversal, released Schacht on bail pending the outcome of the appeal.
On March 31, 1970, Berg, then 28, argued the case before the U.S. Supreme Court against Solicitor General and former Dean of Harvard Law School, Erwin Griswold.  On May 25, 1970, the Court unanimously reversed Schacht's conviction, striking that portion of the statute prohibiting portrayals of the military in a manner that tends to discredit that branch of the armed forces as a violation of free speech.  Vandon Smith's conviction was vacated in later proceedings in the district court.  
The Schacht decision legitimized what was called "guerilla theater" and set a precedent allowing late-filed cases to proceed in SCOTUS, if warranted by the circumstances.
Challenged statutes
18 U.S.C. 702
"Whoever, in any place within the jurisdiction of the United States or in the Canal Zone, without authority, wears the uniform or a distinctive part thereof or anything similar to a distinctive part of the uniform of any of the armed forces of the United States, Public Health Service or any auxiliary of such, shall be fined not more than $250 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both.".
10 U.S.C. § 772(f)
"When wearing by persons not on active duty authorized....
(f) While portraying a member of the Army, Navy, Air Force, or Marine Corps, an actor in a theatrical or motion-picture production may wear the uniform of that armed force if the portrayal does not tend to discredit that armed force.".
Holding
The Supreme Court held that 18 U.S.C. § 702 by itself was valid, i.e. that there could be a blanket ban on the wearing of military uniforms by those not in the military.  However, 10 U.S.C. § 772 provided a list of exceptions, and the Court found that allowing actors to wear uniforms only if their role did not discredit the military was a violation of the actor's First Amendment right to Free Speech. This, in effect, struck the final clause of 10 U.S.C. § 772 (f).
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1970 in United States case law
"""

From "Schad v. Arizona" ==> """
Schad v. Arizona, 501 U.S. 624 (1991), is a United States Supreme Court decision that explained which charges need to be explained to the jury in trials for felony murders.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 501
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
External links
  Case profile from the Arizona Department of Corrections
  Capital Defense Network's Introduction to the Eighth Amendment
Category:1991 in United States case law
Category:United States murder case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1991 in Arizona
Category:Legal history of Arizona
"""

From "Scheidler v. National Organization for Women (2003)" ==> """
Scheidler v. National Organization for Women, 537 U.S. 393 (2003), is a United States Supreme Court case involving whether abortion providers could receive damages  from protesters under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act.Scheidler v. National Organization for Women, .  National Organization for Women (NOW) obtained class status for women seeking the use of women's health clinics and began its court battle against Joseph Scheidler and PLAN et al. in 1986.  In this particular case, the court's opinion was that extortion did not apply to the defendants' actions because they did not obtain any property from the respondents (NOW and the class of women).
Legal history
RICO Act
The Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act was cited by NOW as an attempt to stop PLAN and Scheidler from protesting.  NOW claimed that PLAN's actions constituted extortion because they were attempting to shut down abortion clinics, depriving the staff and the patients of their rights.
FACE Act of 1994
FACE stands for Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances, and protects the rights of patients trying to enter abortion clinics.  This was important because this law had not yet passed when the first case National Organization for Women, Inc. v. Scheidler in Scheidler V. NOW was decided.
Procedural history
In 1980, Joseph Scheidler began the Pro-Life Action League, a non-profit advocacy organization dedicated to ending abortion. As the abortion debate grew increasingly contentious, extreme anti-abortion activists began using violence to disrupt women’s health clinics across the country. In 1986, NOW filed a complaint with the Federal court citing antitrust laws. Then, in 1989, NOW expanded its suit, adding charges of extortion and RICO violations. In 1991, a trial judge dismissed the suit stating that because no economic gains were realized by Joseph Scheidler or PLAN, extortion did not apply.  This was over-turned by  the Supreme court in 1993.. On April 20, 1998 Scheidler, PLAN et al. were declared racketeers under RICO by a jury and triple damages were awarded to NOW as a result of this ruling. In 2001, Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit upheld this ruling.Scheidler v. National Organization for Women,  It was brought before the Supreme court (again) in 2002.  Arguments began December 4, 2002.
Arguments
The chief argument for NOW was that the “property at issue is a business’s intangible right to exercise exclusive control over the use of its assets, (a) defendant obtains that property by obtaining control over the use of those assets.” The chief argument for Scheidler was “to conclude that such actions constituted extortion would effectively discard the statutory requirement that property must be obtained from another.”
The Court's decision
The decision was delivered by Justice Rehnquist.  The court held that “Petitioners did not commit extortion within the Hobbs Act’s meaning because they did not ‘obtain’ property from respondents. “if the distinction between extortion and coercion, which we find controls these cases, is to be abandoned, such a significant expansion of the law’s coverage must come from Congress, and not from the courts.”
Ginsburg's Concurrence
The Justices expressed concern over the interpretation of RICO and maintained that with the passage of the FACE act, Congress recognized that RICO wouldn't apply to a clinic in this way.
"RICO, which empowers both prosecutors and private enforcers, imposes severe criminal penalties and hefty civil liability on those engaged in conduct within the Act's compass. It has already "evolv[ed] into something quite different from the original conception of its enactors," warranting "concern[s] over the consequences of an unbridled reading of the statute,". The Court is rightly reluctant, as I see it, to extend RICO's domain further by endorsing the expansive definition of "extortion" adopted by the Seventh Circuit."Scheidler, 537 U.S. at 412 (Ginsburg, J., concurring).
The court also noted that with the passage of the FACE act, Congress stipulated that RICO did not apply to cases such as this.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Stevens notes that RICO has been applied in this manner for quite some time by multiple courts.
"For decades federal judges have uniformly given the term "property" an expansive construction that encompasses the intangible right to exercise exclusive control over the lawful use of business assets. The right to serve customers or to solicit new business is thus a protected property right. The use of violence or threats of violence to persuade the owner of a business to surrender control of such an intangible right is an appropriation of control embraced by the term "obtaining." Recognizing this settled definition of property, as I believe one must, the conclusion that petitioners obtained this property from respondents is amply supported by the evidence in the record."Scheidler, 537 U.S. at 412 (Stevens, J., dissenting).
He also pointedly adds that withdrawing RICO claims will decrease the severity of the crimes, possibly encouraging more such crimes to be committed.
"Third, given the fact that Congress has enacted specific legislation responsive to the concerns that gave rise to these cases, the principal beneficiaries of the Court's dramatic retreat from the position that federal prosecutors and federal courts have maintained throughout the history of this important statute will certainly be the class of professional criminals whose conduct persuaded Congress that the public needed federal protection from extortion."Scheidler, 537 U.S. at 417 (Stevens, J., dissenting).
Influence
This case had the possibility to influence the interpretation of many laws. The first amendment was cited by Scheidler in his defense. Scheidler’s lawyers contested that he and PLAN had the right to assemble and make speeches within the public areas around the clinics.  This also had bearing on other actions such as union strikes and even peaceful protests such as the civil rights struggles in the 1950s.
See also
 National Organization for Women, Inc. v. Scheidler, 
 Scheidler v. National Organization for Women, 
List of class-action lawsuits
References
External links
NOW's timeline
 Thomas More Society
Category:2003 in United States case law
Category:Class action lawsuits
Category:Hobbs Act case law
Category:National Organization for Women
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Scheidler v. National Organization for Women (2006)" ==> """
Scheidler v. National Organization for Women, 547 U.S. 9 (2006), was a lengthy and high-profile U.S. legal case interpreting and applying the federal Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO): a law originally drafted to combat the mafia and organized crime, the Hobbs Act:  an anti-extortion law prohibiting interference with commerce by violence or threat of violence,The Hobbs Act, 18 USC §1951. and the Travel Act:  a law prohibiting interstate travel in support of racketeering.The Travel Act, 18 USC §1952.
Parties and issues
The National Organization for Women ("NOW") as plaintiff filed the suit as a civil class-action in 1986 in federal district court on behalf of women seeking abortions and on behalf of various abortion clinics and providers. Plaintiffs sought monetary damages and injunctions under the RICO, Hobbs, and the Travel Acts, alleging that the defendants against whom the suit was filed are racketeering organizations engaging in a conspiracy to prevent access to health care facilities providing abortion services. The suit's named defendants were Joseph Scheidler and other anti-abortion protesters and organizations who were members of the Pro-Life Action League (PLAL), and specifically the Oklahoma Pro-Life Action Network (PLAN). The underlying issues in the case concerning access to abortion and the coercive and violent tactics used by some to prevent such access formed a central rallying point for both sides of the national abortion debate.
Consolidation and rulings
The Circuit and Supreme courts heard appeals and the matter was eventually consolidated with National Organization for Women et al. v. Operation Rescue. The case was argued before the Supreme Court of the United States on three separate occasions. A 2003 ruling that non-economic violence does not violate the RICO Act left other federal charges intact, including associated monetary damages and a national injunction against interference with abortion clinic operations, but the entire matter remained unsettled until the final decision in 2006 when the Supreme Court issued a unanimous decision in favor of Scheidler and PLAN (see below).
The case was also notable for the legal skills at the disposal of and displayed by the National Organization for Women.O'Connor, Karen and Yanus, Alixandra B., Where Have All of the Pro-Choice Lawyers Gone? An Analysis of Post-Roe Reproductive Rights Lawyering (abstract), Law & Policy, 29:3:368-379 (2007). .
History
The suit against Scheidler and PLAN members was filed by NOW and supporting clinics in 1986, under the Sherman Antitrust Act and violations of various state laws.  In 1988, it was expanded to include Randall Terry and Operation Rescue. In 1989, RICO and extortion claims were added.
Antitrust litigation
The United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois dismissed the antitrust claims on the grounds that the protest groups were not in economic competition with the abortion clinics, and dismissed the RICO claims on the grounds that no "economic motive" was alleged. The dismissals were upheld by the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals. This decision conflicted with other RICO cases from other circuits.
In 1994, the Supreme Court reversed the appeals court, asserting that no economic motive was necessary to violate the RICO laws.See 
The case was remanded back to the district court.
RICO complaint and trial
At this point, the defendants included John Patrick Ryan, Randall Terry, Andrew Scholberg, Conrad Wojnar, Timothy Murphy, Monica Migliorino, VitalMed Laboratories, Inc., the Pro-Life Action League, Inc. (PLAL), the Pro-Life Direct Action League, Inc. (PDAL), Operation Rescue, and Project Life.  The plaintiffs included NOW and two abortion clinics, the Delaware Women's Health Organization, Inc., and the Summit Women's Health Organization, Inc.
Meanwhile, in 1994, the Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act (FACE) went into effect, prohibiting the use of force or intimidation to block access to reproductive health care facilities.
In 1997, class-action status was granted by the district court, certifying NOW as representing the class of all women seeking reproductive health care. In 1998, Randall Terry, founder of Operation Rescue who was facing over $100,000 in costs from other abortion clinic-related charges, settled the case against him, agreeing to a permanent personal injunction.
Also 1998, as the Supreme Court summarizes: 
After a 7-week trial, a six-member jury concluded that petitioners violated the civil provisions of RICO. By answering a series of special interrogatory questions, the jury found, inter alia, that petitioners' alleged "pattern of racketeering activity" included 21 violations of the Hobbs Act, 18 U. S. C. §1951; 25 violations of state extortion law; 25 instances of attempting or conspiring to commit either federal or state extortion; 23 violations of the Travel Act, 18 U. S. C. §1952; and 23 instances of attempting to violate the Travel Act. The jury awarded $31,455.64 to respondent, the National Women's Health Organization of Delaware, Inc., and $54,471.28 to the National Women's Health Organization of Summit, Inc. These damages were trebled pursuant to §1964(c). Additionally, the District Court entered a permanent nationwide injunction prohibiting petitioners from obstructing access to the clinics, trespassing on clinic property, damaging clinic property, or using violence or threats of violence against the clinics, their employees, or their patients.
(The injunction was issued in 1999; "petitioners" refers to the original defendants, who were the parties making the appeal.)  The case was appealed to the Seventh Circuit again, on several grounds, including the First Amendment right to free speech.  The circuit court affirmed the lower court's decision.National Organization for Women, Inc. v. Scheidler, 
The Supreme Court agreed to hear an appeal, though refused to consider free speech issues. In its 2003 decision, the court ruled that while the actions under consideration in the appeal might have been coercive, they were not extortive because the defendants did not "'obtain' property" from their victims.See . The defendants did, however, according to the Court, interfere with the victims' ability to exercise their property rights. Coercion is a less serious crime than extortion, and is not covered by RICO. The decision left open the question of whether the law generally entitled private parties to injunctive relief (as opposed to after-the-fact monetary damages) in RICO cases.
Supreme Court review
The case returned to the Seventh Circuit, where the plaintiffs argued that while 117 violations of the RICO Act were addressed by the second Supreme Court decision, 4 violations of the Hobbs Act remained, constituting violence but not extortion.  They also claimed that the national injunction could be supported as remedy for these acts.  The appeals court attempted to remand these issues to the district court, but the defendants appealed to the Supreme Court, on the grounds that the Seventh Circuit was ignoring the 2003 decision.  The defendants also asked the court to decide whether the Hobbs Act prohibits non-extortive violence, and to decide the still-open question of whether the law generally entitled private parties to injunctive relief in RICO cases.
With the case styled as Scheidler v. National Organization for Women, Inc., the Supreme Court handed down a unanimous (8-0) decision in favor of Scheidler and PLAN on February 28, 2006. Because he was not yet on the Court when the arguments were presented, Justice Samuel Alito did not participate in the decision. The Court held that the Hobbs Act did not cover violence unrelated to robbery or extortion. The Court also noted that Congress's 1994 passage of FACE indicated that Congress did not view RICO as pertaining to this area.
See also
 List of class action lawsuits
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 547
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
Litigants' summaries
 Plaintiffs' Timeline 
 Defendants' Case summary 
2006 Supreme Court case
 Docket page, including background documents, FindLaw.
 Supreme Court docket updates on [ Operation Rescue v. NOW, et al.]
 Supreme Court docket updates on [ Scheidler, et al. v. NOW et al.]
 2006 Supreme Court Decision
Further reading
 Elman, Emily, Defining the Scope of Extortion Liability After Scheidler v. NOW, Note, NYU Journal of Legislation & Public Policy, 14:213-243 (2011).
 Johnson, Dane E., Cages, Clinics, and Consequences: The Chilling Problems of Controlling Special-Interest Extremism, Oregon Law Review, (2007).
 Nero, Autumn, Where Are We Now? Clinic Protection In The Wake Of Scheidler v. National Organization for Women, Inc., Wisconsin Women's Law Journal, 21:73 (2006).
Kelly, Daniel B., Recent Development, Defining Extortion: Rico, Hobbs, and Statutory Interpretation in Scheidler v. National Organization for Women, Inc., 123 S. Ct. 1057 (2003), Harvard Journal of Law & Public Policy, 26:953 (2003).
 Murray, Brian, Note, Protesters, Extortion, and Coercion: Preventing RICO from Chilling First Amendment Freedoms, Notre Dame Law Review, 75:691 (1999).
 Green, Stuart P., Theft by Coercion: Extortion, Blackmail, and Hard Bargaining, Washburn Law Journal, (2004).
 Scheidler, Joseph, et al. v. National Organization for Women, Inc., et al. / Operation Rescue v. NOW, "On the Docket" column by Laura Mcgann, Medill News Service.  1 September 2005.
RICO use in other social justice contexts
 Roth, Jaime, Comment,  Reptiles in the Weeds:  Civil RICO vs. the First Amendment in the Animal Rights Debate, Univ. of Miami Law Review, 56:467 (2002).
 Beltran, Xavier, Note, Applying RICO to Eco-Activism: Fanning the Radical Flames of Eco-Terror, B.C. Environmental Affairs Law Review, 29:281 (2002).
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:Class action lawsuits
Category:Hobbs Act case law
Category:National Organization for Women
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Alliance Defending Freedom litigation
"""

From "Schenck v. Pro-Choice Network of Western New York" ==> """
Schenck v. Pro-Choice Network of Western New York, 519 U.S. 357 (1997), was a case heard before the United States Supreme Court related to legal protection of access to abortion. The question before the court was whether the First Amendment was violated by placing an injunction on protesters outside abortion clinics. The court ruled in a 6–3 decision that "floating buffer zones" preventing protesters approaching people entering or leaving the clinics were unconstitutional, though "fixed buffer zones" around the clinics themselves remained constitutional. The Court's upholding the fixed buffer was the most important aspect of the ruling, because it was a common feature of injunctions nationwide.
Paul Schenck challenged a Federal District Court injunction that restricted "sidewalk counselors" from approaching abortion clinic patients and others with Bibles, tracts and anti-abortion messages. Because these protesters often violently harassed and intimidated patients and staff or prevented them from entering the clinic, the Court upheld the fixed buffer zone around the clinics, although it struck down the floating buffer zone around individuals because its indefinite and movable nature made it difficult to administer and risked overly restricting free speech.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 519
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 References 
Further reading
External links
PBS NewsHour: "Drawing the Line"
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:1997 in United States case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Schenck v. United States" ==> """
Schenck v. United States, 249 U.S. 47 (1919), was a landmark decision of the U.S. Supreme Court concerning enforcement of the Espionage Act of 1917 during World War I. A unanimous Supreme Court, in an opinion by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr., concluded that Charles Schenck, who distributed flyers to draft-age men urging resistance to induction, could be convicted of an attempt to obstruct the draft, a criminal offense. The First Amendment did not protect Schenck from prosecution, even though, "in many places and in ordinary times, Schenck, in saying all that was said in the circular, would have been within his constitutional rights. But the character of every act depends upon the circumstances in which it is done." In this case, Holmes said, "the words used are used in such circumstances and are of such a nature as to create a clear and present danger that they will bring about the substantive evils that Congress has a right to prevent." Therefore, Schenck could be punished. 
The Court continued to follow this reasoning to uphold a series of convictions arising out of prosecutions during wartime, but Holmes began to dissent in the case of Abrams v. United States, insisting that the Court had departed from the standard he had crafted for them, and had begun to allow punishment for ideas. However, the Court has set another line of precedents to govern cases in which the constitutionality of a statute is challenged on its face. In 1969, Schenck was largely overturned by Brandenburg v. Ohio, which limited the scope of banned speech to that which would be directed to and likely to incite imminent lawless action (e.g. a riot).
Background
Schenck was the first in a line of Supreme Court cases defining the modern understanding of the First Amendment. Supreme Court justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. wrote the often-cited opinion in the case, because of events that were not publicly known at the time. The United States' entry into the First World War had caused deep divisions in society, and was vigorously opposed, especially by those on the left and by those who had ties to Germany. The Wilson administration launched a broad campaign of criminal enforcement that resulted in thousands of prosecutions. Many of these were for trivial acts of dissent. 
In the first case arising from this campaign to come before the CourtBaltzer v. United States, 248 U.S. 593 (1918)South Dakota farmers had signed a petition criticizing their governor's administration of the draft, threatening him with defeat at the polls. They were charged with obstructing the recruitment and enlistment service, and convicted. When a majority of the Court voted during their conference to affirm the conviction, Holmes quickly drafted and circulated a strongly worded dissenting opinion:Real obstructions of the law, giving real aid and comfort to the enemy, I should have been glad to see punished more summarily and severely than they sometimes were. But I think that our intention to put out all our powers in aid of success in war should not hurry us into intolerance of opinions and speech that could not be imagined to do harm, although opposed to our own. It is better for those who have unquestioned and almost unlimited power in their hands to err on the side of freedom.Sheldon Novick, "The Unrevised Holmes and Freedom of Expression," 1991 Supreme Court Review 303, 389 (1992)(Appendix)Rather than proceed in the face of Holmes's biting dissent, Chief Justice Edward Douglass White set the case aside and word of the situation evidently reached the Administration, because the prosecution was abandoned. White then asked Holmes to write the opinion for a unanimous Court in the next case, one in which they could agree, Schenck v. United States. Holmes wrote that opinion, and wrote again for a unanimous court upholding convictions in two more cases that spring, Frohwerk v. United States and Debs v. United States, establishing what remains the standard for deciding the constitutionality of criminal convictions based on expressive behavior. Holmes disliked legislative-style formulas, and did not repeat the language of "clear and present danger" in any subsequent opinion, however. The Schenck opinion alone accordingly is often cited as the source of this legal standard, and some scholars have suggested that Holmes changed his mind and offered a different view in his equally famous dissent in Abrams v. United States.  The events leading to the assignment of the Schenck opinion to Holmes were discovered when Holmes's biographer Sheldon Novick unearthed the unpublished Baltzer opinion among Holmes's papers at Harvard Law School.Sheldon Novick, "Preface, Honorable Justice at twenty-five," in Honorable Justice: The Life of Oliver Wendell Holmes (1989, 2013)
The facts of the Schenck case were as follows. Charles Schenck and Elizabeth Baer were members of the Executive Committee of the Socialist Party in Philadelphia, of which Schenck was General Secretary. The executive committee authorized, and Schenck oversaw, printing and mailing more than 15,000 fliers to men slated for conscription during World War I. The fliers urged men not to submit to the draft, saying "Do not submit to intimidation", "Assert your rights", "If you do not assert and support your rights, you are helping to deny or disparage rights which it is the solemn duty of all citizens and residents of the United States to retain," and urged men not to comply with the draft on the grounds that military conscription constituted involuntary servitude, which is prohibited by the Thirteenth Amendment.Schenck v. United States, 249 U.S. 47, 49-51 (1917)
After jury trials Schenck and Baer were convicted of violating Section 3 of the Espionage Act of 1917., which prohibited willful obstruction of the recently-enacted draft. Both defendants appealed to the United States Supreme Court, arguing that their conviction, and the statute which purported to authorize it, were contrary to the First Amendment. They relied heavily on the text of the First Amendment, and their claim that the Espionage Act of 1917 had what today one would call a "chilling effect" on free discussion of the war effort.Brief of Plaintiffs in Error - Schenk
The Court's decision
left|thumb|Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr.
The Court, in a unanimous opinion written by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., held that Schenck's criminal conviction was constitutional. The statute only applied to successful obstructions of the draft, but common-law precedents allowed prosecution for attempts that were dangerously close to success. Attempts made by speech or writing could be punished like other attempted crimes; the First Amendment did not protect speech encouraging men to resist induction, because, "when a nation is at war, many things that might be said in time of peace are such a hindrance to its effort that their utterance will not be endured so long as men fight, and that no Court could regard them as protected by any constitutional right."  In other words, the court held, the circumstances of wartime allow greater restrictions on free speech than would be allowed during peacetime, if only because new and greater dangers are present.
The opinion's most famous and most often quoted passage was this: The most stringent protection of free speech would not protect a man in falsely shouting fire in a theatre and causing a panic. ... The question in every case is whether the words used are used in such circumstances and are of such a nature as to create a clear and present danger that they will bring about the substantive evils that Congress has a right to prevent.  It is a question of proximity and degree. The phrase "shouting fire in a crowded theater" has since become a popular metaphor for the dangers or limitations of free speech.
Subsequent jurisprudence
In subsequent cases, when it appeared to him that the Court was departing from the precedents established in Schenck and companion cases, Holmes dissented, reiterating his view that expressions of honest opinion were entitled to near absolute protection, but that expressions made with the specific intent to cause a criminal harm, or that threatened a clear and present danger of such harm, could be punished. In Abrams v. United States, he elaborated on the common-law privileges for freedom of speech and of the press, and stated his conviction that freedom of opinion was central to the constitutional scheme because competition in the "marketplace" of ideas was the best test of their truth. In Whitney v. California (1927), concerning a conviction for seditious speech forbidden by California law, Holmes joined a concurring opinion written by Justice Louis D. Brandeis once again explaining the clear-and-present-danger standard for criminal attempts in these terms, reiterating the argument that political speech was protected because of the value of democratic deliberation. The Supreme Court continued to affirm convictions for seditious speech in a series of prosecutions of leftists, however, culminating in Dennis v. United States, 341 U.S. 494 (1951) in which a bitterly divided Court upheld the sedition convictions for the leaders of the Communist Party. Judge Learned Hand in the court below and Chief Justice Vinson for the plurality in the Supreme Court cited Schenck, and the language of "clear and present danger" accordingly fell into disfavor among the advocates of free speech and freedom of the press.
A unanimous Court in a brief per curiam opinion in Brandenburg v. Ohio (1969), abandoned the disfavored language while seemingly applying the reasoning of Schenck to reverse the conviction of a Ku Klux Klan member prosecuted for giving an inflammatory speech. The Court said that speech could be prosecuted only when it posed a danger of "imminent lawless action," a formulation which is sometimes said to reflect Holmes reasoning as more fully explicated in his Abrams dissent, rather than the common law of attempts explained in Schenck. Brandenburg is also taken to have repudiated the clear-and-present-danger standard as construed in Dennis, and to have adopted something more like the explication given by Holmes and Brandeis in subsequent opinions. Partly because the standard for protecting expressive behavior under the First Amendment was stated differently in his different opinions, "revisionist" scholars have argued that Holmes changed his mind in the summer of 1919, and that after writing three opinions for a unanimous court, he stated a different and more liberal view in his Abrams dissent a few weeks later.Albert W. Alschuler, Law Without Values: The Life, Work, and Legacy of Justice Holmes; University of Chicago Press, 2000, , pp. 76-77, citing numerous commentaries. Bolstered by this argument, a number of advocates for freedom of expression have insisted that the Supreme Court has rejected Schenck and the majority opinion in Abrams, and in practice has followed the reasoning of Holmes' Abrams dissent and Brandeis' and Holmes' concurring opinion in Whitney.Thomas Healy, The Great Dissent: How Oliver Wendell Holmes Changed his Mind—and Changed the History of Freedom of Speech in America; Henry Holt and Company, 2013, 
See also
Clear and present danger
Freedom for the Thought That We Hate
Imminent lawless action
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 249
Shouting fire in a crowded theater
Threatening the president of the United States
Abrams v. United States, 
Brandenburg v. Ohio, 
Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 
Dennis v. United States, 
Feiner v. New York, 
Hess v. Indiana, 
Korematsu v. United States, 
Kunz v. New York, 
Masses Publishing Co. v. Patten, (1917)
Sacher v. United States,  
Terminiello v. Chicago, 
Whitney v. California, 
References
Further reading
 Krotoszynski Jr, Ronald J. "The Clear and Present Dangers of the Clear and Present Danger Test: Schenck and Abrams Revisited." SMU Law Review 72 (2019): 415-440 online
Sheldon Novick, "Preface: Honorable Justice at Twenty-five," in Honorable Justice: the Life of Oliver Wendell Holmes (1989, 2013).
External links
Transcript of record and case briefs for Schenck v. United States
First Amendment Library entry for Schenck v. United States
Associated Press article on decision (March 4, 1919)
 "Supreme Court Landmark Case Schenck v. United States" from C-SPAN's Landmark Cases: Historic Supreme Court Decisions
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Conscription in the United States
Category:1919 in United States case law
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States home front during World War I
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Schillinger v. United States" ==> """
Schillinger v. United States, 155 U.S. 163 (1894), is a decision of the United States Supreme Court,.  holding (7–2, per Justice Brewer) that a suit for patent infringement cannot be entertained against the United States, because patent infringement is a tort and the United States has not waived sovereign immunity for intentional torts.Durchslag, Melvyn R. "State Sovereign Immunity: A Reference Guide to the United States Constitution", via Google Books, p. 133, Greenwood Publishing Group, 2002. . Accessed January 20, 2009.The United States subsequently waived sovereign immunity for torts committed negligently.
350px|right|thumb|Drawing of Schillinger's pavement, from the patent on which he sued the Government
 Background 
A patent issued to John J. Schillinger for an improvement in concrete pavement. Later, the Architect of the Capitol invited proposals for a concrete pavement in the capitol grounds, and entered into a contract for the laying of such pavement according to plans and specifications prepared by the Architect, which did not refer specifically to the patent.
Schillinger then sued under the patent to recover damages from the United States for the wrongful use of the invention in the construction of the pavement. The Court of Claims held that there was no contract, either expressed or implied, on the part of the government for the use of such patent, and dismissed the petition as outside of the jurisdiction of the court.
 Opinion of the Court 
right|thumb|150px|Justice David Brewer
Justice Brewer wrote the majority opinion. Justice Harlan, joined by Justice Shiras, dissented.
The doctrine of sovereign immunity provides that the United States cannot be sued without its consent. When Congress consents to suits against the government, it has "an absolute discretion to specify the cases and contingencies in which the liability of the government is submitted to the courts for judicial determination." The courts may not "go beyond the letter of such consent," no matter how beneficial they may deem it to do so, for only Congress has that power.
Until the creation of the Court of Claims in 1855, the only recourse of claimants that the United States had wronged them was to appeal to Congress. The jurisdictional statute for the court defined the claims that could be submitted to the Court of Claims as follows:
The Court of Claims shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all claims founded upon the Constitution of the United States or any law of Congress …or upon any contract, expressed or implied, with the Government of the United States, or for damages …in cases not sounding in tort, in respect of which claims the party would be entitled to redress against the United States … if the United States were suable.
The Court of Claims thus has no jurisdiction over claims against the government for mere torts. To be sure, the Constitution forbids the taking of private property for public uses without just compensation.  But that does not create a claim founded upon the Constitution of the United States and within the jurisdictional grant of the Court of Claims. Congress never intended that every wrongful seizure of property by an officer of the government, the Court explained, would expose the government to an action for damages in the Court of Claims, for the statute expressly excludes tort actions and that exclusion would be meaningless under the foregoing broad reading.
That Schillinger's action was one sounding in tort is clear, the Court said, for the petition charges a wrongful appropriation by the government, against the protest of the claimants, and prays to recover the damages done by the wrong. There is no express or implied contract—no statement tending to show a "coming together of minds" in respect to anything. The Court therefore concluded:
Do the facts, as stated in the petition or as found by the court, show anything more than a wrong done, and can this be adjudged other than a case "sounding in tort"? We think not, and therefore the judgment of the Court of Claims is affirmed.
 Subsequent developments 
Congress subsequently passed 28 U.S.C. § 1498,. which permits owners of intellectual property rights such as patents, copyrights, and mask works to sue for "just and entire compensation" when the United States uses such intellectual property rights. 
The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit recently held that no action against the United States lies for patent-related cases not fitting squarely within the language of § 1498, because sovereign immunity has not been waived for intentional tortsSee  (permitting suit for some intentional torts but not most others). and, consistent with Schillinger, patent infringement is not a taking of property under the Fifth Amendment.Zoltek v. United States, 442 F.3d 1345 (Fed. Cir. 2006), cert. denied, . The Federal Circuit held that patent rights are not property interests under the Fifth Amendment, reasoning that § 1498's "new and limited waiver of sovereign immunity" would have been unnecessary if Congress intended for patents to be compensable rights under the Takings Clause. The Federal Circuit so ruled despite a number of obiter dicta in previous decisions that assumed that patent infringement was a taking of property. The Federal Circuit's ruling is consistent with current Supreme Court takings jurisprudence, however, because patent infringement does not usually deprive the patentee of substantially all of the value of the patent.See  (no taking because NYC's action did not deprive Penn Central of substantially all of the value of Grand Central Station).
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States federal sovereign immunity case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:1894 in United States case law
"""

From "Schlemmer v. Buffalo, Rochester & Pittsburgh Railway Co." ==> """
Schlemmer v. Buffalo, Rochester & Pittsburgh Railway Co., 205 U.S. 1 (1907), was a cause of action for the death of the plaintiff's intestate, Adam M. Schlemmer, while trying to couple a shovel car to a caboose..
Background
Facts
The decedent was killed while following orders to couple railway cars that did not have a coupling device required by the Safety Appliance Act (Act). Plaintiff filed an action against defendant railroad company for the wrongful death of her intestate under the Safety Appliance Act.
The shovel car was part of a train on its way through Pennsylvania from a point in New York, and was not equipped with an automatic coupler in accordance with Federal law.  Instead it had an iron drawbar fastened underneath the car by a pin and projecting about a foot beyond the car. The drawbar weighed about 80 pounds and its free and played up and down. On this end was an eye, and the coupling had to be done by lifting the free end possibly a foot, so that it should enter a slot in an automatic coupler on the caboose and allow a pin to drop through the eye. Due to the absence of buffers on the shovel car and to its being so high that it would pass over those on the caboose, the car and caboose would crush anyone between them if they came together and the coupling failed to be made. Schlemmer was ordered to make the coupling as the train was slowly approaching the caboose. To do so he had to get between the cars, and in endeavoring to obey the order and to guide the drawbar he rose a little too high, and, as he failed to hit the slot, the top of his head was crushed.
The plaintiff, in her declaration, alleged that the defendant was transporting the shovel car from state to state, and that the coupler was not such as was required by existing laws.
Procedural history
The trial judge decided that the deceased was guilty of contributory negligence but left uncertain what the negligence was. The Supreme Court of the State of Pennsylvania affirmed the trial court's grant of a nonsuit.  (207 Pa. St. 198)
Opinion of the court
The court reversed the grant of nonsuit, holding that the decedent had not assumed the risk. The court held, as preliminary matters that the railway car was in the course of interstate transportation, and it was a car within the contemplation of § 2 of the Act. Thus, under § 8 of the act, the decedent could not be deemed to have assumed the risk of the injury or death. The court noted that to the extent the state court alternatively indicated that, even if assumption of risk did not apply, the decedent was guilty of contributory negligence, such statement ran afoul of the Act because the state court was merely substituting contributory negligence for assumption of risk.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 205
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:1907 in United States case law
Category:History of Pittsburgh
"""

From "Schlesinger v. Ballard" ==> """
Schlesinger v. Ballard, 419 U.S. 498 (1975), was a United States Supreme Court case that upheld a federal statute granting female Naval officers four more years of commissioned service before mandatory discharge than male Naval officers..Varat, J.D. et al.  Constitutional Law Cases and Materials, Concise Thirteenth Edition.  Foundation Press, NY: 2009, p. 583  A group of naval officers who were discharged prior to their tenth year of commissioned service, as a result of not being promoted, received a lower rate of separation pay than female officers who were permitted to remain in service longer and receive three additional promotion board opportunities.  As a result, the female officers who failed to be promoted received a higher rate of separation pay over their male counterparts.  Ballard, a male officer who was passed over earned $15,000 in separation pay, but if he had been a similarly situated female officer, he argued that he would have received over $200,000 in separation pay.  Ballard had also served as an enlisted sailor, but his eighteen years of total service was not enough to earn a military retirement.  Although Justice Harry Blackmun's clerk pointed this out in a memorandum, Blackmun responded "We are first of all, dealing with the military and not with some civilian set-up, and I suppose this adds a protective factor to the government's position."Joshua E. Kastenberg, Shaping U.S. Military Law: Governing a Constitutional Military. (London: Ashgate Press, 2013), 154-55
 Decision 
A federal statute granted female Naval officers thirteen years of commissioned service while allowing only nine years of commissioned service for male Naval officers before mandatory discharge.  The Supreme Court held that the law passed intermediate scrutiny equal protection analysis because women, excluded from combat duty, had fewer opportunities for advancement in the military.  The Court found the statute to directly compensate for the past statutory barriers to advancement did violate the Constitution.Varat, p. 583  The Court' approach to the appeal was, unlike Frontiero v. Richardson, part of a line of appeals in which it displayed deference to the military.
 References 
 External links 
 Full text from Justia.com
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
Category:United States affirmative action case law
Category:History of women in the United States
Category:Women in the United States Navy
"""

From "Schlesinger v. Councilman" ==> """
Schlesinger v. Councilman, 420 U.S. 738 (1975), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States.
The case was a key part of government arguments in the 2006 case of Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, defending its contention that the Supreme Court should not have heard the case, because Hamdan was still being processed by a military tribunal court in Guantanamo Bay.
Both the majority opinion by Justice John Paul Stevens and the dissenting argument of Justice Antonin Scalia referenced the case.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 420
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States military case law
Category:1975 in United States case law
"""

From "Schlesinger v. Holtzman" ==> """
Schlesinger v. Holtzman, 414 U.S. 1321 (1973), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States involving the Constitution's War Powers Clause. The Court reversed a ruling by Justice William O. Douglas ordering the military to stop bombing Cambodia.
 Background 
On April 29, 1970, President Richard Nixon ordered the Cambodian Campaign, a secret military invasion lacking congressional approval.David J. Barron & Marty Lederman, The Commander in Chief at the Lowest Ebb - A Constitutional History, 121 Harv. L. Rev. 941 (2008).  Congress responded by passing the Cooper–Church Amendment, which defunded the invasion.  Assistant Attorney General William Rehnquist wrote an Office of Legal Counsel memorandum advising that the Constitution's Commander in Chief clause should authorize President Nixon’s campaign anyway,Memorandum from William H. Rehnquist, Assistant Att’y Gen., Office of Legal Counsel, to Charles Colson, Special Counsel to the President 20 (May 22, 1970). and Rehnquist testified as to such before the United States House Committee on Foreign Affairs.Congress, the President, and the War Powers: Hearing Before the Subcomm. on National Security, Policy and Scientific Developments of the H. Comm. on Foreign Affairs, 91st Cong. 216 (1970).
President Nixon then began Operation Freedom Deal, an extensive bombing campaign over most of Cambodia.  In June 1973, Congress voted to discontinue funding of all combat activities in Cambodia. President Nixon vetoed the bill, which Congress narrowly failed to override.Louis Fisher, Unchecked Presidential Wars, 148 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1637 (2000).  Congress and the President then agreed to the compromise Case–Church Amendment, which would end all bombing on August 15, 1973.
Brooklyn Congresswoman Elizabeth Holtzman voted against the compromise, then sued Defense Secretary James R. Schlesinger to immediately stop the bombings.Holtzman v. Schlesinger, 484 F.2d 1307 (2d Cir. 1973).  On July 25, U.S. District Judge Orrin Grimmell Judd granted summary judgment for Congresswoman Holtzman and issued a permanent injunction ordering the military to refrain “from participating in any way in military activities in or over Cambodia or releasing any bombs which may fall in Cambodia.”Holtzman v. Schlesinger, 361 F. Supp. 553 (E.D.N.Y. 1973).  Judge Judd gave the military until Friday, July 27, before his order would come into effect.  On July 27, a unanimous panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit issued a stay of Judge Judd’s order until the next scheduled sitting of the court.Eugene R. Fidell, Why Did the Cambodia Bombing Continue?, 13 GREEN BAG 2D 321 (2010).
Supreme Court
Congresswoman Holtzman next applied to Justice Thurgood Marshall, the Circuit Justice assigned to oversee the Second Circuit, to vacate the stay.  Justice Marshall declined to order the military to stop bombing, on August 1, writing "the proper response to an arguably illegal action is not lawlessness by judges charged with interpreting and enforcing the laws. Down that road lies tyranny and repression."Holtzman v. Schlesinger, 414 U.S. 1304 (1973) (Marshall, J., in chambers).  The Court was in recess for the summer but the Congresswoman reapplied, this time to outspoken war critic Justice William O. Douglas.Moses, James L.. 1996. “William O. Douglas and the Vietnam War: Civil Liberties, Presidential Authority, and the "Political Question"”. Presidential Studies Quarterly 26 (4). [Wiley, Center for the Study of the Presidency and Congress]: 1019–33.
Justice Douglas met with the Congresswoman’s ACLU lawyers at his home in Goose Prairie, Washington and promised them a hearing the next day.  On Friday, August 3, 1973, Justice Douglas held a hearing in the Yakima federal courthouse, where he dismissed the Government’s argument that he was causing a “constitutional confrontation” by saying, “we live in a world of confrontations. That’s what the whole system is about.”  That night, Justice Douglas ordered the military to stop bombing, reasoning “denial of the application before me would catapult our airmen as well as Cambodian peasants into the death zone.”Holtzman v. Schlesinger, 414 U.S. 1316 (1973) (Douglas, J., in chambers).
The U.S. military ignored the new Supreme Court order.  Six hours later, on August 4, Justice Marshall effectively undid Douglas’s ruling by staying the District Court’s injunction. Marshall contacted the other seven justices, and they agreed to this course of action, but the Court was not formally reconvened to reverse Douglas’s order.Schlesinger v. Holtzman, 414 U.S. 1321, 1323 (1973) (Douglas, J., dissenting in chambers).
 Subsequent developments 
On August 6, the military accidentally bombed Neak Leung, killing at least 137 villagers. The Second Circuit heard argument of the appeal on Wednesday, August 8, and later that day, Circuit Judge William Hughes Mulligan joined by Circuit Judge William H. Timbers, reversed Judge Judd’s order and dismissed Congresswoman Holtzman's lawsuit.  Circuit Judge James L. Oakes dissented, citing Federalist No. 69.  On August 15, all direct U.S. military involvement in Indochina ended.  The substantive case never reached the Supreme Court.
Congress next passed the War Powers Resolution, which requires the President to receive congressional approval for all new hostilities after sixty days.  President Nixon vetoed the resolution, which Congress overwhelmingly overrode on November 7, 1973.
 Significance 
This case is significant because it challenges the legality of being able to operate the military on a "neutral" site. This case emphasizes the proper role of the judiciary to refrain from deciding political questions that are for the President and Congress to decide. Congress has declared war only 11 times and in only five wars: three times in 19th century wars, twice in World War I, and six times in World War II,. The United States has fought in over 240 wars which were not declared, dating  back to President George Washington.
See also  
 Bas v. Tingy (1800)
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1973 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
"""

From "Schlesinger v. Reservists Committee to Stop the War" ==> """
Schlesinger v. Reservists Committee to Stop the War, 418 U.S. 208 (1974), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court which ruled that citizens do not have the right to challenge the constitutionality of members of Congress holding reserve commissions in the armed forces.Schlesinger v. Reservists Comm. to Stop the War, .
Background
Article I, Section 6, clause 2 of the U.S. Constitution, the Ineligibility Clause, states that "no Person holding any Office under the United States, shall be a Member of either House during his Continuance in Office." The Reservists Committee and several of its members brought suit to challenge the legality of members of Congress holding officer's commissions in the reserve components of the armed forces. The Committee alleged that such officers might be subject to undue influence by the executive and might not faithfully execute their legislative duties. 
The district court found standing to sue, holding that the hypothetical injury at issue was exactly the type of harm that the constitutional provision at issue was designed to address. The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia affirmed.
Decision
In a 6–3 decision, the Supreme Court, in an opinion by Chief Justice Warren E. Burger, held that standing to sue may not be predicated upon an interest held in common by all members of the public. Rather, a concrete injury, whether actual or threatened, is necessary. The Court specifically rejected the idea - first embraced by the district court - that the lack of an alternative plaintiff could justify relaxation of the standing requirement. The Court stated: "The assumption that if respondents have no standing to sue, no one would have standing, is not a reason to find standing."Schlesinger, 418 U.S. at 227.
References
External links
Category:1974 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit cases
Category:United States standing case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Schlude v. Commissioner" ==> """
Schlude v. Commissioner, 372 U.S. 128 (1963), is a decision by the United States Supreme Court in which the Court held that, under the accrual method, taxpayers must include as income in a particular year advance payments by way of cash, negotiable notes, and contract installments falling due but remaining unpaid during that year. In doing so, the Court tossed aside the matching principle in favor of the earlier-of test.
Facts
The petitioners operated ballroom dancing studios. They kept their books and completed income tax returns on a fiscal year accrual basis.   Dancing lessons were offered under either of two basic contracts. The cash plan contract required the student to pay the entire down payment in cash at the time the contract was executed, with the balance due in installments thereafter. The deferred payment contract required only a portion of the down payment to be paid in cash, with the remainder of the down payment due in stated installments. The balance of the contract price was to be paid as designated in a negotiable note signed at the time the contract was executed.
The contracts included a specific number of lesson hours ranging from five to 1,200 hours. Some contracts even provided for lifetime courses that entitled the student to two hours of lessons per month plus two parties a year for life. Although the contracts designated the period during which the lessons had to be taken, there was no schedule of specific dates.
The Commissioner included in gross income for the years in question advance payments by way of cash, negotiable notes, and contract installments falling due but remaining unpaid during that year. The Tax Court and the Court of Appeals upheld the Commissioner.
Issue
Was it proper for the Commissioner, exercising his discretion under § 446(b)(b) to reject the studio’s accounting system, as not clearly reflecting income and to include as income in a particular year advance payments by way of cash, negotiable notes, and contract installments falling due but remaining unpaid during that year?
Holding
The Supreme Court holds that it was proper for the Commissioner to include in income advance payments by way of cash, negotiable notes, and contract installments falling due but remaining unpaid during that year. The Court holds that the problem is controlled by American Automobile Ass'n v. United States.
Rationale
In American Automobile Association v. United States, the Court held that the Commissioner was correct in including in taxpayer’s gross income for each year the entire amount of membership dues actually received in the taxable calendar year without regard to expected future service expense in the subsequent year. The Court rejected the taxpayer’s system as artificial since the advance payments related to services which were to be performed only upon customers’ demands and not on fixed dates in the future.
The Court likened this case to American Automobile Association because the contracts did not provide for lessons on fixed dates after the taxable year.  Instead, the lessons were to be arranged from time to time by the instructor and his student. Therefore, the student could arrange for some or all of the additional lessons or could simply allow their rights to lapse. As in American Automobile Association, the services were rendered solely on customers’ demands without relation to fixed dates in the future.
The Court also relied on Spring City Foundry v. Commissioner. In Spring City Foundry, the Court held that, for an accrual basis taxpayer, “it is the right to receive and not the actual receipt that determines the inclusion of the amount in gross income.” The Court reasoned that in this case, the right to receive the advance payments had become fixed at least at the time they were due and payable.
Dissent
The dissent believes that the majority decision is in direct contrast to the most elementary principle of accrual accounting—that advances be considered reportable income only in the year in which they are earned by the taxpayer’s rendition of the services for which the payments were made. The dissent argues that this decision “completes the mutilation of a basic element of the accrual method of reporting income”—a method which has been explicitly approved by Congress for almost half a century.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 372
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1963 in United States case law
"""

From "Schlup v. Delo" ==> """
Schlup v. Delo, 513 U.S. 298 (1995), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court expanded the ability to reopen a case in light of new evidence of innocence..
Petitioner Lloyd E. Schlup, Jr., a Missouri prisoner under a sentence of death for the 1984 murder of an inmate named Arthur Dade, filed a habeas corpus petition alleging that constitutional error deprived the jury of critical evidence that would have established his innocence. At trial, the state's evidence consisted of the testimony of two corrections officers who had witnessed the murder. Schlup's defense was that the videotape from a camera in the dining room showed that he was not the man that killed Arthur Dade. Schlup was denied his federal habeas corpus petition and filed a second petition alleging ineffective counsel. However, he did not argue his ineffective counsel claim in his first habeas corpus petition. Due to this, he was procedurally barred from arguing his case unless he could show that he was actually innocent and his conviction would be a miscarriage of justice. The Court granted certiorari to consider whether the Sawyer v. Whitley. standard provides adequate protection against the kind of miscarriage of justice that would result from the execution of a person who is actually innocent.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court held that the standard of Murray v. Carrier,. which requires a habeas petitioner to show that "a constitutional violation has probably resulted in the conviction of one who is actually innocent," id., at 496—rather than the more stringent Sawyer standard, governs the miscarriage of justice inquiry when a petitioner who has been sentenced to death raises a claim of actual innocence to avoid a procedural bar to the consideration of the merits of his constitutional claims. The exception is dependent on the petitioner's credible showing of innocence with reliable evidence. To meet the standard in Murray v. Carrier, the petitioner must show that it is more likely than not that no juror would have convicted given the new evidence. The Supreme Court remanded for determination of whether Schlup showed this evidence as required by Carrier. 
 Subsequent developments 
In 1996, Schlup was granted a writ of habeas corpus on the ground that his original trial attorney failed to adequately represent him. In 1999, on the second day of his re-trial, Schlup agreed to plead guilty to second degree murder which allowed him to avoid the death penalty. Schlup's co-defendant, Robert Earl O'Neal, was executed for his role in Dade's murder in 1995.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 513
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States death penalty case law
Category:Capital punishment in Missouri
Category:1995 in United States case law
"""

From "Schmerber v. California" ==> """
Schmerber v. California, 384 U.S. 757 (1966), was a landmarkAron Hogden, Reconciling A Split of Authority: A South Dakota Response to Recent Developments in Drunk Driving Law, 59  372, 373 (2014) (describing Schmerber v. California as a "landmark case"); see also Kelsey P. Black, Undue Protection Versus Undue Punishment: Examining the Drinking & Driving Problem Across the United States, 40  463, 469 (2007) (describing Schmerber v. California as a "watershed case" in the nation's Fourth Amendment jurisprudence). United States Supreme Court case in which the Court clarified the application of the Fourth Amendment's protection against warrantless searches and the Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination for searches that intrude into the human body. Until Schmerber, the Supreme Court had not yet clarified whether state police officers must procure a search warrant before taking blood samples from criminal suspects. Likewise, the Court had not yet clarified whether blood evidence taken against the wishes of a criminal suspect may be used against that suspect in the course of a criminal prosecution.
In a 5–4 opinion, the Court held that forced extraction and analysis of a blood sample is not compelled testimony; therefore, it does not violate the Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination.Schmerber v. California, . The Court also held that intrusions into the human body ordinarily require a search warrant.Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 770. However, the Court ruled that the involuntary, warrantless blood sample taken in this case was justified under the Fourth Amendment's exigent circumstances exception because evidence of blood alcohol would be destroyed by the body's natural metabolic processes if the officers were to wait for a warrant.Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 770 ("in the present case, however, [the officer] might reasonably have believed that he was confronted with an emergency in which the delay necessary to obtain a warrant, under the circumstances, threatened the destruction of evidence") (internal quotations omitted). In 2013, the Supreme Court clarified in Missouri v. McNeely that the natural metabolism of alcohol in the bloodstream is not a per se exigency that would always justify warrantless blood tests of individuals suspected of driving under the influence of alcohol.Missouri v. McNeely, 133 S.Ct. 1552 (2013).
In the years following the Court's decision in Schmerber, many legal scholars feared the ruling would be used to limit civil liberties.Kelsey P. Black, Undue Protection Versus Undue Punishment: Examining the Drinking & Driving Problem Across the United States, 40  463, 478–79 (2007). Other scholars, including Nita A. Farahany, Benjamin Holley, and John G. New, have suggested courts may use the ruling in Schmerber to justify the use of mind reading devices against criminal suspects.Nita A. Farahany, Incriminating Thoughts, 64  351, 355 (2012); Benjamin Holley, It's All in Your Head: Neurotechnological Lie Detection & the Fourth & Fifth Amendments, 28  1, 18 (2009); John G. New, If You Could Read My Mind: Implications of Neurological Evidence for Twenty-First Century Criminal Jurisprudence, 29  179, 197 (2008); cf. Kiel Brennan-Marquez, A Modest Defense of Mind Reading, 15  214 (2013) ("The modern era of self-incrimination jurisprudence began with Schmerber v. California."). Because the Court's ruling in Schmerber prohibited the use of warrantless blood tests in most circumstances, some commentators argue that the decision was responsible for the proliferation of breathalyzers to test for alcohol and urine analyses to test for controlled substances in criminal investigations.See, e.g., John A. Scanlan, Jr., Playing the Drug-Testing Game: College Athletes, Regulatory Institutions, & the Structures of Constitutional Argument, 62  (1987); Commonwealth v. Brennan, 386 Mass. 772, 776-77 (1982) (discussing impacts of the Court's ruling in Schmerber on "the breathalyzer test").
Background
In the 1950s, the Supreme Court of the United States issued two key rulings clarifying the constitutionality of physical intrusions into the human body by police and other government agents. In Rochin v. California, police officers broke into the home of an individual suspected of selling narcotics and observed him place several small objects into his mouth.Rochin v. California, . Officers were unable to force his mouth open, so they transported him to a local hospital where his stomach was pumped against his will.Rochin, 342 U.S. at 166. A unanimous Supreme Court held the involuntary stomach pump was an unlawful violation of substantive due process because it "shocked the conscience", and was so "brutal" and "offensive" that it did not comport with traditional ideas of fair play and decency.Rochin, 342 U.S. at 172–73. In 1957, the Court held in Breithaupt v. Abram that involuntary blood samples "taken by a skilled technician" neither "shocked the conscience" nor violated substantive due process.Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 433–39. In Breithaupt, police took a blood sample from a patient suspected of driving under the influence of alcohol while he lay unconscious in a hospital.Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 433. The Court held that the blood samples were justified, in part, because "modern community living requires modern scientific methods of crime detection."Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 439. Additionally, the Court mentioned in dicta that involuntary blood samples may violate the constitution if officers do not provide "every proper medical precaution" to the accused.Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 438.
 Fourth Amendment exclusionary rule 
Until the twentieth century, courts would admit evidence at trial even if it was seized in violation of the Fourth Amendment.See Weeks v. United States, . Although the Supreme Court developed an exclusionary rule for federal cases in Weeks v. United States and Silverthorne Lumber Co. v. United States,Silverthorne Lumber Co. v. United States, ; Weeks, 232 U.S. at 394–96. the Court held in 1949 that the exclusionary rule did not apply to the states.Wolf v. Colorado, . In Rochin, the Court held that evidence obtained in a manner that "shocks the conscience" must be excluded in criminal prosecutions but the court declined to incorporate a broad exclusionary rule for all Fourth Amendment violations.E. John Wherry, Jr., Vampire or Dinosaur: A Time to Revisit Schmerber v. California?, 19  503, 510 (1996) ("[The] Rochin decision applied the exclusionary rule to state courts for the first time, but only where conscience-shocking due process issues were present."). By the middle of the twentieth century, many state courts had crafted their own exclusionary rules.E. John Wherry, Jr., Vampire or Dinosaur: A Time to Revisit Schmerber v. California?, 19  503, 510 (1996) ("State courts were left to fashion their own remedies for Fourth Amendment violations."). In 1955, the California Supreme Court ruled in People v. Cahan that the Fourth Amendment's exclusionary rule applied in California because it was necessary to deter constitutional violations by law enforcement.People v. Cahan, 44 Cal. 2d 434, 445 (1955) ("evidence obtained in violation of the constitutional guarantees is inadmissible"). In 1961, the Supreme Court of the United States relied upon Cahan to hold in Mapp v. Ohio that the exclusionary rule was incorporated to the states.Mapp v. Ohio, ; see also E. John Wherry, Jr., Vampire or Dinosaur: A Time to Revisit Schmerber v. California?, 19  503, 510 (1996) ("A closely divided United States Supreme Court, relying heavily upon Cahan, voted five to four to adopt the prophylactic exclusionary rule in the landmark decision of Mapp v. Ohio.").
 Arrest and prosecution 
On the night of November 12, 1964, Armando Schmerber and a passenger were driving home after drinking at a tavern and bowling alley in the San Fernando Valley region of Los Angeles, California, when their car skidded off the road and struck a tree.Schmerber 384 U.S. at 758 n.2; see also , Schmerber v. California. Schmerber and his companion were injured in the crash and taken to a hospital for treatment.Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 758 n.2 (1966). When investigating police officers arrived at the hospital, they asked Schmerber to submit a sample of his blood, but Schmerber refused.Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 758–59. Although they did not possess a search warrant, officers instructed attending physicians to take a blood sample from Schmerber.Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 758. The blood sample indicated that Schmerber was intoxicated, and he was placed under arrest.Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 759. The blood sample was ultimately admitted into evidence at trial, and Schmerber was convicted for driving under the influence of intoxicating liquors.Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 758–59; see also California Vehicle Code § 23102(a). Schmerber objected to the admissibility of the blood sample, claiming that the police violated his rights to due process, his right against self-incrimination, his right to counsel, and his right not to be subjected to unreasonable searches and seizures. The Appellate Department of the California Superior Court rejected Schmerber's arguments, and the California District Court of Appeal declined to review his case.Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 759, 759 n.3.
 Arguments before the Court 
Schmerber submitted an appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States, which granted certiorari on January 17, 1966.Schmerber v. California, . In his brief, Schmerber argued, inter alia, that the warrantless blood test violated his Fourth Amendment right to be free from unlawful searches and seizures, as well as his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination. The Los Angeles City Attorney's office represented the State of California on appeal.Brief for Respondent, Schmerber v. California, 384 U.S. 757 (U.S., 1966). In their brief, the City Attorney argued that the blood test did not violate the Fourth Amendment because the seizure was conducted incident to a lawful arrest. The City Attorney also argued that admitting the sample into evidence did not violate Schmerber's Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination because blood is not testimonial evidence under the Fifth Amendment. Oral arguments were held on April 25, 1966, and the Court issued its opinion on June 20, 1966.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|upright|right|In his majority opinion, Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. emphasized that "[t]he overriding function of the Fourth Amendment is to protect personal privacy and dignity against unwarranted intrusion by the State."Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 767.
In his majority opinion, Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. held that Schmerber's constitutional rights were not violated when police took his blood without his consent. Relying upon the Court's holding in Breithaupt v. Abram, he concluded that the police did not violate Schmerber's Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination because the extraction and chemical analysis of the blood sample did not involve "even a shadow of testimonial compulsion."Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 765. Likewise, Justice Brennan held that the officers did not violate Schmerber's Fourth Amendment right against unreasonable seizures. Justice Brennan wrote that absent exigent circumstances, searches that involve intrusions into the human body require a search warrant. Here, the search was not justified as a search incident to arrest because weapons and contraband are not ordinarily concealed beneath the skin.Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 769–70. However, the involuntary blood draw was justified under the Fourth Amendment's exigent circumstances exception because if the officers had waited to receive a search warrant, evidence of intoxication would have been lost through the body's natural metabolism of alcohol in the bloodstream.Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 771–72. He wrote that the responding officer "might reasonably have believed that he was confronted with an emergency," where evidence would be destroyed if he waited to receive a warrant. Additionally, Justice Brennan cautioned that the Court's ruling was limited "only to the facts of the present record" and that "minor intrusions into an individual's body under stringently limited conditions in no way indicates that it permits more substantial intrusions, or intrusions under other conditions."Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 772.
Justice Harlan's concurrence
In his concurring opinion, Justice John Marshall Harlan II agreed that the involuntary blood sample did not implicate involuntary testimonial compulsion, but wrote separately to emphasize his opinion that the case before the Court "in no way implicates the Fifth Amendment."Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 772 (Harlan, J., concurring). Additionally, Justice Harlan cited to his dissent in Miranda v. Arizona where he argued against a broad expansion of the Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination. Justice Harlan disagreed with the Court's ruling in Miranda and even stated that the case "represents poor constitutional law and entails harmful consequences for the country at large."Miranda v. Arizona, .
Dissenting opinions
thumb|upright|right|In his dissenting opinion, Justice William O. Douglas wrote that involuntary blood samples violate the right to privacy enumerated in Griswold v. Connecticut.Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 779 (Douglas, J., dissenting).
All four dissenting Justices wrote separate dissenting opinions in Schmerber. Chief Justice Earl Warren reiterated his dissenting opinion in Breithaupt v. Abram, where he argued that involuntary blood samples violate substantive due process.Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 772 (Warren, C.J., dissenting) (citing Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 442 (Warren, C.J., dissenting)). Justice Hugo Black authored an impassioned dissent in which he argued that the officers violated Schmerber's right against self-incrimination.Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 778 (Black, J., dissenting). He wrote, "[b]elieving with the Framers that these constitutional safeguards broadly construed by independent tribunals of justice provide our best hope for keeping our people free from governmental oppression, I deeply regret the Court's holding." Justice William O. Douglas also reiterated his dissent in Breithaupt v. Abram, but added that physical invasions into the human body violate the right to privacy enumerated in Griswold v. Connecticut and that "[n]o clearer invasion of this right of privacy can be imagined than forcible bloodletting of the kind involved here." Finally, Justice Abe Fortas wrote that the involuntary blood sample was an act of violence that violated substantive due process and that states may not resort to acts of violence when prosecuting crimes.Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 779 (Fortas, J., dissenting).
Subsequent developments
In the 1970s and 1980s, the Supreme Court revisited questions about the constitutionality of involuntary bodily intrusions in several key cases. In 1973, the Court ruled in Cupp v. Murphy that the police were permitted to extract a tissue sample from underneath a suspect's fingernails to recover "evanescent" physical evidence.Cupp v. Murphy, . The suspect in Cupp was suspected of strangling his wife and voluntarily went to a police station to answer questions.Cupp, 412 U.S. at 292. Officers noticed bloodstains under the suspect's fingernails and detained him, but did not place him under arrest. Against the suspect's wishes, the police scraped out a tissue sample from under his fingernails to retrieve the evidence. The biological material found under the suspect's fingernails was later found to have come from the victim. Citing Schmerber, the Court held that this warrantless search was justified under the exigent circumstances exemption of the Fourth Amendment because the search was necessary to preserve the “highly evanescent evidence” under the defendant's fingernails.Cupp, 412 U.S. at 296.
Twelve years later, the Court again revisited the topic of involuntary bodily intrusions in Winston v. Lee, where the Court held that the State of Virginia could not force an individual to undergo surgery to extract a bullet that may be evidence of a crime.Winston v. Lee, . The Court applied its previous holding in Schmerber to conclude that the surgery would constitute an unreasonable search under the Fourth Amendment and that a crucial factor for evaluating any bodily intrusion "is the extent to which the procedure may threaten the safety or health of the individual."Winston, 470 U.S. at 761, 762–63. Writing for the Court's majority, Justice Brennan concluded that forcing a patient to undergo major surgery intrudes too far upon individual privacy rights and that surgical intrusions "can only be characterized as severe."Winston, 470 U.S. at 766.
In 1989, the Court ruled in Skinner v. Railway Labor Executives’ Association that warrantless blood tests of railroad employees were reasonable under the Fourth Amendment.Skinner v. Railway Labor Executives Ass'n, . The Court reaffirmed that the “compelled intrusio[n] into the body for blood to be analyzed for alcohol content” is a search under the Fourth Amendment,Skinner, 489 U.S. at 616 (internal quotations omitted). but that warrantless blood tests of railroad employees were necessary to "prevent accidents and casualties in railroad operations that result from impairment of employees by alcohol or drugs.”Skinner, 489 U.S. at 620–21 (citing 49 CFR § 219.1(a) (1987)). The Court also concluded that when individuals “participate in an industry that is regulated pervasively to ensure safety,” these individuals “have a reduced expectation of privacy.”Skinner, 489 U.S. at 627. Because these employees had a "diminished expectation of privacy," the warrantless blood tests were permissible.Skinner, 489 U.S. at 628. Justice Thurgood Marshall and Justice Brennan wrote a dissenting opinion in which they argued that this case was distinguishable from Schmerber because "no such exigency prevents railroad officials from securing a warrant before chemically testing the samples they obtain."Skinner, 489 U.S. at 642 (Marshall, J., dissenting).
South Dakota v. Neville and self-incrimination
thumb|upright|In his dissenting opinion in South Dakota v. Neville, Justice John Paul Stevens wrote that Schmerber intended to adopt a broad and liberal interpretation of the Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination.South Dakota v. Neville,  (Stevens, J., dissenting) ("[T]his Court's opinion in Schmerber v. California [citations] had assumed that the Fifth Amendment should be construed as broadly as the more liberal state language.").
After the Court issued its decision in Schmerber, a split of authority emerged in lower courts with regard to whether the Fifth Amendment's right against self-incrimination prohibited the use of a suspect's refusal to submit to a blood test as evidence of guilt.Neville, 459 U.S. at 558 ("we granted certiorari to resolve the conflict"). The United States Supreme Court resolved this split in authority in South Dakota v. Neville, where the Court held that prosecutors could use a suspect's refusal to submit to a blood test as evidence of guilt, and the introduction of this evidence at trial does not violate the suspect's Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination.Neville, 459 U.S. at 561–62. Writing for the Court's majority, Justice Sandra Day O'Connor concluded that "the state did not directly compel respondent to refuse the test" and that a "simple blood-alcohol test is so safe, painless, and commonplace" a suspect would not feel coerced to refuse the test.Neville, 459 U.S. at 562–63. Justice John Paul Stevens wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Thurgood Marshall, in which he argued that the Court in Schmerber intended to adopt a broad and liberal interpretation of the Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination.Neville, 459 U.S. at 570 (Stevens, J., dissenting).
Missouri v. McNeely and the exigent circumstances exception
Over time, a split of authority grew among lower courts with regard to whether the Fourth Amendment's exigent circumstances exception allowed officers to always conduct warrantless blood tests on individuals suspected of driving under the influence of alcohol because evidence of alcohol was being destroyed by the body's natural metabolic processes.McNeely, 133 S. Ct. at 1558 (discussing split of authority). States that recognized this per se exigency argued that "[o]nce police arrest a suspect for drunk driving, each passing minute eliminates probative evidence of the crime."McNeely, 133 S. Ct. at 1575 (Thomas, J., dissenting). In 2012, the Court granted review in Missouri v. McNeely to resolve this question.McNeely, 133 S.Ct. at 1552 (2013) ("[w]e granted certiorari to resolve a split of authority on the question"). In a 5–4 opinion, the Court rejected the theory that the natural dissipation of blood alcohol constituted a per se exigency.McNeely, 133 S. Ct. at 1558, 1568. Instead, the court affirmed the basic principle from Schmerber that absent "an emergency that justifie[s] acting without a warrant," police may not conduct warrantless blood testing on suspects.McNeely, 133 S. Ct. at 1559. Consequently, exigency in drunk driving cases "must be determined case by case based on the totality of the circumstances."McNeely, 133 S. Ct. at 1556.
Analysis
Scholars have described Schmerber v. California as a landmark caseAron Hogden, Reconciling A Split of Authority: A South Dakota Response to Recent Developments in Drunk Driving Law, 59  372, 373 (2014) (describing Schmerber v. California as a "landmark case"); Michael A. Sabino & Anthony Michael Sabino, Warrantless Blood Tests, Drunk Driving, & "Exigent Circumstances": Preserving the Liberty Guarantee of the Fourth Amendment While Evolving the Exceptions to the Warrant Requirement, 34  27, 68 (2015) (same); Floralynn Einesman, Vampires Among Us – Does A Grand Jury Subpoena for Blood Violate the Fourth Amendment?, 22  327, 328 (1995) (same); H. Richard Uviller, Self-Incrimination by Inference: Constitutional Restrictions on the Evidentiary Use of A Suspect's Refusal to Submit to A Search, 81  37, 76 (1990) (discussing "Justice Brennan's landmark pronouncement in Schmerber v. California"). and a "watershed moment" in the history of Fourth Amendment jurisprudence.Kelsey P. Black, Undue Protection Versus Undue Punishment: Examining the Drinking & Driving Problem Across the United States, 40  463, 469 (2007). Likewise, John D. Castiglione described the case as "seminal for its place in the annals of Fifth Amendment jurisprudence."John D. Castiglione, Human Dignity Under the Fourth Amendment, 2008  655, 682 (2008). Constitutional law scholar Akhil Reed Amar identified Schmerber as a turning point in the Fifth Amendment's "distinction between words and physical evidence."Akhil Reed Amar & Renee B. Lettow, Fifth Amendment First Principles: The Self-Incrimination Clause, 93  857, 885 (1995). Anne Marie Schubert has also argued that Schmerber served as the genesis for a long line of Supreme Court cases ordering the compelled production of physical evidence.Anne Marie Schubert, Compelled Consent to Release of Foreign Records-Taking the Fifth: Doe v. United States, 23  291, 297 (1989). Because Schmerber foreclosed the use of warrantless blood tests in most circumstances, some scholars, including John A. Scanlan, argue that the Court's ruling was responsible for the proliferation of breathalyzers to test for alcohol and urine analysis to test for controlled substances in criminal investigations.
Immediate reaction
Soon after the Court's ruling, analysts predicted that the effects of the case would be "far-reaching."Wendell J. Willmore, The Implications of Schmerber v. California, 9  26, 27 (1967). Some analysts feared the ruling would be used to justify "other intrusive searches."Intrusive Border Searches – Is Judicial Control Desirable?, 115  276, 283 (1966). Other commentators also observed that the Court's holding in Schmerber seemed to "reverse direction" from the court's decision in Miranda v. Arizona one week earlier, where the Court enlarged protections against the police for criminal suspects.See, e.g., Wendell J. Willmore, The Implications of Schmerber v. California, 9  26, 26 (1967). However, in his assessment of Schmerber, Charles L. Berry praised the decision as a "successful effort to find a practical solution to the problem of the drinking motorist."Charles L. Berry, Constitutional Law Compulsory Blood Tests Do Not Violate Fifth Amendment Privilege Against Self-Incrimination or Fourth Amendment Prohibition Against Unreasonable Search & Seizure: Schmerber v. California, 384 U.S. 757, 44  1616, 1621 (1966). Additionally, many law journals also offered commentary of the case's significance. For example, a November 1966 article in the Harvard Law Review opined that Justice Brennan's majority opinion was "a good exposition of his view of the interrelationship between the fourth and fifth amendments,"Stephen J. Friedman, Mr. Justice Brennan: The First Decade, 80  7, 11 (1966). and a February 1967 article in the Texas Law Review argued that Schmerber "exemplifies the proposition that the fifth amendment is not absolute."Charles T. Newton, Jr., The Mere Evidence Rule: Doctrine or Dogma?, 45  526, 552 (1967).
Impact
Some legal scholars have criticized the Court's ruling in Schmerber for infringing too far upon civil liberty and privacy.See, e.g., Kelsey P. Black, Undue Protection Versus Undue Punishment: Examining the Drinking & Driving Problem Across the United States, 40  463, 478–79 (2007); E. John Wherry, Jr., Vampire or Dinosaur: A Time to Revisit Schmerber v. California?, 19  503 (1996). E. John Wherry, Jr., former Dean of the University of Orlando School of Law, wrote that "[b]lindly following Schmerber as authorization for all non-consensual blood seizure for forensic purposes is, in this day and age, an outrage."E. John Wherry, Jr., Vampire or Dinosaur: A Time to Revisit Schmerber v. California?, 19  503, 540 (1996). Writing for the Notre Dame Law Review, Blake A. Bailey, Elaine M. Martin, and Jeffrey M. Thompson observed that although the Court limited the holding in Schmerber to the facts of the case, prior to Winston v. Lee, many lower courts relied upon the ruling to order criminal defendants to undergo surgery to remove bullets that may have been evidence of a crime.Blake A. Bailey, et al., Criminal Law – Lee v. Winston: Court-Ordered Surgery & the Fourth Amendment-A New Analysis of Reasonableness?, 60  149, 152 (1984). Other scholars have expressed concern that the Court's decision to exclude physical evidence from protections against self-incrimination may one day lead to the use of mind reading devices when prosecuting criminal suspects.Nita A. Farahany, Incriminating Thoughts, 64  351, 355 (2012); cf. Kiel Brennan-Marquez, A Modest Defense of Mind Reading, 15  214 (2013). For example, the Harvard Law Review suggested that the Court's decision may be used to justify monitoring brain waves.Anthropotelemetry: Dr. Schwitzgebel's Machine, 80  403, 409 (1966). Additionally, in an article in the journal Developments in Mental Health Law, Benjamin Holley suggested that "neurotechnological lie detection" could be used in criminal prosecutions, as long as a suspect's words are not "linked with the physical manifestations sought to be introduced at trial."Benjamin Holley, It's All in Your Head: Neurotechnological Lie Detection & the Fourth & Fifth Amendments, 28  1, 18 (2009). Likewise, in an article in the Journal of Legal Medicine, John G. New suggested that non-testimonial evidence gathered from electroencephalography or magnetic resonance imaging may be admissible to demonstrate a suspect's thoughts.John G. New, If You Could Read My Mind: Implications of Neurological Evidence for Twenty-First Century Criminal Jurisprudence, 29  179, 197 (2008).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 384
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Warren Court
Notes
References
The citations in this Article are written in Bluebook style.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:1966 in United States case law
Category:1966 in California
Category:Legal history of California
Category:Medical lawsuits
Category:Blood tests
"""

From "Schmieder v. Barney" ==> """
Schmieder v. Barney, 113 U.S. 645 (1885), regards the Act of July 14, 1862, § 9, 12 Stat. 553, which imposes a duty, "On all delaines . . . and on all goods of similar description, not exceeding in value forty cents per square yard, two cents per square yard." Held that the similarity required is a similarity in product, in adaptation to uses, and in uses, even though in commerce they may be classed as different articles; affirming Greenleaf v. Goodrich...
The court found that it was competent to inquire of a witness in a suit to recover back duties paid under this clause of the act of 1862 whether the words "of similar description" is a commercial term, and if so what is its commercial meaning; but it was not competent to inquire whether the particular goods, alleged to have been improperly subjected to duty, were of similar description to delaines.
It was contended in this case that the plaintiffs in error went further than was done and that they offered to prove that in commerce "Saxony dress goods" were not considered as of "similar description" to delaines. It is argued that this brings the case within what should be taken as an exception reserved in the former decision. The exception claimed is drawn from the following clause in the opinion:
Undoubtedly the language of tariff acts is to be construed according to its commercial signification, but it will always be understood to have the same meaning in commerce that it has in the community at large, unless the contrary is shown. Swan v. Arthur, 103 U. S. 598. The most that can be claimed for the alleged reservation in Greenleaf v. Goodrich is that it would have been proper to inquire whether the phrase "of similar description" was a commercial term, and if so what it was understood by merchants and importers to mean. That, however, is not what was attempted in this case. The witnesses were asked in effect not what the words "of similar description" were understood among commercial men to mean, but whether the goods of these importers were known in commerce as goods of similar description to delaines.
The effort was to put the opinion of commercial experts in the place of that of the jury upon a question which was as well understood by the community at large as by merchants and importers. This it was decided in Greenleaf v. Goodrich could not be done, and upon the point supposed to have been reserved in that decision, this case stands just where that did. The testimony offered was therefore properly rejected.
The opinions of the collector of the port and of the board of official appraisers were no more admissible on this question than those of any other competent experts.
The judgment was affirmed.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
"""

From "Schmuck v. United States" ==> """
Schmuck v. United States, 489 U.S. 705 (1989), is a United States Supreme Court decision on criminal law and procedure. By a 5–4 margin it upheld the mail fraud conviction of an Illinois man and resolved a conflict among the appellate circuits over which test to use to determine if a defendant was entitled to a jury instruction allowing conviction on a lesser included charge. Justice Harry Blackmun wrote for the majority; Antonin Scalia for the dissent.
The case had begun when Schmuck was prosecuted for having rolled back odometers for years on cars he sold to used-car dealers. He had been indicted for 12 counts of mail fraud, based on the vehicle title applications the dealers had then mailed to the state's Department of Transportation in order to resell the cars. Before his trial in the Western District of Wisconsin, he had been denied a motion to have the jury instructed that they could vote to convict him of tampering with the odometer, at the time a less serious offense, if they did not find him guilty of mail fraud.
He raised the issue after his conviction with the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals, as well as the applicability of the mail-fraud statute to the dealers' applications. A panel rejected the latter argument but agreed that the jury should have been allowed to consider the lesser charge, reversing the conviction and remanding the case for a new trial. The government appealed that decision to an en banc panel of the circuit, which restored the conviction, holding that the odometer tampering was not "inherently related" to the mail fraud. Since other appellate circuits had preferred a different test for lesser included charges, Schmuck successfully petitioned the Supreme Court to hear the case.
Blackmun ruled for the government on both questions. Since Schmuck had enjoyed a continuing relationship with the dealers he sold to, and the cars could not be resold to a retail customer without titles obtained using false information, the dealers' applications were an essential element of his crime and thus constituted mail fraud. On the second question, Blackmun said the court should have considered whether the elements of odometer tampering were a subset of the elements of the mail fraud, and since that was not the case Schmuck had been properly denied the instruction. Scalia's dissent focused exclusively on the mail fraud issue. Since Schmuck had already received his payment for the altered vehicles, it did not matter what happened afterwards, a holding he found more consistent with the Court's earlier rulings on the subject.
Underlying prosecution
For 15 years, Wayne Schmuck of Harvard, Illinois, owner of Big Foot Auto Sales, had sold used cars he had bought in his state, where vehicle titles did not then require a statement on the title of the odometer reading at the time of the transaction, to dealers in Wisconsin, which did. Unbeknownst to the dealers, he had in some cases hired someone to roll back the odometers on them, making the vehicles appear to have less mileage than they actually did. Thus they commanded an artificially higher price, both when the dealer paid Schmuck and when they sold it to a customer. In order for the retail transaction to take place, the dealers needed to mail a title application, including the falsified odometer reading, to the state Department of Transportation.
thumb|right|A mechanical odometer similar to the ones Schmuck had rolled back|alt=A strongly illuminated black surface with "60 80 100" on top in large white letters above a radial design. In the middle of the radial is "31412" in a recessed area on indicator wheels.
Around 1981 his scheme was discovered when suspicious regulators wrote to the vehicles' previous owners, whose addresses were on the dealer's applications, and learned what the odometers had said at the time of sale. He was arrested by federal authorities and indicted on 12 counts of mail fraud, a felony, for cars he had sold to five different dealers, some as many as five timesUnited States v. Schmuck, hereafter Schmuck II, 840 F.2d 384, 386 (7th Cir., 1988) over a two-year period. At his trial, presided over by district judge Barbara Brandriff Crabb, he admitted that he had rolled back the odometers, but denied that he had committed mail fraud since the dealers had sent the applications after they had bought the cars from him, therefore it wasn't necessary that they do so for him to have realized the proceeds of the odometer tampering. Before his trial in United States District Court for the Western District of Wisconsin, his attorney, Peter Lewis Steinberg, moved that the jury be instructed that they could convict Schmuck on the lesser included charge of odometer tampering, at the time a misdemeanor, if they did not feel his actions constituted mail fraud.United States v. Schmuck, hereafter Schmuck I, 776 F.2d 1368 (7th Cir., 1985)
It was denied, and the jury convicted Schmuck on all 12 counts. In late 1983 he was sentenced to 90 days in jail and four years of probation. His lawyers appealed the conviction to the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals.
Legal background
On appeal, Steinberg again raised the jury-instruction issue. He also challenged the conviction itself as an unreasonable, overbroad application of the statute, and called it a violation of due process since Schmuck could not have had control over the actions of his victims. Both arguments relied on unresolved issues of case law.
Scope of mail-fraud statute
Under the relevant federal statute, it is not necessary to prove that the accused personally made the mailing at issue. The law applies to one who "causes to be deposited any matter or thing whatever to be sent or delivered by any private or commercial interstate carrier" or "knowingly causes to be delivered by mail or such carrier according to the direction thereon" as much as to a perpetrator who makes the mailing themselves.. The extent to which a mailing may be considered part of a fraudulent scheme has been the subject of many appeals cases.
The most important precedent in the case was recent. Three years earlier, in United States v. Galloway, a panel of the Seventh Circuit had sustained a mail-fraud conviction in United States v. Galloway, another case involving odometer tampering. Crabb had also presided over that case's trial, and had directed a not-guilty verdict after the jury convicted.United States v. Galloway, 664 F.2d 161 (7th Cir., 1981)
The government appealed, and by a 2–1 margin the jury's verdict was restored. Robert Arthur Sprecher, following United States v. Shryock, an earlier case from the Fifth Circuit where the defendant had been the head of the leasing department at a new-car dealership,United States v. Shryock, 537 F.2d 207 (5th Cir., 1976) held that the ongoing nature of the scheme distinguished the case and supported the jury verdict.Galloway at 164–166. But concurring Judge Richard Dickson Cudahy, calling the statute "judicially hypertrophied" warned that "the present case takes us to what (for now) may be the outer limits".Galloway, at 166. Luther Merritt Swygert dissented. "The mailings did not conceal the fraud, produce profit for Galloway or contribute to the consumer's harm," he wrote. "The mailings resulted from a transaction to which Galloway was not a party and they were routine business mailings the purposes of which were immaterial to Galloway." He distinguished that case from Shryock by noting that Shryock had been a retail dealer, selling directly to consumers, instead of a wholesaler.Galloway, at 169.
Both Galloway and Shryock had departed from a line of Supreme Court cases in which inevitable mailings by other parties that took place after the perpetrators of the fraud had made their money had been held not to constitute mail fraud.United States v. Kann, ; Parr v. United States,  and United States v. Maze,  However, other cases had established that mail fraud had occurred even where the perpetrators had not explicitly intended use of the mails as part of their scheme,United States v. Young,  was merely incident to itPereira v. United States,  or if the mailing took place after the money had been collected but as part of an ongoing scheme involving a continuing relationship with the victims.United States v. Sampson, .
All of those cases had been narrowly decided. In his dissent in Kann v. United States, one of the former, where the mail-fraud charge arose from a check sent to a bank by the perpetrators, William O. Douglas argued that even though the deception was complete the perpetrators still needed the check to clear the bank for their scheme to be finalized. "[I]t is plain that these plans had a wider reach and that but for the use of the mails they would not have been finally consummated," he concluded.Kann, at 96, Douglas, J., dissenting. The Fifth Circuit used similar logic in Shryock,Shryock at 209. as did the Seventh in Galloway.
Lesser included offense
Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 31(c) says that a lesser included offense must be "necessarily included" in the greater offense. What that means was and how thus to determine if a defendant was entitled to an instruction allowing the jury to consider it was, at the time, unsettled. Courts had traditionally used the elements test, by which a lesser charge was available only if all its elements were part of the greater offense. The test was purely theoretical, based on how both offenses were described in the statutes without regard to the actual circumstances.United States v. Whitaker, 447 F.2d 314, 318–19 (D.C. Cir., 1971)
In 1971, Judge Malcolm Richard Wilkey of the District of Columbia Circuit articulated some issues with Rule 31(c)'s wording:
He proposed instead that courts consider the actual facts of the case, to see if an inherent relationship existed between the charged offense and the proposed lesser offense. He called this "[a] more natural, realistic and sound interpretation" of Rule 31(c). At the time of Schmuck's appeal, two circuits had elected to stay with the traditional elements test, while others, including the Seventh, were using Wilkey's inherent-relationship test.Schmuck I, 1371.
Appeals
The Seventh Circuit heard the case twice. A three-judge panel reversed the conviction and ordered a new trial, but then the circuit en banc reinstated it.
Panel
Swgyert, Joel Flaum, Thomas E. Fairchild heard oral argument in the case in September 1984. They returned over a year later with a 2-1 decision reversing the conviction and remanding the case to district court for a new trial.
Swygert wrote for himself and Flaum. He rejected Schmuck's attack on the conviction, citing the circuit's recent holding in Galloway(a decision from which he himself had dissentedGalloway, 166–169.) and declining to overrule it. As for the alleged due-process violation, he continued, "[o]ne answer is that he can prevent the mailing by abstaining from the fraud." Galloway and the cases on which it rested had also found no due-process violation.Schmuck I, 1369–70.
However, applying the inherent-relationship test, which the circuit had adopted earlier that year,United States v. Cova, 755 F.2d 595, (7th Cir., 1985) he found that Schmuck was indeed entitled to a jury instruction allowing them to convict on odometer tampering:
In this specific case, a rational trier of fact such as the jurors could have decided the question of whether Schmuck's scheme constituted mail fraud either way, as indeed Galloway suggested, but that was for the jury to decide.Schmuck I, 1372–73.
Fairchild concurred with the majority's upholding of the conviction's rationality but disagreed that the odometer-tampering instruction was necessary. Not only was there no correspondence between the statutory elements of the two crimes, he found no inherent relationship between them either. The facts in all the precedents the majority relied on, even Whitaker, " demonstrate a much closer relationship between the offense not charged but proved in the course of trial and the offense charged than can be discerned between odometer alteration and mail fraud," he wrote. "There is apparently no case holding that fraudulent conduct which happens to constitute a federal offense and is proved in establishing the elements of mail fraud is included within mail fraud."Schmuck I, 1375.
En banc
The government appealed the ruling, asking for an en banc rehearing before the entire Seventh Circuit. After hearing arguments in mid-1986, a decision was handed down early in 1988. By a 9–2 margin, the panel was reversed and Schmuck's conviction affirmed. The circuit also decided to reverse itself on the adoption of the Whitaker inherent-relationship test.
Majority
Fairchild wrote for the majority. Not only did he reiterate and clarify his earlier opinion to say that "[g]iven the present indictment, ... alleging as one element devising a scheme to defraud purchasers of automobiles with altered odometers, knowingly and willfully causing an odometer to be altered is not identical to the element of having devised the scheme", he made an extended critique of the inherent-relationship test. "Neither the court in Whitaker nor any decision adopting its analysis has addressed how the language of the Rule gives rise to the inherent relationship test.Schmuck II at 389–90.
That test, Fairchild wrote, required that the court dispense with the mutuality provision under which a request for a lesser included charge can be granted only if the other side would also be able to make the same request. A defense could request a lesser-charge instruction later in the trial as the facts became clearer, yet a prosecution making the same motion could well fail on the grounds that the defendant had not received sufficient prior notice such as is usually given in the indictment. Yet, the judge observed, there was no language in Rule 31(c) that would support such different treatment.
Further, Fairchild argued, the test was less likely to lead to "certainty and predictability" in the application of the rule. "Finding an inherent relationship requires a determination that the offenses relate to the same interests and that 'in general' proof of the lesser 'necessarily' involves proof of the greater," he wrote, quoting from Whitaker. "These new layers of analysis add to the uncertainty of the propriety of an instruction in a particular case: not only are there more issues to be resolved, but correct resolution involves questions of degree and judgment, with the attendant probability that the trial and appellate courts may differ."
Other problems Fairchild identified included the potential for abuse by defendants seeking late in the trial to appeal to the jury's mercy, a problem he noted that Whitaker had also recognized. Lastly, the concept of a lesser included charge was key in resolving some questions of double jeopardy and unlawful cumulative punishment. Precedent suggested that those cases stuck with the elements test, and "[i]t seems desirable that, as nearly as possible, the terminology should have the same meaning in both contexts," he concluded. "Using the elements test for Rule 31(c) problems at least approaches keeping the same meaning."
Dissent
While Swygert had changed his mind and voted with the majority, Flaum was joined by Cudahy in holding fast to Whitaker and its test. "To confine the determination of whether to give an instruction to an analysis of statutes is to impose an artificial restraint on the instruction formulation process," he said. Had that test been the one applied in United States v. Cova, the case where the circuit had adopted the inherent-relationship test, in which conspiracy to possess cocaine was held to be a proper lesser charge to conspiracy to distribute cocaine, "the government would have lost a case that it had proved for a reason that had nothing to do with the case itself."Schmuck II, 391.
"The need for a complete method of determining what lesser offenses are included within a charged offense is particularly great where, as here, the statute at issue is one that can be violated in a number of ways," Flaum wrote. "Indeed, the past several years have seen the enactment of a number of criminal statutes that can be violated in various ways, and that in fact are specifically predicated on violations of any number of other legal provisions" such as the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO). "They are exactly the type of offenses for which consideration of lesser offenses is appropriate under Rule 31(c), but it is hard to imagine how any lesser included offense could ever be considered under the elements test, precisely because these 'greater' offenses are so broadly defined." The Tenth Circuit, he reminded his colleagues, had found both tests valid and held that their use should depend on the circumstances.United States v. Cooper, 812 F.2d 1283, (10th Cir., 1987).
Flaum scoffed at the majority's insistence on the mutuality provision, which Wilkey had seen as inimical to the fair administration of justice:
Applying the inherent-relationship test to Schmuck's case, Flaum found that the odometer tampering was indeed a lesser charge to the mail fraud. "[T]he mailings that were the subject of the charges against the defendant were not separate from the fraudulent acts of which he was accused, but followed those acts both logically and chronologically," he wrote. "As the government proved this case, it had to prove odometer tampering because tampering led to sale, which led to mailing."Schmuck II, 393.
Flaum pointed to Schmuck's motion for a directed verdict after the prosecution finished its case. One of the defendant's arguments had been that the mailings were not only not necessary to the fraud, they were actually counterproductive to his scheme because they increased the chance that his crime would be discovered. The district judge had denied it as properly a question for the jury to decide, a decision Flaum called correct. But that denial, he continued, was exactly why the jury needed to be able to consider odometer tampering as a lesser included charge. "Because this rational possibility existed based on the record assembled at trial, the defendant was entitled to a lesser instruction on odometer tampering."Schmuck II, 394.
Before the Court
This time the defense appealed. Schmuck petitioned the Supreme Court for certiorari; it was granted a few months later so the Court could resolve the conflict between the circuits over the test for lesser included offenses. Oral arguments were heard in November.
Oral argument
Steinberg appeared for Schmuck, as he had since trial. Brian Martin appeared for the government, assisted on his brief by the Solicitor General's office.
Schmuck
Steinberg began by reminding the justices of the tenuous nature of Galloway, the precedent for the conviction, accepted only because of the previous judicial extension of the statute. When they had held the previous year in McNally v. United States that the mail-fraud statute only applied to schemes to acquire money or property and not what was later codified as honest services fraud, they had reiterated an old principle "that where you're faced with two possible interpretations, you should choose the less harsh one and also that you shouldn't create constructive crimes".McNally v. United States, 483 U.S. 350, 359–60 (1987), White, J. Only one crime, odometer tampering, corresponded exactly with what Schmuck had done.
He was interrupted by Justice Anthony Kennedy, who wanted him to address the government's argument that the ongoing nature of the fraud made the odometer readings on the title applications essential to the scheme. "It seems to me that if in a single instance the mailing of the title documents doesn't suffice to make it mail fraud, the multiplication of the instances doesn't change anything," Steinberg responded. "The repetition of odometer tampering doesn't create a mail fraud."
Antonin Scalia followed up by asking if the dealers were lulled by Schmuck regularly passing good title. "[T]hat's been the point I think at which the government's case breaks down," Steinberg told him. "There's nothing about title registration which reassures you the odometer hasn't been tampered with." When Scalia pressed the lawyer on whether Schmuck would be culpable if he had had to mail the applications himself, Steinberg stood firm. The success of the title applications, he maintained, did not depend on the odometer readings, although Schmuck might have been committing mail fraud if he had mailed the original odometer slips himself. Scalia said he was contradicting his earlier argument that the mail was utterly irrelevant to the scheme, to which Steinberg said "[Y]ou have to be able to point out how the mailing contributed to the success of the scheme."
For the latter half of his argument, he addressed the lesser-included issue. At trial, the jury had deliberated for three hours. Since Schmuck had admitted to the odometer tampering, "the only thing the jury could have been out considering was is this really mail fraud. Are these mailings really sufficiently closely related to what my client was trying to do to be mail fraud?" he posited them asking themselves. "I think it's clear from that record that a lesser instruction on odometer tampering had at least an arguable chance of success." The justices asked no questions, and Steinberg asked to reserve his remaining time for rebuttal.
United States
Martin began by reiterating the government's main argument: that the scheme had been continuing, that dealers were able to resell the cars with altered odometers and went back to Schmuck for more and thus the title applications furthered his scheme. Justice Sandra Day O'Connor asked if the government had any evidence to support that claim; when Martin restated his argument another justice indicated he had a problem with that as well. "[T]he evidence would support a finding here that the existence of title laws which he could circumvent, figure out a way to get around, actually had a lulling effect," he claimed.
"[T]he primary benefit in this case was that ... was that the mailings were necessary to effect the transaction", Martin asserted. "And that's all that the mail fraud statute requires is that the mailing be incident to an essential part of the scheme or step in the plot of the scheme. And the sale could not be made without the title papers being sent to the Department of Transportation." This, he argued, distinguished the case from Kann and the Court's other holdings in this area of law.
As for the elements test, Martin said it was plain from the language of the rule. "One offense is not necessarily included in another simply because in one case defendant happens to commit both." The history of the rule further supported the use of the elements test, he added. Asked why the inherent-relationship test was harder to apply in a situation where the facts of the indictment would have clearly supported the lesser charge, he insisted that on balance that test was still harder to apply. "Lastly," he concluded, "we think that the elements test respects the role of the government and the grand jury as the charging instrument in criminal matters."
Rebuttal
On rebuttal, Steinberg returned to another point he had been trying to make: that the title-application mailings were actually potentially counterproductive to Schmuck's scheme, since they increased the chance that his odometer alteration would be discovered. This had been part of the Court's holding in United States v. Maze, where invoices that reflected the use of a stolen credit card were found not to constitute mail fraud since they increased the likelihood of detection.Maze, at 403, Rehnquist, J. In Schmuck's case, the address of the person who sold him the cars was included on those applications, which eventually led investigators to talk to those sellers and uncovered the scheme. "[T]his brings up my point about the relationship between the requirements that automobile titles be registered and the purpose of that registration", Steinberg said. "The purpose is precisely to make it tough on people like my client."
He contended that the failure to even allow himself and his partner to argue before the jury for a lesser charge left them prejudiced against his client. "I mention in my brief the comment that the government's attorney made in his rebuttal argument about how if you do any type of crime, you should pay for it. It was [a] clear invitation to say, well, he's certainly guilty of something, and we can't let him go."
Noting that since the trial, Congress had made odometer tampering a felony, he implored the justices to stand firm. "This is really odometer tampering. Don't let the government get away with overcharging ... It takes more than the proof of a fraudulent scheme plus some connected mailing to make a case mail fraud."
Decision
In March 1989 the Court handed down its ruling. By a narrow margin, it held for the government on both questions, that the title applications were mailings in furtherance of Schmuck's scheme and that he was not entitled to an instruction on odometer tampering. Harry Blackmun wrote the majority opinion, joined by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, Byron White, John Paul Stevens, and Anthony Kennedy. Scalia wrote for himself and the other three dissenters, William Brennan, Thurgood Marshall, and Sandra Day O'Connor. His opinion exclusively concerned the first question and did not reach the second.Schmuck v. United States,  (hereafter Schmuck III.
Majority opinion
Following the prosecution's arguments, Blackmun distinguished the case from Kann, Maze and the earlier precedents. "Schmuck's was not a 'one-shot' operation in which he sold a single car to an isolated dealer. His was an ongoing fraudulent venture," he wrote. "A rational jury could have concluded that the success of Schmuck's venture depended upon his continued harmonious relations with, and good reputation among, retail dealers."Schmuck III, at 711–12, Blackmun, J.
Blackmun also rejected Schmuck's argument from Maze that the mailings' potential to expose the scheme ruled them out as contributory elements of it. "The mail fraud statute includes no guarantee that the use of the mails for the purpose of executing a fraudulent scheme will be risk-free. Those who use the mails to defraud proceed at their peril."Schmuck III at 715.
Turning to the lesser included charge, Blackmun again accepted the prosecution's reading of Rule 31(c). "The Rule speaks in terms of an offense that is 'necessarily included in the offense charged.' This language suggests that the comparison to be drawn is between offenses," he wrote. "Since offenses are statutorily defined, that comparison is appropriately conducted by reference to the statutory elements of the offenses in question." He further agreed that the inherent-relationship test was inconsistent with that language, and that mutuality was not something that could be discarded so casually since it would violate the long-held constitutional and common law principle that a defendant not be required to answer any charges not in the indictment."Schmuck III at 716–718.
Martin's argument that the history of the rule favored the elements test also met with Blackmun's agreement. In addition to the examples of use prior to its adoption that Martin had mentioned, Blackmun found that the Court itself had used it back in 1896.Stevenson v. United States,  Lastly he agreed that it could not produce certain, uniform results, pointing to the case before the Court as an example. "The three judges of the original appellate panel split in their application of the inherent relationship test to the offenses of mail fraud and odometer tampering," Blackmun wrote. "In the context of rules of criminal procedure, where certainty and predictability are desired, we prefer the clearer standard for applying Rule 31(c)."Schmuck III at 718–721.
Having established that the elements test was the one to use, Blackmun applied it to Schmuck's case. "The offense of odometer tampering includes the element of knowingly and willfully causing an odometer to be altered. This element is not a subset of any element of mail fraud," he wrote. "Knowingly and willfully tampering with an odometer is not identical to devising or intending to devise a fraudulent scheme." Therefore, the Seventh Circuit had decided the case correctly.Schmuck III at 721–722.
Dissent
"The law does not establish a general federal remedy against fraudulent conduct, with use of the mails as the jurisdictional hook, but reaches only 'those limited instances in which the use of the mails is a part of the execution of the fraud, leaving all other cases to be dealt with by appropriate state law,'" Scalia began, quoting from Kann. "In other words, it is mail fraud, not mail and fraud, that incurs liability.".Schmuck III at 722–723, Scalia, J., dissenting.
He saw no distinction between the previous cases and the instant one, since the mailings occurred after Schmuck had been paid by the dealers. He was skeptical of the majority's argument that Schmuck depended on the dealer's ongoing trust. He pointed in particular to another of the precedent cases, Parr v. United States,Parr v. United States,  in which property-tax bills and credit-card payments mailed by others were necessary for the scheme but held to not support a conviction. "All the more reason to adhere as closely as possible to past cases," he concluded. "I think we have not done that today, and thus create problems for tomorrow."Schmuck III at 723–725
Subsequent jurisprudence
While the Supreme Court has not had to revisit the scope of mail fraud, lower courts have used Schmuck to guide them on the question. In two cases heard by the Fifth Circuit, a distinction sufficient enough to not be covered by the law was found.
In a later case, Carter v. United States, the Supreme Court relied on Schmuck when it applied the elements test in considering a lesser-included charge; other courts have cited the case to support similar applications.
Mail fraud
In a 1996 case the Ninth Circuit was faced with a very similar scheme. Like Schmuck, the defendants had bought used vehicles, formerly rental cars, from California and Texas, and rolled back the odometers before selling them to an Arizona taxi service. To conceal the tampering, they applied for duplicate titles from those two states, and filled in the altered mileage.United States v. Hubbard, 96 F.3d 1223, (9th Cir., 1996)
They avoided using the Postal Service in their communications with sellers and buyers, relying on alternatives like Federal Express and fax. Nevertheless, the government alleged that the mailing of a title certificate to the cab company by Arizona's Department of Transportation was equivalent to the title-application mailing in Schmuck, and the defendants were convicted. On appeal, Judge Stephen S. Trott found no distinction, calling the mailing of the title certificates "analogous" to the applications.Hubbard, at 1229.
Other types of third-party mailings—among them stock-purchase confirmation slips,United States v. O'Hagan, 139 F.3d 641, 652  (8th Cir., 1998 annual reports and proxy statementsUnited States v. Wittig, 425 F.Supp.2d 1196, 1209–1211 (D.Kansas, 2006)—have also been found to be part of ongoing fraudulent schemes and thus supporting mail fraud convictions. Months after Schmuck, the Seventh Circuit relied on it in overturning a district court's acquittal of the mail fraud charges of two Chicago men accused of an insurance-fraud scheme, holding that correspondence between their lawyer and the insurance company over settling the claim was part of their scheme. Flaum followed the Supreme Court in rejecting the counterproductivity argument.United States v. Kuzniar, 881 F.2d 466, 471–473 (7th Cir., 1989) In a civil suit under RICO, Schmuck was read to allow the plaintiff telephone company to argue that the bills it sent customers allegedly bilked by the defendant premium texting provider constituted mail fraud.Cellco Partnership v. Hope, CV11-0432-PHX-DGC, (D.Arizona, 2012)
In two other cases, Schmuck'''s "ongoing fraudulent scheme" standard supported convictions. Invoices from a caseworker's employer to a state public housing authority based on her falsified activity reports were found by a district court to be a necessary part of such a scheme since they displaced the loss from the employer.United States v. Tiller, 142 F.Supp.2d 638, 644–647, (E.D.Pa, 2001) The Third Circuit relied on Schmuck to determine that a scheme to embezzle fuel tax payments by using a long series of wire transfers not only supported the fraud conviction but, by extension, one for money laundering.United States v. Morelli, 169 F.3d 798, 804–808 (3rd Cir., 1998)
In a Colorado case, a distinction argued by defendants resulted in the judge relying on a more expansive reading of Schmuck to deny their motion to dismiss the indictment. The government had alleged that, as part of a mortgage fraud scheme, the deeds and deeds of trust mailed to the lenders by the county recorder's office constituted mail fraud. The defendants countered that, under Colorado law, deeds took effect once they were executed, so the mailing of the documents was not necessary to their scheme.United States v. Weiss, 469 F.Supp.2d 941, 950–953 (D.Colo., 2007)
"Defendants' argument is persuasive, to a point", wrote Lewis Babcock, then chief judge for the District of Colorado. While they were right that legal ownership of the homes in Colorado was, unlike the cars in Wisconsin, transferred before the mailing of the document, he still found that those mailings served the "theories of lulling and concealment" that he saw as implied by Schmuck. However, he dismissed charges arising from the mailings of those documents to the actual buyers, since they were not the intended victims of the scheme and thus the mailings did not further it.
Evans and Strong
In 1998, the Fifth Circuit heard United States v. Evans, an appeal of a parole officer's conviction on mail-fraud charges stemming from falsified travel vouchers she filed to conceal a relationship and bribery scheme with a parolee. The government's theory was that the vouchers' mailing to state archives in Austin after her supervisor had approved them was an essential part of the scheme.United States v. Evans, 148 F.3d 477, 478–80 (5th Cir., 1998)
A divided panel overturned the convictions. Judge Harold R. DeMoss, Jr., primarily relied on Kann, Parr and Maze in finding that the mailings occurred after Evans' scheme had come to fruition (when she submitted the vouchers to her supervisor) and were not essential to them. In a footnote, he distinguished the case from Schmuck with the observation that Evans had no long-term relationship to maintain with the employees who kept the records.Evans, at 483n7.
But Thomas Morrow Reavley, in dissent, found the case to have much more similarity to Schmuck than the others. The vouchers were not mailed to Austin merely for archival purposes, he noted, but because her checks for reimbursement were cut there and sent to her directly. Further, she did have an ongoing relationship to maintain through the falsified documents. "As in Schmuck, Evans' ongoing fraudulent scheme depended on continued harmonious relations with her employer," he wrote. "Failure to submit routine travel vouchers consistent with Clay's parole file put at risk her relationship of trust and goodwill with her employer."Evans, 485–486.
In United States v. Strong, involving another complicated used-car scheme called "punching titles", the Fifth Circuit unanimously found another significant distinction from Schmuck. The defendants, two brothers, would buy cars at auto auctions using buyer's drafts, which allowed them to take immediate possession. While the auction house was waiting for the draft to clear, they would apply to a branch office of the Texas Department of Transportation (TDOT) for a certified copy (CCO) of the original, which they could get on the spot, using forged documents to "authenticate" themselves as the owner. Then they sold the car to another buyer using the copy, making it difficult to recover once the auctioneer came to try and retrieve it once the draft came back unpaid.United States v. Strong, 371 F.3d 225, 226–227 (5th Cir., 2004)
The brothers were charged with eight counts of mail fraud, since TDOT mailed copies of the CCO applications to the agency's headquarters in Austin. One pleaded guilty and the other opted for trial. After the jury convicted him, he successfully moved for a directed verdict of not guilty. The government appealed.
Judge E. Grady Jolly noted that while Schmuck had reached a different result than Kann, Parr and Maze about the utility of the mailings to the scheme, it had not overruled those cases. While Strong was right that, unlike Schmuck, clear title never passed to the buyers of the fraudulently obtained cars, neither were the TDOT mailings as distant from the scheme as they had found to be in the other cases. "As a result, this case falls in the interstices," Jolly observed.Strong, 228–232.
Prosecutors argued that the mailings lent authenticity to the fraud, lulled buyers into complacency and might have helped conceal the fraud from someone checking the records in Austin. Jolly wrote that no evidence had been introduced to support the first two arguments, and as to the second, he considered their counterproductivity significant. "The mailings, by introducing a secondary chain of title into state records, are more likely to alert an investigator to the fraud than to somehow delay its detection ... [I]t is counterintuitive to conclude that a defendant who knew enough about TDOT procedures to envision an inter-office mailing as part of his fraud would not realize the fraud-revealing implication of such a mailing on title records."
Carter v. United States
In 2000, the Court heard Carter v. United States, on appeal from an unpublished decision of the Third Circuit. The petitioner, convicted of bank robbery, had, like Schmuck, been denied a jury instruction on a lesser included offense at trial. Since he had not used force once in the bank, he argued that the jury should have been allowed to consider convicting him of bank larceny instead. By another 5–4 vote, the conviction was affirmed.Carter v. United States, .
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote for the majority. He undertook a lengthy comparison of the elements of the two offenses, separately codified, and concluded that differences in the wording were significant enough that bank larceny could not be a lesser included charge to bank robbery.Carter, at 261–274, Thomas, J. In dissent, Ruth Bader Ginsburg criticized Thomas's opinion as a "woodenly literal construction" of the statutes that ignored the underlying common law and gave prosecutors too much power at the expense of juries.Carter, 275–89, Ginsburg, J., dissenting.
Analysis and commentary
Most discussion of Schmuck has focused on its expansive reading of the "in furtherance" provision of the statute. Ellen Podgor, a professor at Georgia State, wrote in 1994 for the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers that it would appear that the decision left previous limitations to the statute, particularly from Maze, Kann and Parr, "questionable." But although the majority had eliminated counterproductivity as a potential defense, some appeals courts had continued to accept it.
Shortly after the decision, Creighton law student Matthew J. Effken wrote something similar in that institution's law review. The Court, he observed, was faced with inconsistent and conflicting precedents in its prior mail-fraud cases, and sought to reconcile them in Schmuck. By using "highly selective quotations" from those cases, he argued, the Court was able to narrow the limitations it had placed on them. Then, it distinguished the case from Kann, Parr and Maze by treating all Schmuck's acts as part of an ongoing scheme, rather than single, discrete acts. Then, it deferred to the jury in making that finding. "The overall effect
should be that mail fraud cases will be won or lost at trial," he concluded. "Therefore, appeals which allege inadequate mailings should only be successful based upon a showing of an irrational result."Effken, Matthew J.; , 23 Creighton L. Rev. 97, 124–127 (1989-1990). Retrieved March 13, 2013.
Legacy
As Steinberg had noted at oral argument, during the pendency of the case Congress had made odometer tampering a felony. In 1985 Nebraska Senator James Exon introduced a bill that not only did that but required stronger reporting and disclosure; it was signed into law by President Ronald Reagan as the Truth in Mileage Act of 1986 just before that year's elections. It provides for civil and criminal penalties, including fines and prison terms of up to three years.
The case's name has been found to be unintentionally humorous, since "schmuck", from the Yiddish word for "penis", is also a common term of abuse in American English. SCOTUSblog reporter John Elwood has referred to a "Schmuck v. United States Memorial Worst-Case-Caption Award" he supposedly gives each term. In a short 1993 Yale Law Journal article on the increasing use of Yiddish loanwords in American legal opinions, chief judge of the Ninth Circuit Alex Kozinski and UCLA law professor Eugene Volokh noted that the fact that some people actually are named Schmuck made it hard to tell much about the history of the word's use in opinions. "We can't report on the degree to which schmuck has worked its way into legal English, which is too bad, because schmucks are even more common in courtrooms than schlemiels, schmoozing, and chutzpah," they wrote. "We can, however, mention that there's a U.S. Supreme Court case named Schmuck v. United States''; for what it's worth, the petitioner was a used-car dealer.""Lawsuit, Shamwsuit", 103 Yale Law Journal 463 (1993); retrieved March 14, 2013.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 489
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit cases
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:United States criminal procedure case law
Category:Mail and wire fraud case law
Category:1989 in United States case law
"""

From "Schneckloth v. Bustamonte" ==> """
Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218 (1973), was a U.S. Supreme Court case that ruled that in a case involving a consent search, although knowledge of a right to refuse consent is a factor in determining whether a grant of consent to a search was voluntary, the state does not need to prove that the person who granted consent to search knew of the right to refuse consent under the Fourth Amendment.
Background
While on routine patrol in Sunnyvale, California, at approximately 2:40 in the morning, Officer James Rand stopped an automobile when he observed that one headlight and its license plate light were burned out. Six men were in the vehicle. Joe Alcala and the respondent, Robert Bustamonte, were in the front seat with Joe Gonzales, the driver. Three older men were seated in the rear. In response to the policeman's question, Gonzales could not produce a driver's license, Rand asked if any of the other five had any evidence of identification. Only Alcala produced a license, and he explained that the car was his brother's. After the six occupants had stepped out of the car at the officer's request, after two additional policemen had arrived, Rand asked Alcala if he could search the car. Alcala replied, "Sure, go ahead." Prior to the search, no one was threatened with arrest, and, according to Rand's uncontradicted testimony, it "was all very congenial at this time." Gonzales testified that Alcala actually helped in the search of the car by opening the trunk and glove compartment. In Gonzales' words:
"[T]he police officer asked Joe [Alcala], he goes, 'Does the trunk open?' And Joe said, 'Yes.' He went to the car and got the keys and opened up the trunk."
Wadded up under the left rear seat, the police officers found three checks that had previously been stolen from a car wash. The checks were later linked to Bustamonte (defendant), one of the six passengers riding in the car.
The trial judge denied Bustamonte’s motion to suppress, and the checks in question were admitted in evidence at Bustamonte's trial..
Holding
The court held that consent searches are constitutional, and the government must show that consent existed. However, a defendant under the Fourth Amendment need not necessarily know of his right to object to a consent search. That differentiates the case from Miranda v. Arizona in which the Court held that defendants must know of their rights against self-incrimination in the course of a custodial interrogation.
References
External links
Category:1973 in United States case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Schneider v. New Jersey" ==> """
Schneider v. State of New Jersey, 308 U.S. 147 (1939), was a United States Supreme Court decision that combined four similar appeals (Schneider v. State of New Jersey (Town of Irvington), Young v. People of the State of California, Snyder v. City of Milwaukee, Nichols et al. v. Commonwealth of Massachusetts), each of which presented the question whether regulations embodied in municipal ordinances abridged the First Amendment rights of freedom of speech and of the press secured against state invasion by the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution.
The appellants (Jehovah's Witnesses) were charged with a violation of a local ordinance that barred persons from distributing handbills on public streets or handing them out door-to-door.
Representation
 Joseph F. Rutherford, with whom Mr. Hayden C. Covington was on the brief, for petitioner in No. 11.
 Robert I. Morris argued the cause, and Messrs. Meyer Q. Kessel and Joseph C. Braelow were on the brief, for respondent in No. 11.
 Osmond K. Fraenkel, with whom Carol King and Mr. A.L. Wirin were on the brief, for appellant in No. 13.
 Ray L. Chesebro, Frederick Von Schrader, Leon T. David, John L. Bland, and Bourke Jones submitted for appellee in No. 13.
 A.W. Richter, with whom Mr. Osmond K. Fraenkel was on the brief, for petitioner in No. 18.
 Carl F. Zeidler argued the cause, and Mr. Walter J. Mattison was on the brief, for respondent in No. 18.
 Sidney S. Grant and Osmond K. Fraenkel for appellants in No. 29.
 Edward O. Proctor, Assistant Attorney General of Massachusetts, with whom Mr. Paul A. Dever, Attorney General, was on the brief, for appellee in No. 29.
Decision
In 1939, the U.S. Supreme Court held that the purpose of the ordinances to keep the streets clean and of good appearance was insufficient to justify prohibiting defendants from handing out literature to other persons willing to receive it. Any burden imposed upon the city authorities in cleaning and caring for the streets as an indirect consequence of such distribution resulted from the constitutional protection of the freedom of speech and press. Concerning the distribution of materials from house to house without a permit, the ordinance was void. 
This right is not absolute, however. Municipalities may lawfully regulate the conduct of those using the streets, for the purpose of keeping them open and available for movement of people and property, so long as legislation to this end does not abridge the constitutional liberty of one rightfully upon the street to impart information through speech or the distribution of literature.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 308
Lovell v. City of Griffin
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1939 in United States case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
Category:1939 in religion
"""

From "Schneider v. Rusk" ==> """
Schneider v. Rusk, 377 U.S. 163 (1964), was a United States Supreme Court case which invalidated a law that treated naturalized and native-born citizens differentially under the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment..
Background
Angelika Schneider, a German immigrant, came to the US with her parents and became a United States citizen upon their naturalization at age 16. When she graduated from college, she moved back to Germany.
The State Department claimed Schneider had lost her US citizenship in accordance with a section of the Immigration and Nationality Act which revoked the citizenship of any naturalized citizen who returned to his or her country of birth and remained there for at least three years.
Opinion
The Supreme Court held that since no provision of the law stripped natural-born Americans of their citizenship as a result of extended or permanent residence abroad, it was unconstitutionally discriminatory to apply such a rule only to naturalized citizens.
References
 Sources
Schneider v. Rusk: Great American Court Cases
The Supreme Court: Welcome Home TIME, May 29, 1964
External links
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
"""

From "Schneiderman v. United States" ==> """
Schneiderman v. United States, 320 U.S. 118 (1943), was a U.S. Supreme Court case involving denaturalization. By a 5–3 vote, the justices rejected the federal government's attempt to denaturalize William Schneiderman, a self-avowed communist. The Court held that "clear, unequivocal, and convincing" proof was required to revoke citizenship; it determined that there was insufficient evidence that Schneiderman was not "attached to the principles of the Constitution" as required by federal law. 
 Background 
William Schneiderman was born in Russia in 1905; he immigrated to the United States with his parents at age two. A member of communist groups throughout his early years, he joined the Worker's Party (which later became the Communist Party of the United States) in 1924. In 1927, Schneiderman became a naturalized citizen. He had never been charged with a crime, nor had there been any assertions of unlawful behavior on his part. Schneiderman remained committed to communism throughout the period, and in 1932 he ran on the Communist Party ticket for governor of Minnesota. In 1939, the federal government commenced denaturalization proceedings against him, arguing that his citizenship had been illegally procured because, as a communist, Schneiderman had not been "attached to the principles of the Constitution of the United States", as required by the Naturalization Act of 1906. A California federal court agreed and denaturalized Schneiderman. The court found that he supported communist principles, such as the abolition of private property, that were inherently contrary to the Constitution; it also concluded that he supported the use of "methods of force and violence" to carry out those goals. On appeal, the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed, listing the Communist Party's beliefs and asserting that "[i]t is obvious that these views are not those of our Constitution".
Schneiderman appealed the case to the Supreme Court of the United States, which heard the case on November 9, 1942. He was represented pro bono by Wendell Willkie, a previous Republican candidate for president; Solicitor General Charles Fahy argued on behalf of the government. The case was initially heard by only seven justices: one seat was vacant and Justice Robert H. Jackson was recused due to his previous service as Attorney General. After Wiley Rutledge was appointed to fill the vacant seat, the Court reheard the case to enable him to participate.
 Decision 
 Majority opinion 
Justice Frank Murphy delivered the opinion of the Court, which was joined by Justices Black, Reed, Douglas, and Rutledge, on June 21, 1943. Disagreeing with the government's arguments, the Court reversed the lower courts' rulings. Murphy reasoned that one could be attached to the Constitution's principles without agreeing with each one of its provisions. Citing the First Amendment's free-expression protections and Article V's constitutional-amendment process, he wrote that "[t]he constitutional fathers, fresh from a revolution, did not forge a political straight-jacket for the generations to come....As Justice Holmes said, 'Surely it cannot show lack of attachment to the principles of the Constitution that [one] thinks it can be improved.'" Next, the justices rejected the Justice Department's contention that Schneiderman's membership in the Communist Party meant that he supported overthrowing the government by force. Discussing in detail the writings of various communist leaders, Murphy determined that the Communist Party did not unequivocally favor actual violence against the government. Finally, the Court determined that, in light of the First Amendment, "clear, unequivocal, and convincing" proof was necessary to denaturalize a citizen. Murphy determined that, in Schneiderman's case, the government had not met that high standard of proof.
 Concurrences 
Two justices filed concurring opinions: Justices Douglas and Rutledge. Douglas argued that naturalization should only be revoked on illegal-procurement grounds in cases in which no finding of attachment had been made in the first place, not in cases in which "another judge would appraise the evidence differently". Rutledge expressed concern that the government was attempting to revoke Schneiderman's citizenship so long after his naturalization. According to Rutledge, "no citizen with such a threat hanging over his head could be free".
 Dissent 
In an opinion joined by Justices Roberts and Frankfurter, Chief Justice Harlan F. Stone stridently dissented. He argued that the majority failed to give adequate deference to the district court's factual findings. Although Stone accepted arguendo Murphy's "clear, unequivocal, and convincing" standard, he concluded that the government had met it. In Stone's view, the record showed that Schneiderman was "well aware that he was a member of and aiding a party which taught and advocated the overthrow of the Government of the United States by force and violence."
 Impact and legacy 
The decision attracted immediate contemporary attention. Major newspapers took various views of the ruling: the St. Louis Star-Times praised it as "a triumph for American principles of freedom and justice", while The Philadelphia Inquirer criticized "its weakening effect on the safeguards which the Government seeks to establish against subversive elements". The perspectives presented in law reviews were generally hostile to the Court's decision. In later years, the ruling had a substantial impact on the law. Its high burden of proof reduced the number of denaturalization cases, while its rejection of "guilt by association" was cited in later cases involving the Communist Party. Schneiderman himself, meanwhile, had not seen the last of the Supreme Court: after being convicted in 1952 of conspiracy to violate the Smith Act, the Court again ruled in his favor in the influential case of Yates v. United States.
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:1943 in United States case law
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:Communism in the United States
"""

From "Schreiber v. Sharpless" ==> """
Schreiber v. Sharpless, 110 U.S. 76 (1884), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held charges of copyright infringement do not survive the death of the accused and may not be transferred to the executors of their will..
 References 
External links
Category:1884 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
"""

From "Schriro v. Summerlin" ==> """
Schriro v. Summerlin, 542 U.S. 348 (2004), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that a requirement that a different Supreme Court decision requiring the jury rather than the judge to find aggravating factors would not be applied retroactively..
Facts
In April 1981, Warren Wesley Summerlin killed a creditor who had come to his home in Phoenix, Arizona, to inquire about a debt.  He was later convicted of first-degree murder and received a death sentence.  Under Arizona law at the time, a jury decided the question of guilt but a judge sitting without a jury decided the question of penalty after receiving evidence regarding aggravating and mitigating factors.  The Arizona Supreme Court affirmed the death sentence.  While the appeal in his habeas corpus case was pending in the Ninth Circuit, the Supreme Court decided Ring v. Arizona,. which held that such aggravating factors had to be proved to a jury rather than a judge. The Ninth Circuit ruled that the Ring decision applied to Summerlin's case even though Ring was decided after Summerlin's conviction had become final on direct review. The state appealed this decision to the Supreme Court.
Result
The Court, in an opinion by Justice Scalia, reversed the decision of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, and stated that "we give retroactive effect to only a small set of 'watershed rules of criminal procedure implementing the fundamental fairness and accuracy of the criminal proceeding.' That a new procedural rule is 'fundamental' in some abstract sense is not enough; the rule must be one 'without which the likelihood of an accurate conviction is seriously diminished."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 542
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:Capital punishment in Arizona
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment sentencing case law
"""

From "Schuette v. Coalition to Defend Affirmative Action" ==> """
Schuette v. Coalition to Defend Affirmative Action, 572 U.S. 291 (2014), was a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States concerning affirmative action and race- and sex-based discrimination in public university admissions. In a 6-2 decision, the Court held that the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause does not prevent states from enacting bans on affirmative action in education.
The case arose after Michigan voters approved the Michigan Civil Rights Initiative, which amended the state constitution to make affirmative action illegal in public employment and public education. In a plurality opinion joined by two other justices, Justice Anthony Kennedy held that the ban on affirmative action was constitutional. Kennedy wrote that "[t]here is no authority in the Constitution of the United States or in this Court's precedents for the Judiciary to set aside Michigan laws that commit this policy determination to the voters." Justices Antonin Scalia, Clarence Thomas, and Stephen Breyer concurred in the result but filed or joined separate opinions. In her dissenting opinion, Associate Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote that the voters of Michigan had "changed the basic rules of the political process in that State in a manner that uniquely disadvantaged racial minorities."
Background
In 1961, President John F. Kennedy issued an executive order establishing the concept of affirmative action and mandating that federally financed projects ensure that their hiring and employment practices are free of racial bias. With the enactment of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, sex or national origin was prohibited.
In the first case involving affirmative action in higher education, the Supreme Court ruled in Regents of the University of California v. Bakke (1978) that the UC Davis medical school admissions program violated the Fourteenth Amendment with the institution of quotas for underrepresented minorities. It did not, however, eliminate race as a factor in university admissions, calling diversity a "compelling interest".
The Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled in Hopwood v. Texas (5th Cir. 1996) that the University of Texas School of Law could not use race as a factor in admissions. This was the first successful legal challenge to racial preferences since Bakke.
Two cases in 2003 involving the University of Michigan found that the university's policy of granting extra points to minorities for undergraduate admissions was unconstitutional (Gratz v. Bollinger) but that a program which gave holistic consideration for being a certain racial minority, though not an automatic boost, in admissions to the law school was constitutional (Grutter v. Bollinger).
Michigan voters approved Proposal 2 in 2006 which amended the state's constitution to make affirmative action illegal in public employment, public education or public contracting purposes, except for actions mandated by federal law or that are necessary in order for an institution to receive federal funding.Mich. Const., Art. I, sec. 26
The United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit ruled in 2012 that the ban was unconstitutional.Coalition to Defend Affirmative Action, et al. v. Regents of the University of Michigan, et al. (6th Cir. 2012)
Supreme Court
The Court heard oral argument on October 15, 2013. John J. Bursch, then the Michigan Solicitor General, argued for the petitioner, Michigan Attorney General Bill Schuette. Mark D. Rosenbaum argued for the Cantrell respondents, and Shanta Driver argued for the Coalition to Defend Affirmative Action. Justice Elena Kagan took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.
Opinion and concurrences
On April 22, 2014, the Court ruled for the petitioner that the ban on affirmative action in the Michigan Constitution is constitutional. Justice Kennedy, writing the plurality opinion, wrote that "[t]here is no authority in the Constitution of the United States or in this Court's precedents for the Judiciary to set aside Michigan laws that commit this policy determination to the voters." Chief Justice Roberts and Justice Alito joined in the plurality.
Chief Justice Roberts also filed a concurring opinion, arguing that the dissent contains a paradox: the governing board banning affirmative action is an exercise of policymaking authority, but others who reach that conclusion (presumed to mean the supporters of Proposal 2) do not take race seriously. He continues that racial preferences may actually do more harm than good, as they reinforce doubt about whether or not minorities belong.
Justice Scalia filed an opinion concurring in the judgment, joined by Justice Thomas. He examines what he calls a "frighteningly bizarre question": Whether the Equal Protection Clause forbids what its text requires. He answers this by quoting his concurrence/dissent in Grutter: that "the Constitution [forbids] government discrimination on the basis of race, and state-provided education is no exception." He asserts that the people of Michigan adopted that understanding of the clause as their fundamental law, and that by adopting it, "they did not simultaneously offend it."Schuette v. Coalition to Defend Affirmative Action, 572 U.S. ___ (2014)
Justice Breyer filed an opinion concurring in the judgment, arguing that the case has nothing to do with reordering the political process, nor moving decision-making power from one level to another, but rather that university boards delegated admissions-related authority to unelected faculty and administration. He further argues that the same principle which supports the right of the people or their representatives to adopt affirmative action policies for the sake of inclusion also gives them the right to vote not to do so, as Michigan did.
Dissent
Justice Sotomayor filed a dissent, joined by Justice Ginsburg, outlining what she called the nation's "long and lamentable record of stymieing the right of racial minorities to participate in the political process." She charges that "[a] majority of the Michigan electorate changed the basic rules of the political process in that State in a manner that uniquely disadvantaged racial minorities." Sotomayor contended that those opposed to affirmative action policies could have either lobbied the boards of the state's universities to change their policies or, through the electoral process, changed the membership of the boards. She invokes the political-process doctrine, recognized in Hunter v. Erickson (1969) and Washington v. Seattle School District (1982), whereby "[w]hen the majority reconfigures the political process in a manner that burdens only a racial minority, that alteration triggers strict judicial scrutiny."  Sotomayor had previously credited her own admission to college to affirmative action, stating "I am the perfect affirmative action baby", and that without affirmative action "it would have been highly questionable if I would have been accepted." In the dissent, Sotomayor notably paraphrased Chief Justice John Roberts's majority opinion in Parents Involved in Community Schools v. Seattle School District No. 1, writing that "The way to stop discrimination on the basis of race is to speak openly and candidly on the subject of race, and to apply the Constitution with eyes open to the unfortunate effects of centuries of racial discrimination."
References
External links
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:United States affirmative action case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:University and college admissions in the United States
Category:Legal history of Michigan
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Schweiker v. Chilicky" ==> """
Schweiker v. Chilicky, 487 U.S. 412 (1988), was a United States Supreme Court decision that established limitations on implied causes of action. The Court determined that a cause of action would not be implied for the violation of rights where the U.S. Congress had already provided a remedy for the violation of rights at issue, even if the remedy was inadequate.
In this case, seriously disabled people were wrongfully being denied federal benefits (although, on appeal to an Administrative Law Judge, two-thirds had their payments restored). Although Congress provides for the return of back-pay, no provision is made for pain and suffering or other economic losses. The injured parties sued responsible agency personnel, under the theory that pursuant to Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents they could allege a private right of action for deprivation of due process. 
The Court examined whether Congress intended a private right of action under these circumstances, and concluded that if Congress has created a meaningful remedy – even if it is incomplete – then no Bivens-type remedy is available. Special factors counseling hesitation included judicial deference to a combination of: 
 some indication that Congress considered providing a cause of action, and chose not to; and
 the design of some government program containing what Congress considers an adequate remedial mechanism.
Here Congress has provided a great deal of process, and some relief, and has been otherwise silent as to a remedy, which the Court found to be enough to foreclose a Bivens remedy.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 487
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1988 in United States case law
Category:Implied constitutional cause of action case law
"""

From "Scialabba v. de Osorio" ==> """
Scialabba v. de Osorio, 573 U.S. 41 (2014), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the court found that lawful residents in the United States who turned twenty-one while their visa applications were being processed could not retain their original application date after "aging out" of eligibility for child-visas. Those "aged out" were moved to the bottom of the list of applicants for adult visas. The Ninth Circuit Court had originally agreed that provisions in the Child Status Protection Act allowed applicants to retain their date.
References
External links
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
"""

From "Scott v. Harris" ==> """
Scott v. Harris, 550 U.S. 372 (2007), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States involving a lawsuit against a sheriff's deputy brought by a motorist who was paralyzed after the officer ran his eluding vehicle off the road during a high-speed car chase. The driver contended that this action was an unreasonable seizure under the Fourth Amendment. The case also involved the question of whether a police officer's qualified immunity shielded him from suit under Section 1983. On April 30, 2007, in an 8–1 decision, the court sided with police and ruled that a "police officer's attempt to terminate a dangerous high-speed car chase that threatens the lives of innocent bystanders does not violate the Fourth Amendment, even when it places the fleeing motorist at risk of serious injury or death." In a rare occurrence, the court accepted the presentation of video evidence of the high-speed pursuit. Such procedure is quite uncommon in the Supreme Court and was viewed as part of an interesting relationship between the Supreme Court and technology. The video had a strong effect on the Court's decision and is viewed as a major factor in how the court made its decision.  The author of the opinion, Justice Antonin Scalia, in a first-time occurrence ever, posted the video of the car chase online (for access to the video, see external links below).
Justice John Paul Stevens, the lone dissenter, argued that the videotape evidence was not decisive, as the majority claimed it to be, and that a jury should determine if deadly force was justified. He stated a jury should be used, instead of the case "being decided by a group of elderly appellate judges," a reference to himself and his colleagues on the court (this sentence is not in the text of the dissent, but he pronounced it while reading the opinion at bench).Associated Press."Court Sides With Cops On High-Speed Chase, Supreme Court Rejects Arguments Of Man Paralyzed in Crash Stemming From Police Pursuit", CBS News, April 30, 2007.
Three law professors created an experiment based on the video, showing it to over a thousand subjects and then asking them whether they thought the use of deadly force was reasonable.  The study found "[a] fairly substantial majority did interpret the facts the way the Court did. But members of various subcommunities did not."  The study and the disagreement over the reasonableness of the use of deadly force was reported in the Harvard Law Review.
 See also 
 Tennessee v. Garner, 
 Plumhoff v. Rickard, 572 U.S. ___ (2014)
 References 
External links
 Supreme Court Scott v. Harris video 
 Court-posted format (mp4 file).
 streaming version, and MPEG4 and MPEG2 downloads
 Analysis and editing of the Scott v. Harris video
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Scott v. Illinois" ==> """
Scott v. Illinois, 440 U.S. 367 (1979), was a case heard by the Supreme Court of the United States. In Scott, the Court decided whether the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments required Illinois to provide Scott with trial counsel.
Background
After being denied a request for court-appointed counsel, Scott was convicted in a bench trial of shoplifting and fined $50. The statute applicable to his case set the maximum penalty at a $500 fine and one year in jail.
Supreme Courts decision
A plurality held that Illinois had not violated the Constitution. Writing for four of the justices, Rehnquist clarified the Court's holding in Argersinger v. Hamlin (1972) and argued that states could sentence a convicted criminal to imprisonment only if that person had been represented by counsel.  Since Scott was not sentenced to imprisonment, even though the applicable statute allowed for it, the state was not obligated to provide counsel.  Rehnquist called that line of reasoning "the central premise of Argersinger."
Justice Brennan dissented, drawing a distinction between "actual imprisonment" and "authorized imprisonment." He read Argersinger as saying that the right to jury trial existed when (1) a non-petty offense punishable by more than 6 months of jail time and (2) actual imprisonment was likely despite the authorized maximum penalty. 
Brennan viewed authorized imprisonment as a more accurate standard because criminal statutes were written with this standard in mind and the social stigma attached to a crime took it into account. 
Brennan also said the majority's reason for going with the actual imprisonment standard was budgetary. He said that this was an inappropriate standard when dealing with constitutional guarantees.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 440
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Sixth Amendment appointment of counsel case law
Category:1979 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Screws v. United States" ==> """
Screws v. United States, 325 U.S. 91 (1945), was a 1945 Supreme Court case that made it difficult for the federal government to bring prosecutions when local government officials killed African-Americans in an extra-judicial manner.
Claude Screws, the sheriff of Baker County, Georgia, arrested Robert "Bobby" Hall, an African American, on January 29, 1943. Hall had allegedly stolen a tire, and was alleged to have tried to fight back against Screws and two of his deputies during the arrest.  Hall was arrested at his home. Screws then beat Hall to death.
The local U.S. attorney then convened a grand jury which indicted Screws on charges of violating Hall's civil rights. Screws was then convicted at the federal court house in Albany, Georgia. The conviction was upheld by the Circuit Court and then appealed to the Supreme Court. While the case was moving through the courts Screws was reelected as sheriff by a very wide margin.
The Supreme Court, in a decision authored by William O. Douglas, ruled that the federal government had not shown that Screws had the intention of violating Hall's civil rights when he killed him. This ruling greatly reduced the frequency with which federal civil rights cases were brought over the next few years.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 325
 Enforcement Act of 1870
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1945 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:Lynching deaths in Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:African-American history of Georgia (U.S. state)
"""

From "Scribner v. Straus" ==> """
Scribner v. Straus, 210 U.S. 352 (1908), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held copyright holders did not have the statutory right to control the price of subsequent resales of lawfully purchased copies of their work..
The court decided this case immediately after Bobbs-Merrill Co. v. Straus, which featured the same defendants, Isador Straus and Nathan Straus, being accused of copyright infringement for the same reason by a different company.. The result of Bobbs-Merrill Co. v. Straus held sway here.
 References 
External links
Category:1908 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Scull v. Virginia ex rel. Committee on Law Reform & Racial Activities" ==> """
Scull v. Virginia ex rel. Committee on Law Reform and Racial Activities, 359 U.S. 344 (1959), is a 9–0 ruling by the Supreme Court of the United States which held that a conviction violates the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution if the defendant is not given an opportunity "to determine whether he was within his rights in refusing to answer" an inquiry put to him by the legislature of a U.S. state.. 
Background
The state of Virginia enacted a package of statutes in September 1956 designed to ensure racial segregation in that state's public schools despite the ruling of the Supreme Court of the United States in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas, 347 U.S. 483 (1954). The legislative program ("the Stanley Plan") was named for Governor Thomas B. Stanley, who proposed the program and successfully pushed for its enactment. The Stanley Plan was a critical element in the policy of "massive resistance" to the Brown ruling advocated by U.S. Senator Harry F. Byrd, Sr.Duke, p. 18. The Stanley Plan was introduced and passed during a special session of the Virginia General Assembly. During the special session, Delegate James McIlhany Thomson, an ardent segregationist, introduced a bill (unrelated to the Stanley Plan) to establish a seven-member Assembly committee to investigate any group seeking to influence public opinion in the state, teacher quality, uniformity of courses and curriculum in the public schools, and the effects of integration on public education.Baker, Robert E. and Feeley, Connie. "New Bill Would Give Stanley Pupil Assignment." Washington Post. September 7, 1956."Bills Aimed at NAACP Stir Va. Assembly Fight." Washington Post. September 11, 1956. The bill passed on the last day of the special session.  The legislation established a 10-member Assembly committee composed of six delegates and four senators."Key Parts of Virginia School Bills." Washington Post. September 23, 1956. The committee was charged with investigating the effect of integration on public schools, racial matters in the state in general, and the effectiveness of racial legislation. The committee was to issue a report and make recommendations (if any) to the Assembly by November 1, 1957.
The legislative investigating committee was officially titled the Virginia Committee on Law Reform and Racial Activities, but was publicly known as the "Thomson Committee" after its chair, Delegate Thomson.Anzalone, p. 652-653. In 1954, David Scull (a printer in Annandale, Virginia) began publishing literature in favor of racial integration on behalf of a number of organizations in Virginia. The Fairfax Citizens' Council, a group opposed to racial integration, publicized Scull's role in the printing of the literature in 1957. Scull was subpoenaed to appear before the Thomson Committee, and subjected to an aggressive series of questions (many of which did not pertain to the committee's legal charge).Anzalone, p. 653. Scull refused to answer some of these questions and asked whether they pertained to the committee's legal charge.  The committee went to court to force him to answer. The Circuit Court of Arlington County ordered Scull to answer the questions.Anzalone, p. 652. He refused, and was convicted of contempt of court.
Scull appealed his conviction to the Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals. Without comment, the state supreme court declined to hear his appeal in 1958.Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals, p. lxxx.
Scull appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which granted certiorari and agreed to hear the case.
Ruling
Associate Justice  Hugo Black wrote the decision for the unanimous Court.
Scull made four claims:  
 That the committee was part of a program of state-sponsored harassment of those attempting to win racial integration of Virginia's public schools; 
 That the questions put to him violated his First Amendment rights to freedom of speech, freedom of assembly, and right to petition; 
 That the information sought was not relevant to the legislative function of the Virginia General Assembly; and 
 That despite repeated requests, the committee failed to show that its interrogatories were relevant to its legal charge.
Black declined to address the first three of Scull's claims, deciding instead to rule on the narrow grounds of the fourth claim. The record of the committee's proceedings showed that Scull asked the committee what the purpose of its inquiry was, so that he could determine which questions put to him were pertinent.Scull, 359 U.S. at 347. Chairman Thomson made an ambiguous reply, then told Scull that "several" of the lines of inquiry did not apply to Scull.Scull, 359 U.S. at 347-348. When Scull claimed that he still did not know what properly constituted the committee's subjects of inquiry, the committee proceeded to ask 31 questions of Scull.Scull, 359 U.S. at 348. Black expressed scepticism regarding the committee's actions: "It is difficult to see how some of these questions have any relationship to the subjects the Committee was authorized to investigate, or how Scull could possibly discover any such relationship from the Chairman's statement."Scull, 359 U.S. at 349.
Thomson's testimony in the contempt proceeding before the Circuit Court further muddied things.  During his testimony, Thomson "successively ruled out as inapplicable to Scull each of the subjects which the Legislature had authorized the Committee to investigate."Scull, 359 U.S. at 350-351, quoted at 351. Nor did the state circuit court's instructions to Scull clarify matters.  Black noted that the circuit court did not analyze any of the 31 questions put to Scull, did not explain to Scull what the subject of the committee's inquiry was, and did not explain how these questions related to that inquiry.Scull, 359 U.S. at 352.
It was clear, Black held, that the questions put to Scull clearly involved the First Amendment rights of freedom of speech, freedom of the press, and freedom of association. The Court's long-established test in such cases was to determine if there was a compelling governmental interest which could justify infringement on these fundamental rights.Scull, 359 U.S. at 352-353. But the majority did not need to reach even this constitutional question, Black concluded, because Thomson's, the committee's, and the circuit court's statements about the subject of inquiry were so unclear that Scull was prevented from knowing what he was supposed to answer.Scull, 359 U.S. at 353. "To sustain his conviction for contempt under these circumstances would be to send him to jail for a crime he could not with reasonable certainty know he was committing."
The Supreme Court had repeatedly held (Lanzetta v. New Jersey, 306 U.S. 451 [1939], Jordan v. De George, 341 U.S. 223 [1951], Watkins v. United States, 354 U.S. 178 [1957], Flaxer v. United States, 358 U.S. 147 [1958]) that "fundamental fairness" required that a reasonable certainty exist as to what crime an individual might be committing. Relying on Winters v. New York, 333 U.S. 507 (1948), Black concluded that such certainty is "essential" when individuals are asked to give up their freedom of speech, freedom of the press, and freedom of association out of a fear of violating a vague law. But the "far too wavering, confused and cloudy" responses given to Scull did not meet these standards.
The Court reversed and remanded the case to the Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals.
References
Bibliography
Anzalone, Christopher A. Supreme Court Cases on Political Representation, 1787-2001. Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe, 2002.
Duke, Daniel Linden. Education Empire: The Evolution of an Excellent Suburban School System. Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press, 2005.
Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals. Cases Decided in the Supreme Court of Appeals of Virginia. Richmond, Va.: Virginia Dept. of Purchase and Supply, 1959.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Void for vagueness case law
Category:Virginia law
Category:1959 in United States case law
Category:1959 in Virginia
"""

From "Sears, Roebuck & Co. v. Stiffel Co." ==> """
Sears, Roebuck & Co. v. Stiffel Co., 376 U.S. 225 (1964), was a United States Supreme Court case which limited state law on unfair competition when it prevents the copying of an item that is not covered by a patent.. 
Justice Hugo Black wrote for a unanimous Court that the Constitution reserved power over intellectual property such as patents to the federal government exclusively. Since the trial court had found Stiffel's patent invalid as insufficiently inventive, its product design was thus in the public domain and no state law could be used to prevent Sears from copying it.
The Supreme Court made a similar ruling in a companion case decided the same day, Compco Corp. v. Day-Brite Lighting, Inc...
These two cases were the first decisions of the Supreme Court that states could not, because of the Supremacy Clause of the Constitution, create their own patent or patent-like laws. The issue had been raised, but not decided, in Gibbons v. Ogden,. in which Attorney General Wirt argued on behalf of the United States22 U.S. at 165-77. for federal patent preemption of New York's grant of a steamboat patent to Robert Fulton.See Product Simulation: A Right or a Wrong, Ralph S. Brown, 64  1216, 1218 (1964). Brown commented that one of his colleagues had observed: "What a way to begin an opinion—'This case presents the question unresolved in Gibbons v. Ogden.'" Id. at 1218 n.6. Brown also notes that "the pretermission of the question" in Gibbons is discussed in the Brief for the United States as Amicus Curiae in Stiffel. Id.
Background
Stiffel Co. was a lamp manufacturer that had created a "pole lamp", which was a vertical tube standing upright between the floor and ceiling of a room, and with lamp fixtures along the outside of the tube.  Stiffel Co. had secured a mechanical patent and a design patent, granted in 1957, on the pole lamp, and the lamp proved a "decided commercial success," according to the Supreme Court's opinion.Sears, Roebuck & Co. v. Stiffel Co., 376 U.S. at 226.
200px|thumb|left|The Stiffel "pole lamp" – U.S. Design Pat. No. 180,251
Soon after Stiffel brought the pole lamp to market, the Sears, Roebuck & Co. department store put on the market copies of the lamp. Stiffel Co. brought suit against Sears, for patent infringement and for unfair competition under Illinois law, the latter claim based on Sears' allegedly causing confusion in the trade as to the source of the lamps.
The United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois, held the patents invalid for "want of invention," but ruled Sears to be guilty of unfair competition because the lamps were "confusingly similar," enjoined Sears from selling the identical lamps, and ordered an award of monetary damages to Stiffel Co.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit affirmed, holding that under Illinois law, Stiffel had only to prove that there was a "likelihood of confusion as to the source of the products" due to the identical appearance of the lamps.  The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari to consider whether this use of a state's unfair competition law was compatible with U.S. patent law.
Ruling of Supreme Court
thumb|175px|right|Justice Hugo Black
Justice Black, in the Court's opinion, reviewed the history of the patent monopoly in English and U.S. law, and wrote that when a patent expires, or when an item is unpatentable, then the item "is in the public domain and may be made and sold by whoever chooses to do so.".376 U.S. at 231 (citing Kellogg Co. v. National Biscuit Co. (1938)). The lower courts had erred by using Illinois unfair competition law to effectively give Stiffel Co. a patent monopoly on its unpatented lamp.376 U.S. 232-33 ("But because of the federal patent laws, a State may not, when the article is unpatented and uncopyrighted, prohibit the copying of the article itself or award damages for such copying. The judgment below did both, and, in so doing, gave Stiffel the equivalent of a patent monopoly on its unpatented lamp. That was error, and Sears is entitled to a judgment in its favor.") (citation omitted).
The Court continued that "mere inability of the public to tell two identical articles apart is not enough to support an injunction against copying or an award of damages for copying that which the federal patent laws permit to be copied,"376 U.S. at 232. though it noted that a state could require that goods be labeled in order to prevent consumers from being misled as to the source of an article; but that this was a trade dress issue, and that such state laws could not go so far as to prohibit the copying of the goods themselves: "What Sears did was to copy Stiffel's design and to sell lamps almost identical to those sold by Stiffel. This it had every right to do under the federal patent laws. That Stiffel originated the pole lamp and made it popular is immaterial."376 U.S. at 231.
Justice Harlan concurred in the result but opined that states should be able to prohibit copying if the main purpose of the prohibition is to prevent "palming off" one company's goods as those of another.376 U.S. at 239.
Subsequent events
Stiffel was reaffirmed in Bonito Boats, Inc. v. Thunder Craft Boats, Inc..
Stiffel Co. survived the setback of its loss in this case, continuing in business until 2000.  At that point, it failed, after 68 years in business. It was described as "the last full-line cast zinc lamp maker in the United States.""Main Street Pulls the Plug on Stiffel Co"., Meyer, Nancy, HFN: The Weekly Newspaper For The Home Furnishing Network, July 2000 (visited July 6, 2015). However, Stiffel Lamps appears to be doing business as recently as April 20, 2021 with the website http://stiffel.com/, where it reports to have been founded in 1932."About Stiffel Lamps" (visited April 22, 2021).
A Symposium issue of the Columbia Law Review, Product Simulation: A Right or a Wrong, 64  1178 (1964) was published containing articles on Sears and Compco after "the Editors of the Columbia Law Review [] invited several eminent scholars to comment upon the opinions."
Stiffel is widely cited for preemption of state product protection by the federal patent laws.According to Court Listener it has been cited in more than 200 opinions, as of July 2015.
References
 The citations in this Article are written in Bluebookstyle. Please see the Talk page for this Article.
Further reading
James M. Treece, Patent Policy and Preemption: The Stiffel and Compco Cases, 32  80 (1964).
Symposium issue of Columbia Law Review: Product Simulation: A Right or a Wrong, 64  1178 (1964) (articles about case by Daphne R. Leeds, Milton Handler, Walter J. Derenberg, Ralph S. Brown, Jr., and Paul Bender).
External links
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:Sears Holdings
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
"""

From "SEC v. Chenery Corp. (1947)" ==> """
Securities and Exchange Commission v. Chenery Corporation, 332 U.S. 194 (1947), is a United States Supreme Court case.  It is often referred to as Chenery II.
 Background 
A federal water company was accused of illegal stock manipulation.
The SEC was charged with deciding whether re-organization of companies that were in violation of the Public Utilities Company Holding Act was approved. The Chenerys were officers, directors, and shareholders of Federal Water Service Corporation. 
Originally, in the case called Chenery I, the company submitted a plan to the SEC, which the SEC did not approve. The reason that the SEC gave was that the plan violated certain standards of fraud. The first time this was heard before the Supreme Court in SEC v. Chenery Corporation, 318 U.S. 80 (1943), the Court held that the acts committed by the company did not amount to common law fraud and therefore the Securities and Exchange Commission's stated rationale for the charges could not be sustained.  
On remand the SEC charged the company's officials on different grounds, under its own enabling act.  The court used the case as an opportunity to discuss the merits of policy-making through adjudication and retroactive rule-making. The rejection again went before the Supreme Court as Chenery II. 
This time the Supreme Court upheld the rejection. The explanation given was that the rejection in Chenery I was on the basis of standards that had not actually existed. But the SEC was authorized to create its own standards in such cases, so long as it based the rejection on those standards. A court reviewing the SEC (or general agency) action would not approve it simply on the basis of the agency's authority, it had to be approved based on the rationale that the agency provided. 
Since the SEC was authorized to create its own standards, it was free to reject reorganization plans based on those standards - so long as that was the stated rationale of the SEC. Therefore, when the SEC, in Chenery II, explained that as the basis for their decision, it was upheld. 
 Opinion of the Court 
The US Supreme Court stated that policy-making through administrative adjudication is not necessarily wrong and may be desirable.  Adjudication is more flexible than rule-making and allows policy to be made on an ad hoc basis.  This flexibility is important where there may be unforeseeable problems, inexperience with the problem, or the problem is so specialized and varied that a general rule would be impossible.  Therefore, the choice between rule-making and adjudication lies in the informed discretion of the agency. However, this particular adjudication might be the application of impermissible retroactivity in interpreting the statute because the SEC seems to have decided after the fact, based on its actions in Chenery I, that the officers' actions were against the law.  This type of retroactivity in this case was permissible.    
The Court reversed the court of appeals on these grounds.
Dissents 
Justice Jackson dissented because he felt that the basis for Chenery I was that the SEC must do rule-making before it applies this principle of law.  He felt that the change in opinion was due to the change in a composition of the Court.  He also argued that deference to the agency's expertise made no sense where the agency had never seen the particular problem before.
It is worth noting the extent of the turnover in the court between Chenery I and Chenery II. Although the decision seems to distinguish the two cases rather than overturn Chenery I, which has become part of the doctrine regarding agency action, both of the remaining justices from the majority in Chenery I dissented in Chenery II.
 See also 
 Administrative law
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:1947 in United States case law
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States securities case law
Chenery Corporation (1947)
"""

From "SEC v. Chenery Corp. (1943)" ==> """
Securities and Exchange Commission v. Chenery Corporation, 318 U.S. 80 (1943), is a United States Supreme Court case. It is often referred to as Chenery I, as four years later the case was before the Supreme Court a second time in Chenery II. Chenery I set out what is known as the Chenery Doctrine, a basic principle of U.S. administrative law that an agency may not defend an administrative decision on new grounds not set forth by the agency in its original decision.
 Background 
The respondents, who were officers, directors, and controlling stockholders of the Federal Water Service Corporation (hereafter called Federal), a holding company registered under the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935, c. 687, 49 Stat. 803, 15 U.S.C. § 79 et seq., brought this proceeding under § 24(a) of the Act to review an order made by the Securities and Exchange Commission on September 24, 1941, approving a plan of reorganization for the company. Under the Commission's order, preferred stock acquired by the respondents during the period in which successive reorganization plans proposed by the management of the company were before the Commission was not permitted to participate in the reorganization on an equal footing with all other preferred stock. The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, with one judge dissenting, set the Commission's order aside, 75 U.S.App.D.C. 374, 128 F.2d 303, and, because the question presented loomed large in the administration of the Act, the Supreme Court granted certiorari.
 See also 
 Administrative law
 Securities and Exchange Commission v. Chenery Corporation (1947)
Bowen v. Georgetown University Hospital
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States securities case law
Chenery Corporation (1943)
Category:1943 in United States case law
"""

From "SEC v. W. J. Howey Co." ==> """
Securities and Exchange Commission v. W. J. Howey Co., 328 U.S. 293 (1946), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the offer of a land sales and service contract was an "investment contract" within the meaning of the Securities Act of 1933 () and that the use of the mails and interstate commerce in the offer and sale of these securities was a violation of §5 of the Act, ..  It was an important case in determining the general applicability of the federal securities laws.
The case resulted in a test, known as the Howey test, to determine whether an instrument qualifies as an "investment contract" for the purposes of the Securities Act: "a contract, transaction or scheme whereby a person invests his money in a common enterprise and is led to expect profits solely from the efforts of the promoter or a third party."
Facts
The defendants, W. J. Howey Co. and Howey-in-the-Hills Service, Inc., were corporations organized under the laws of the state of Florida. William John Howey owned large tracts of citrus groves in Florida.  Howey kept half of the groves for its own use and sold real estate contracts for the other half to finance its future developments. Howey would sell the land for a uniform price per acre (or per fraction of an acre for smaller parcels) and convey to the purchaser a warranty deed upon payment in full of the purchase price.
The purchaser of the land could then lease it back to the service company Howey-in-the-Hills, via a service contract, which would tend to the land, and harvest, pool, and market the produce. The service contract gave Howey-in-the-Hills "full and complete" possession of the land specified in the contract and left no right of entry or any right to the produce harvested.  Purchasers of the land had the option of making other service arrangements, but W. J. Howey, in its advertising materials, stressed the superiority of Howey-in-the-Hills's service.
Howey marketed the land through a resort hotel it owned in the area and promised significant profits in the sales pitch it provided to those who expressed interest in the groves. Most purchasers of the land were not Florida residents or farmers. Rather, they were business and professional people inexperienced in agriculture and lacking the skill or equipment to tend to the land by themselves.
Procedural history
Howey had not filed any registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission. The SEC filed suit to obtain an injunction forbidding the defendants from using the mails and instrumentalities of interstate commerce in the offer and the sale of unregistered and nonexempt securities, in violation of 5(a) of the Securities Act of 1933. The United States District Court for the Southern District of Florida denied the injunction, and the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit affirmed. The US Supreme Court then granted certiorari.
Majority opinion
Justice Frank Murphy, writing for the majority, identified the major legal issue in this case as whether or not the contracts that Howey was selling (which were basically leaseback agreements) constituted an "investment contract" within the meaning of § 2(a)(1) of the Securities Act of 1933. Murphy reasoned that while the term "investment contract" was left undefined by the Act, it had been used in state blue sky laws to cover a broad array of contracts and other schemes to raise capital in a way to secure some income or profit from the use thereof. Thus, the Court concluded that Congress had written the term into the statute in recognition of its previously adopted common law meaning.
Murphy then formulated one of the US Supreme Court's earliest tests to determine whether an instrument qualifies as an "investment contract" for the purposes of the Securities Act (which later came to be referred to as the Howey test):
"In other words, an investment contract for purposes of the Securities Act means a contract, transaction or scheme whereby a person invests his money in a common enterprise and is led to expect profits solely from the efforts of the promoter or a third party, it being immaterial whether the shares in the enterprise are evidenced by formal certificates or by nominal interests in the physical assets employed in the enterprise."
"The test is whether the scheme involves an investment of money in a common enterprise with profits to come solely from the efforts of others. If that test be satisfied, it is immaterial whether the enterprise is speculative or non-speculative or whether there is a sale of property with or without intrinsic value."
Murphy determined that the contracts in issue met all four prongs of this test and so W. J. Howey could be held liable for violating § 5 of the Securities Act of 1933. Furthermore, Murphy held that the fact that some of the investors chose to use services other than those of Howey-in-the-Hills to tend to the groves was irrelevant because §5 forbids the offer of unregistered securities as well as the sale of them.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Frankfurter wrote a brief dissenting opinion. He first suggested the Supreme Court to defer to the findings of both lower courts, particularly the District Court, as it was the finder of fact in this case. He also noted that the purchasers were permitted to inspect the land before they bought it, and they were allowed the option of using their own agricultural services.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 328
 William John Howey
References
External links
Category:1946 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States securities case law
W. J. Howey Co.
Category:William John Howey
"""

From "SEC v. Ralston Purina Co." ==> """
Securities and Exchange Commission v. Ralston Purina Co., 346 U.S. 119 (1953),. was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that a corporation offering "key employees" equity stock shares is eligible for a transaction-based exemption from securities registration under Section 4(1) [Now Section 4(a)(2)] of the Securities Act of 1933.  This exemption would generally not apply when offered to all employees, including rank-and-file employees, as the investors should be "sophisticated investors."
Rule 
Section 4(1) [Now Section 4(a)(2)] of the Securities Act of 1933 exempts "transactions by an issuer not involving any public offering" from the registration requirements of Section 5. This is also known as the "private offering exemption."Securities and Exchange Comm'n v. Ralston Purina Co., 346 U.S. 119 (1953).
Facts of the case
Ralston Purina provided feed and cereal products throughout the U.S. and Canada. The company was staffed by some 7,000 employees with which Ralston had a policy of encouraging stock ownership. Between 1947 and 1951, Ralston Purina sold nearly $2 million of stock to employees without registration. In each of these years, Ralston Purina authorized the sale of common stock "to employees ... who shall, without solicitation by the Company ... inquire of any of them as to how to purchase common stock of Ralston Purina Company." A memorandum sent to branch and store managers advised that the "only employees to whom this stock will be available will be those who take the initiative and are interested in buying stock at present market prices." 
Among those who responded to these offers were employees with the duties of artist, bakeshop foreman, chow loading foreman, clerical assistant, copywriter, electrician, and veterinarian. The buyers lived across the U.S. The lowest salary bracket of those purchasing was $2,700 in 1949, $2,435 in 1950 and $3,107 in 1951. The record shows that in 1947, 243 employees bought stock, 20 in 1948, 414 in 1949, 411 in 1950, and the 1951 offer, interrupted by this litigation, produced 165 applications to purchase. No records were kept of those to whom the offers were made; the estimated number in 1951 was 500.
Procedural history
Ralston Purina conceded that an offering to all of its employees would be a public offering which would require it to have filed a registration statement under Section 5 the Securities Act of 1933. The company claimed that it was exempted from filing because it offered stock only to key employees' in its organization. Ralston Purina argued on trial was that ‘A key employee ... would include an individual who is eligible for promotion, an individual who especially influences others or who advises others, a person whom the employees look to in some special way, an individual, of course, who carries some special responsibility, who is sympathetic to management and who is ambitious and who the management feels is likely to be promoted to a greater responsibility.’
Issue
Whether offering stock to 'key employees' would exempt Ralston Purina from filing a registration statement under Section 4(1) [Now Section 4(a)(2)] of the Securities Act of 1933.
Analysis by the court
"The natural way to interpret the private offering exemption is in light of the statutory purpose. Since exempt transactions are those as to which ‘there is no practical need for * * * (the bill's) application,’ the applicability of [Section 4(a)(2)] should turn on whether the particular class of persons affected need the protection of the Act. An offering to those who are shown to be able to fend for themselves is a transaction ‘not involving any public offering.' " Ralston Purina, 346 US 119, 125 (1953).
The "exemption question turns on the knowledge of the offerees .... The focus of inquiry should be on the need of the offerees for the protections afforded by registration." SEC v. Ralston Purina, 346 US 119, 126-127 (1953).  Investors need to be "Sophisticated" investors.  If this requirement is met, the company meets the Section 4(a)(2) exemption.
In this case, the employees that were offered the stock option were "rank-and-file" employees. The employees here were not shown to have access to the kind of information which registration would disclose. Therefore, the offering was found to be a "Public Offering," which did not allow Ralston Purina to use the registration exemption.
Every single offeree must meet the "Ralston Purina" requirement or the exemption will not apply.
Conclusion
No. Offerings must be made to individuals who have access to the kind of information that a registration statement would supply in order to be exempt from the filing requirements of Section 5 the Securities Act of 1933.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 346
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States securities case law
Ralston Purina Co
Category:Ralston Purina
Category:1953 in United States case law
"""

From "Seila Law LLC v. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau" ==> """
Seila Law LLC v. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 591 U.S. ____ (2020) was a U.S. Supreme Court case which determined that the structure of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), with a single director who could only be removed from office "for cause", violated the separation of powers. Handed down on June 29, 2020, the Court's 5–4 decision created a new test to determine when Congress may limit the power of the president of the United States to remove an officer of the United States from office.
The Court recognized that the president may generally remove officers at will. However, the Court stated there were two exceptions to this rule. First, the president's removal power may be constrained by Congress if the officer in question is a member of an agency that shares similar characteristics to the Federal Trade Commission as discussed in Humphrey's Executor v. United States (1935). Second, Congress may constrain the president's removal power over "inferior officers with limited duties and no policymaking" role as discussed in Morrison v. Olson (1988). The Court declined to extend the exceptions to "an independent agency led by a single director and vested with significant executive power."
The Court also held that the directorship position was severable from the statute that established the CFPB, allowing the CFPB to continue to operate.
 Background 
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) was envisioned by Elizabeth Warren while she was still a law professor at Harvard Law School. In 2010, it was established by the 2010 Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act under President Barack Obama and the Democratic-led Congress. It was designed to protect consumers and promote regulations to prevent similar events such as the Great Recession that ran from 2007 to 2009. To be able to promote these regulations, it was determined that the agency needed to be independent, and thus Congress designed the agency to have a single director, selected by the president with confirmation by the Senate, appointed to a five-year term, and who could only be removed for "inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office." Since its establishment, the CFPB has actively gone after banks and other financial service providers that have been determined to be "bad actors". For instance, it fined Wells Fargo large sums of money due to the Wells Fargo account fraud scandal.
The CFPB had been seen as a bane by the Republican Party and as a sign of government overreach. In the years after it was established, Republicans gained control of the Senate, and Donald Trump became president in 2017, putting the CFPB under scrutiny. Businesses that also shared a dismissive view of the CFPB began to file lawsuits challenging the constitutionality of the CFPB's organizational structure. These lawsuits focused on the for-cause termination statute around the CFPB's directorship position. For-cause removal of agency executives presents a prima facie challenge to the separation of powers, because it places a limit—imposed by Congress—on the president's Article II authority over executive branch officials. Most courts that had considered the question found that for-cause removal of the CFPB director was constitutional. However, the Supreme Court's "precedents on for-cause removal [were] a jurisprudential train wreck."
An alert published by Holland & Knight noted that the litigation posture of Seila Law was unusual, as the CFPB declined to defend the constitutionality of its own structure before the Supreme Court.
 Facts and procedural history 
Seila Law LLC (Seila Law), a law firm that provided debt relief services, was under investigation by the CFPB. As part of its investigation, the CFPB issued a civil investigative demand (CID) to Seila Law, which required Seila Law to produce certain documents. Seila Law declined to comply with the CID and challenged the constitutionality of the CFPB. Judge Josephine Staton of the United States District Court for the Central District of California found the CFPB to be constitutionally structured. 
On appeal at the Ninth Circuit, the circuit panel affirmed the district court's ruling, and agreed that the Supreme Court's prior decisions upholding for-cause removal in Humphrey's Executor and Morrison were "controlling." It also referred approvingly to the en banc decision of the DC Circuit in PHH Corp. v. CFPB (2018), in which the Circuit found that the structure of the CFPB was constitutional. The courts opinion arguably created a circuit split because while the Ninth Circuit and DC Circuit had held that the CFPB's structure to be constitutional, the Fifth Circuit in Collins v. Mnuchin (2018) held that the structure of the Federal Housing Finance Agency—an agency that had a director who was structurally similar to CFPB's—was not.
Supreme Court
 Majority opinion 
The Supreme Court granted certiorari in Seila Law on October 18, 2019, and heard oral argument on March 3, 2020. The Court issued its decision on June 29, 2020. Chief Justice John Roberts wrote the opinion of the Court, joined by justices Clarence Thomas, Samuel Alito, Neil Gorsuch, and Brett Kavanaugh. The 5–4 decision ruled that the CFPB structure, with a sole director that could only be terminated for cause, was unconstitutional as it violated the separation of powers. Specifically, the Court held that Article II of the Constitution gives the president the power to remove principal officers at will except for two exceptions recognized under case law.Seila, 140 S. Ct. at 2199–200. The first exception was based on Humphrey's Executor v. United States. Roberts narrowly construed Humphrey's Executor to stand for the proposition that the president's removal power may be constrained by Congress if the officer in question was a member of an agency that shared the same characteristics as the Federal Trade Commission in 1935. In Humphrey's, the FTC was described as "exercising 'no part of the executive power'" and as "'an administrative body' that performed 'specified duties as a legislative or as a judicial aid." Because the CFPB was dissimilar from that description, the Court held that the exception did not apply.Seila, 140 S. Ct. at 2200. 
The second exception to the president's at-will removal power came from Morrison v. Olson which held that Congress could constrain the president's removal power over "inferior officers with limited duties and no policymaking" role. Because the CFPB director was not an inferior officer, the Court held that this exception did not apply. 
Having determined that the insulation of the CFPB director did not fall under an established exception, Chief Justice Roberts then looked to see whether the Court should "extend those precedents to ... an independent agency led by a single director and vested with significant executive power." He reasoned no.Seila, 140 S. Ct. at 2201. Roberts wrote that the CFPB structure with a single point of leadership that could only be removed for cause "ha[d] no foothold in history or tradition", and had only been used in four other instances: three modern uses for the United States Office of Special Counsel, the Social Security Administration, and the Federal Housing Finance Agency, and temporarily for one year during the American Civil War for the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. Roberts wrote that the three current uses "are modern and contested. And they do not involve regulatory or enforcement authority comparable to that exercised by the CFPB." Roberts also wrote that the CFPB structure "is also incompatible with the structure of the Constitution, which—with the sole exception of the presidency—scrupulously avoids concentrating power in the hands of any single individual." In support of this position, Roberts also cited the decision of 1789. 
The Court also held that the statutes around the director of the CFPB was severable from the rest of the statute establishing the agency, and thus "[t]he agency may therefore continue to operate, but its director, in light of our decision, must be removable by the president at will." The Court vacated the lower court's judgement and remanded the case for review.Seila, 140 S. Ct. at 2209. The dissenting justices concurred on the matter of severability.
 Concurrence and dissent 
Justice Thomas wrote a partial concurrence joined by Justice Gorsuch, adding that he believed that Humphrey's Executor should be overturned and all "for cause" terminations positions should be considered unconstitutional. Thomas also wrote that he believed there was no need to resolve the severability matter for the case at hand.
Justice Elena Kagan wrote a dissent joined by justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen Breyer, and Sonia Sotomayor.Seila, 140 S. Ct. at 2236 (Kagan, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). The Kagan dissent struck a functionalist tone in contrast with the formalism apparent in the Court's opinion. Kagan challenged the argument presented by the majority stating that "[n]owhere does the text [of the Constitution] say anything about the president's power to remove subordinate officials at will." She also contested the majority's characterization of Article II's Take Care Clause as conferring power to the president. Kagan wrote that to the extent the clause gives the president any power—instead of merely conferring a duty upon them—it is only power to ensure that "the laws are faithfully executed."Seila, 140 S. Ct. at 2228 (Kagan, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).  Kagan also challenged Roberts' characterization of the Decision of 1789, stating that "[t]he best view is that the First Congress 'was deeply divided' on the president's removal power, and 'never squarely addressed' the central issue here."Seila, 140 S. Ct. at 2230 (Kagan, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) (quoting Saikrishna Prakash, New Light on the Decision of 1789, 91 CORNELL L. REV. 1021, 1072 (2006)). Finally, she questioned why it was relevant that the head of the CFPB was an independent director and not an independent commission, as independent commissions theoretically cause a higher diffusion of executive power than a single director does.
 Commentary and impact 
Seila Law has been the subject of numerous law review articles. Its use of precedent has perplexed legal scholars. Important questions raised by commentators post-Seila include:
 Whether Myers and Humphrey's Executor "still stand for the proposition that Congress can impose limitations on the president’s removal authority for agency heads as long as it does not retain a role for itself?"
 If Humphrey’s Executor and Morrison v. Olson are exceptions "to the view that Congress cannot impose limitations on the president’s removal authority, what is the scope of these exceptions?" 
 "Is there really a conceptually relevant difference between agencies with one head and those with multiple heads? Is the modern-day FTC now vulnerable?"
Professor Edward Cantu wrote that "[c]onsistent with how the Court has always approached separation-of-powers decisions, Seila should be viewed not as anti-pragmatic formalism but as pragmatic posturing." In contrast, Professor Lisa Schultz Bressman believed that Seila Law "offered a vision of separation of powers" that finally explained Chief Justice Roberts' administrative law jurisprudence. Further, she called the case's new removal test "remarkable both because it changes the law and because of how it changes the law: it lets the structure of the agency determine the degree of presidential control over its principal officers."
The majority opinion has also been written about as an example of a case based on the unitary executive theory. Thomas A. Barnico, a professor at Boston College Law School, noted that the case raised federalism issues. In particular, he suggested that the CFPB's power to pre-empt state legislation presented special concerns regarding accountability for its leadership.
Subsequent to the decision, the Supreme Court certified the petition to the Fifth Circuit decision on Collins v. Mnuchin related to the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) that had been established with the same single-administrator position, dismissable only for cause, as the CFPB. In June 2021, the Supreme Court affirmed the Fifth Circuit's decision in light of Seila Law that the FHFA directorship position's termination allowance was unconstitutional but otherwise left the FHFA in place.
 See also 
 Consumer Financial Protection Bureau v. Community Financial Services Association of America, Limited
 References 
 Sources 
  [Seila Law CA] 
 Notes 
 External links 
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
Category:Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
"""

From "Sekhar v. United States" ==> """
Sekhar v. United States, 570 U.S. 729 (2013), is a United States Supreme Court decision regarding extortion under the Hobbs Act of 1946..
Details
Giridhar C. Sekhar was a partner at a venture capital firm based in Brookline, Mass. In 2009, Sekhar sent multiple emails to Luke Bierman, who was at the time legal counsel to New York State Comptroller Thomas DiNapoli. According to the emails obtained from Sekhar's home computer by the FBI, Sekhar demanded that Bierman advise the comptroller to commit to a $35 million retirement fund investment at Sekhar's firm, threatening to reveal details of Bierman's alleged extra-marital affair to his wife, DiNapoli, and the media.
After initially being charged with coercion under state law, Sekhar was tried and convicted for attempted extortion under the federal Hobbs act. Sekhar's lawyers contended that the advice of a lawyer employed by the state was not a form of property that could be sought by threats, and hence that the extortion charge was not applicable in this case. The argument was refuted by a federal district court judge and by the Second Circuit court on appeal. Sekhar's lawyers then approached the United States Supreme Court in September 2012.
Justice Antonin Scalia wrote for the majority. The Court held that legal advice could not be considered to be "transferable property" and therefore did not fit the definition of extortion under the Hobbs Act.
 See also 
 2012 term United States Supreme Court opinions of Antonin Scalia
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:Hobbs Act case law
"""

From "Selective Draft Law Cases" ==> """
Arver v. United States, 245 U.S. 366 (1918), also known as the Selective Draft Law Cases, was a United States Supreme Court decision which upheld the Selective Service Act of 1917, and more generally, upheld conscription in the United States. The Supreme Court upheld that conscription did not violate the Thirteenth Amendment's prohibition of involuntary servitude, or the First Amendment's protection of freedom of conscience.
The Solicitor General's argument, and the court's opinion, were based primarily on Kneedler v. Lane, which was actually multiple opinions of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania during the American Civil War that upheld the Enrollment Act, and Vattel's The Law of Nations (1758). The reliance on the Kneedler v. Lane decisions of the Pennsylvania Supreme Court have been questioned on multiple occasions.
As reasoning for its decision, laws of the following governments of sovereign states were given as listed in The Statesman's Yearbook for 1917 as enforcing military service:
 Argentina
 Austria-Hungary
 Belgium
 Brazil
 Bulgaria
 Bolivia
 CanadaMilitary Service Act of August 27, 1917, expressly providing for service abroad. Printed in the Congressional Record of September 20, 1917, 55th Cong. Rec., p. 7959
 Colombia
 Chile
 China
 Denmark
 Ecuador
 El Salvador
 France, July 15, 1889 (Duvergier, vol. 89, p. 440), modified by act of March 21, 1905 (Duvergier, vol. 105, p. 133)
 Greece
 GermanyConstitution, German Empire, April 16, 1871, Art. 57, 59, No. 1767, , p. 11, amended by law of July 22, 1913, No. 4264, , p. 593
 Guatemala
 Honduras
 Italy
 Japan
 Mexico
 Montenegro
 Netherlands
 Nicaragua
 Norway
 Peru
 Portugal
 Romania
 Russia
 Serbia
 Siam
 Spain
 Switzerland
 Turkey
 References 
External links
Category:1918 in United States case law
Category:Conscription in the United States
Category:Conscription law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States Thirteenth Amendment case law
Category:United States in World War I
"""

From "Seling v. Young" ==> """
Seling v. Young, 531 U.S. 250 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case decided in 2001. The case concerned a challenge to a civil commitment statute for sexual predators in Washington state. The petitioner tried to differentiate this case from previous ones before the Supreme Court which upheld civil commitment statutes. The Court rejected the challenge to the law over the objection of a single Justice.
Background
In 1990, Washington state passed the Community Protection Act of 1990 which authorized the civil commitment of "sexually violent predators", persons considered to have a "mental abnormality" that makes them likely to engage in sexually violent acts. Under this law, a person who has been convicted of a sexually violent offense and is scheduled for release from jail or prison is instead subject to civil commitment, if found to be a "sexually violent predator". Andre Brigham Young was confined under the provisions of the Act.The other named party in the case, Dr. Mark Seling, was the superintendent of the facility where Young was committed. (Hough 2001) He challenged his commitment in state court, arguing that the conditions of his commitment were  punitive and that he was, in effect, serving a second criminal sentence. After losing in his suit, he began a habeas action in federal court.
The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals concluded that Young's challenge to the law was allowed, even though the United States Supreme Court had decided in 1997, in Kansas v. Hendricks, that a similar Kansas law was constitutional. The Ninth Circuit distinguished the cases, saying this case challenged the law "as applied", and was specific to the potentially 'punitive' nature of the Washington law. 
The state appealed and the Supreme Court granted review.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor delivered the opinion of the Court, which disagreed with the Ninth Circuit as to the nature of the challenge to the Washington statute. O'Connor argued that because the Washington Supreme Court had already held the law as entirely 'civil', Young's contention that the law was 'punitive' was functionally a full "facial challenge". A facial challenge takes issue with the entire law, and such challenges had already been dismissed by the Supreme Court.
O'Connor stressed that the decision "does not mean that respondent and others...have no remedy for the alleged conditions at the Center". Instead, committed persons could challenge the state of conditions in accordance with the procedures established under the Washington law. Lastly, the Court dismissed the challenge to the law as the act in question was entirely 'civil'.
Scalia's concurrence
Justice Antonin Scalia wrote a concurrence in the decision of the majority with which Justice Souter joined. He wrote simply to "dissociate [himself] from any implication that there is [an] open question" about the ex post facto and Double Jeopardy Clause challenges to the Washington law. Scalia wrote that the purely civil nature of the commitment statute blocked any Fifth Amendment challenge, which only relate to criminal laws.
Thomas' concurrence
Justice Clarence Thomas concurred in the judgment of the Court, but not the reasoning of the majority. His opinion rested on two primary points: first, that just because a civil statute is implemented in a 'criminal-like' manner does not change the nature of the statute; second, a 'first instance' challenge and a subsequent challenge is a distinction "without a difference". Thus, he disagreed with the concept of 'as-applied' challenges to state laws.
Stevens' dissent
Justice John Paul Stevens wrote a lone dissenting opinion. He argued that the detention of a person in the manner Washington state has done is not "necessarily civil". Stevens argued that the punitive nature of the detention makes the sanction criminal. Thus, he saw a violation of the Double Jeopardy Clause as "conditions of confinement" were placed twice for the defendant -- once in prison and once in civil commitment. 
Stevens concluded by saying he would have affirmed the decision of the Ninth Circuit.
See also
 Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Sell v. United States" ==> """
Sell v. United States, 539 U.S. 166 (2003), is a decision in which the United States Supreme Court imposed stringent limits on the right of a lower court to order the forcible administration of antipsychotic medication to a criminal defendant who had been determined to be  incompetent to stand trial for the sole purpose of making them competent and able to be tried. Specifically, the court held that  lower courts could do so only under limited circumstances in which specified criteria had been met.  In the case of Charles Sell, since the lower court had failed to determine that all the appropriate criteria for court-ordered forcible treatment had been met, the order to forcibly medicate the defendant was reversed..
Previously, in Washington v. Harper,. the Supreme Court made clear that the forced medication of inmates with mental disorders could be ordered only when the inmate was a danger to themselves or others and when the medication is in the inmate's own best interests. In addition, courts must first consider "alternative, less intrusive means" before resorting to the involuntary administration of psychotropic medication.
Using the framework set forth in Riggins v. Nevada,. the Court emphasized that an individual has a constitutionally protected  "interest in avoiding involuntary administration of antipsychotic drugs" and this interest is one that only an "essential" or "overriding" state interest might overcome.
Facts of the case
In 1997, Charles Thomas Sell, a St. Louis dentist with no prior history of criminal behavior, was charged with fifty-six counts of mail fraud, six counts of Medicaid fraud, and one count of money-laundering. That year a federal judge found Sell competent to stand trial and released him on bail. However, Sell's mental status deteriorated while he was on bail, and his bail was revoked in 1998. Also in 1998, on the basis of a videotape provided by an undercover agent, Sell was charged with one count of conspiring to commit  the attempted murder of the Federal Bureau of Investigation officer arresting him.  The agent later interviewed Sell in jail, and by questioning got him to say something about hiring a hit man. In early 1999 Sell requested a competency hearing before standing trial for the fraud and attempted murder charges.
Sell was given a competency evaluation by the United States Medical Center for Federal Prisoners (Medical Center), and in 1999 was found incompetent to stand trial. Sell was ordered to be hospitalized to determine whether he would be able to become competent so as to allow his trial to proceed. While in the hospital, Sell refused to take the antipsychotic medication prescribed by the Medical Center staff. The Medical Center sought to involuntarily medicate Sell. On June 9, 1999, an administrative hearing was held before a medical hearing officer who concluded that antipsychotic medication was the treatment of choice based on the fact that Dr. Sell's "delusional thinking could make him dangerous." Sell filed a court challenge to stop the hospital's decision to give him the drug involuntarily.
The question of whether the drug could be administered involuntarily was the subject of several other hearings. In August 2000 the magistrate found that Sell was a danger to himself and others, authorized Sell to be forcibly medicated on the grounds that only medication would reduce his dangerousness, that any serious side effects could be treated, that the benefits to Sell were greater than the risks, and that the medication were substantially likely to restore Sell's competence.
In 2001, Sell appealed on certiorari to the Federal District Court which, while reversing the federal magistrate's finding of dangerousness, upheld the order of forced medication on the grounds that it was necessary to restore Sell's competency to stand trial. The Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the lower court's decision in a divided vote. Sell's attorney pointed out that Sell had already been incarcerated for a longer period of time than if he were convicted for the offenses as charged.
Sell, on Writ of Certiorari, appealed to the United States Supreme Court. The American Psychological Association filed an amicus curiae brief taking a neutral position, supporting neither the government's nor Sell's position.
Decision
Although the Supreme Court upheld two aspects of the appeal, it ultimately vacated and remanded on the question of the petitioner's dangerousness.
 Held
In a divided opinion  (6-3), the Court held that the Constitution allows the Federal Government to administer antipsychotic drugs, even against the defendant's will, in limited circumstances as decided previously in Washington v. Harper and Riggins v. Nevada. It affirmed that involuntary administration for the purposes of restoring a defendant's competency to stand trial can be an appropriate means of acting in the state's interest to bring to trial defendants who are charged with serious crimes, overriding the defendant's right to refuse forced medication. However, the court outlined specific criteria which must be satisfied to justify involuntary medication. This framework was outlined in Riggins v. Nevada.
 An important government issue must be at stake and only a case by case inquiry can determine whether the government's interest is mitigated by the possibility of a long civil commitment for the treatment of the mental illness or by the fact that long periods of confinement have already been served, as this would be subtracted from any criminal sentence.
 There must be a substantial probability that the medication will enable the defendant to become competent without substantial undermining side effects.
 The medication must be necessary to restore the defendant's competency, with no alternative, less intrusive procedures available that would produce the same results.
 Held
The Supreme Court held that the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals erred in approving the lower court's order to allow forced medication to restore Sell's competence to stand trial because the original decisions of the hospital and the judge were based on an assessment of Sell's dangerousness. Since the experts testifying at the hearings focused mainly on the issue of dangerousness and not on Sell's trial competence, there was not enough evidence in the court record regarding the possible effect of the medication on Sell's ability to obtain a fair trial.
 Vacated and remanded
In examining the lower courts' findings, the Court found no evidence that Sell was dangerous, so the Court assumed that he was not. Determining that the findings of the District Court and Court of Appeals did not satisfy the criteria for involuntary medication, the Court vacated the appellate court's judgment.
Summary
The Court in its decision wrote that the standards it outlined will allow involuntary medication  for the sole purpose of rendering the defendant competent to stand trial only in rare instances. The standard implies that a court must find that important governmental interests are at stake and that its interest in bringing the accused to trial for serious crimes is  important enough to override constitutional issues, and that the forced medication will not significantly interfere with the defense or have untoward side effects. Therefore, in each case the facts and circumstances must be considered individually, balancing the government's responsibility to ensure timely prosecution with an equal interest in making sure a defendant obtains a fair trial. The court must weigh these factors and decide if forced medication will significantly further or hinder these conflicting interests of the state.
Significance
The Supreme Court laid down four criteria for cases involving the involuntary administration of medication to an incompetent pretrial defendant:
 Did the defendant commit a serious crime?
 Is there a substantial likelihood that involuntary medication will restore the defendant's competence and do so without causing side effects that will significantly interfere with the defendant's ability to assist counsel?
 Is involuntary medication the least intrusive treatment for restoration of competence?
 Is the proposed treatment medically appropriate?
It is unknown in how many cases  involuntary administration will now be justified, and any  procedure outlined by the Court will require the government to submit proof on all the criteria outlined by the court. Beyond the federal situation, any constitutional ruling will apply to  all criminal proceedings, state as well as federal. However, although this  decision possibly affects only a small percentage of trials, it seems to add weight to a growing acceptance of the belief that government can override the constitutional rights of self-determination on medical matters. The case potentially could have addressed a more serious question of whether governmental manipulation of an individual's mental state through psychotropic drug administration is based  on false assumptions of what makes up a person's individuality. The court chose to sidestep this issue.
However, others disagreed, arguing that the strict limits imposed by the Supreme Court on involuntary medication meant that the involuntary medication of a non-dangerous defendant would be rare, especially since government's "important" interest in bringing the defendant to trial must be unattainable by alternative, less invasive means. 
At the very least however, the criteria set forth  by the court will ensure that the lower courts considering the issue of forced medication must determine why it is medically appropriate to force drug an individual who is not dangerous and furthermore is competent to make up his own mind about treatment.
Subsequent developments
In 2004, Sell was found competent to stand trial and trial was scheduled. A week before the trial was to begin, the prosecution and defense claimed that he was mentally unfit for trial and the trial was discontinued. 
On April 18, 2005, Sell pleaded no contest to federal charges of fraud and conspiracy to kill a federal agent, after serving eight years without trial in federal prison. The U.S. District Judge sentenced him to time served, six months in a halfway house and three years on parole.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 539
List of United States Supreme Court cases
Washington v. Harper
Riggins v. Nevada
Rennie v. Klein
Footnotes
External links
 Court's Decision in Sell v. United States Reflects Psychology's Recommendation that Alternatives to Drug Therapy Should be Considered
 Amicus brief filed in behave of Dr. Sell by Association of American Physicians and Surgeons
 A win for Sell, but not a complete victory
 State Can Make Inmate Sane Enough to Execute
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Adjudicative competence case law
Category:2003 in United States case law
"""

From "Seminole Nation v. United States" ==> """
Seminole Nation v. United States, 316 U.S. 286 (1942), was a United States Supreme Court case.
 Background 
The original suit was decided by the Court of Claims in favor of petitioner, the Seminole Nation, in the amount of $1,317,087.27.  The Supreme Court reversed this decision for want of jurisdiction.  The jurisdictional barrier was then removed by statute, and the Seminole Nation of Oklahoma filed a second amended petition in the Court of Claims, reasserting the six claims previously denied by the Supreme Court.  The Court of Claims denied three claims entirely, allowed one in full and two in part.  Seminole Nation was awarded $18,388.30.  However, the United States was entitled to gratuity offsets in the amount of $705,337.33, and as such, the second amended petition was dismissed.  The Supreme Court granted certiorari on a petition challenging the lower court's decision on each of the five claims disallowed in whole or in part.  The Court also agreed to review the items which the Court of Claims included in the list of gratuity offsets.
 Opinion of the Court 
 Holding 
The Court found three of the Seminole Nation's five claims for reimbursement from the United States government to be without merit.  The remaining two claims were remanded to the lower Court of Claims to determine whether the government breached its fiduciary duty to the Seminoles by making payments to tribal leaders with knowledge of the potential for mismanagement of funds.
 Relevance 
This case is often cited "as authority for the application of fiduciary principles to the government in the administration of Indian affairs."David H. Getches, Charles F. Wilkinson & Robert A. Williams, Jr., Cases and Materials on Federal Indian Law, 342 (5th ed., West 2005).
 Case summary 
The Seminole Nation's claims for reimbursement related to language contained in the Treaties of 1856 and 1866 and to various agreements and acts of Congress.  The Nation's claims were divided into five separate items.  The Court dismissed the first claim for reimbursement, finding the Treaty of March 21, 1866 released the government of its obligation to pay the outstanding balance owed under the Treaty of August 7, 1856.  The third claim for reimbursement was disallowed upon the finding that the annual interest from the trust fund established under the Treaty of 1866 was, in fact, directed to its designated purpose (support of local schools).  The fourth claim is also in reference to the Treaty of 1866, which provided additionally that the Government construct, "at an expense not exceeding ten thousand ($10,000) dollars, suitable agency buildings' on the Seminole reservation."  The Court of Claims found that $10,000 was expended to fulfill this treaty obligation in 1872, and an agency building was erected on the reservation in 1873.  Seminole Nation did not claim that the building was unsuitable and, furthermore, the treaty required the Government to erect a suitable building not in excess of $10,000.  The Government's obligation was fulfilled and the fourth claim was disallowed. 
With regard to the second and fifth claims, the cause was remanded to the lower court for further material findings of fact.
The second claim concerned language from Article VIII of the Treaty of 1856 which provided that the government would establish a $500,000 trust fund with the annual interest to be distributed equally among the individual members of the Seminole Tribe.  During the years 1870-1874 the government made payments totaling $66,422.64.  A portion of this amount was paid to the tribal treasurer and the remainder was paid to the designated creditors of the tribe.  This arrangement for distribution was requested by the Seminole General Council.
The Seminole Nation argued that the Treaty was violated since annuity payments were made to the General Council when the Treaty stipulated that "payments were to be made per capita for the benefit of each individual Indian."  The Court found merit to this claim and cited "a well established principle of equity that a third party who pays money to a fiduciary for the benefit of the beneficiary, with knowledge that the fiduciary intends to misappropriate the money or otherwise be false to his trust, is a participant in the breach of trust and liable therefore to the beneficiary."  The Commissioner of Indian Affairs received reports as early as 1870 discussing the unjust distribution of funds, "recommend[ing] that the provisions of the treaty be rigidly enforced[.]" The Court went on to describe Government's responsibility to the Indian tribes as a "moral obligation[] of the highest responsibility and trust." It is with this standard that the Court remanded the case to the Court of Claims for further review.  
The fifth claim for reimbursement was in regard to payments made "during the fiscal years 1899 to 1907," which totaled $864,702.58.  These payments were made to the Seminole tribal treasurer.  Though the Court found the government did not act improperly by making payment to the treasurer (as the provision did not stipulate per capita distribution), the Court stated it could still be found liable if it violated its fiduciary duty in the manner discussed above.  It was documented that the Commission of the Five Civilized Tribes notified Congress and the Secretary of the Interior of the rampant corruption throughout tribal governments before the payments were made to the Seminole treasurer.  More pointedly, the Secretary of the Interior and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs were informed in January 1898 of "complaints of misgovernment, venality, and fraudulent conduct on the part of Seminole leaders[.]"
The Court remanded the two claims to the lower Court of Claims for further findings of fact, to determine whether the government breached its fiduciary duty.  The Court provided instruction that if government officials made payments to tribal leaders with knowledge of their corruption and potential mismanagement, the government would be found liable and responsible for reimbursing the Seminole Nation.
Lastly, the Court ruled that in reviewing the gratuitous offsets, the Court of Claims must designate the precise expenditures to be offset against the Government's liability so as to avoid a double credit.  This portion was also remanded to the lower court for further review.
 Notes 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:1942 in United States case law
Category:Aboriginal title case law in the United States
Category:Seminole Nation of Oklahoma
Category:Native American history of Oklahoma
Category:Legal history of Oklahoma
"""

From "Seminole Tribe of Florida v. Florida" ==> """
Seminole Tribe of Florida v. Florida, 517 U.S. 44 (1996), was a United States Supreme Court case which held that Article One of the U.S. Constitution did not give the United States Congress the power to abrogate the sovereign immunity of the states that is further protected under the Eleventh Amendment. Such abrogation is permitted where it is necessary to enforce the rights of citizens guaranteed under the Fourteenth Amendment as per Fitzpatrick v. Bitzer. The case also held that the doctrine of Ex parte Young, which allows state officials to be sued in their official capacity for prospective injunctive relief, was inapplicable under these circumstances, because any remedy was limited to the one that Congress had provided.
Background
Indian gaming history
thumb |left |250px |alt=photograph Seminole men at the Hollywood Reservation|Seminole men at the Hollywood Reservation
The Seminole Tribe of Florida owned property in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, seven miles southwest of downtown, and in the late 1970s, built a large bingo facility on that land. (hereinafter cited as "Clinton, Enactment");  (hereinafter cited as "Cox, IGRA"). As this was before the enactment of the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act, the tribe then sued the Broward County Sheriff in federal court to prevent him from enforcing state law on tribal land. The Southern District of Florida heard the case and issued a preliminary injunction in favor of the tribe in 1979 and a permanent injunction the following year., Clinton, Enactment, at 29; Cox, IGRA, at 770-71. The sheriff appealed, and the Fifth Circuit affirmed the lower court's decision.; Clinton, Enactment, at 29; Cox, IGRA, at 770-71. 
thumb |left |200px |alt=Bingo card graphic| Bingo card
That court decision opened the floodgates for Indian gaming, which had been shut down in 1949 by a decision in Wisconsin that Indians could not use slot machines or other gambling instruments on their reservations.Clinton, Enactment, at 31. Since bingo did not use those prohibited instruments, the tribes were free to open bingo halls. By 1983, about 180 bingo halls were being operated by tribes on reservations across the nation.Clinton, Enactment, at 31. This prompted a flood of litigation as the individual States attempted to shut down Indian gaming by either civil or criminal cases, efforts which typically failed, as in California.; Clinton, Enactment, at 31-33.
As the various Indian tribes sought to obtain a steady source of revenue through gaming, some tribes went further than others. While abiding with the federal prohibition on gambling machines and instruments, the Puyallaup Indian tribe, on their reservation, opened casinos that offered blackjack, poker, and craps. Clinton, Enactment, at 34. Federal law enforcement authorities arrested the tribal members operating the casino and charged them with violating the Organized Crime Control Act.Organized Crime Control Act, Pub.L. 91-452, 84 Stat. 922 (1970) (codified at  §§ 1501-1510,  § 1621 et seq., | §§ 1951-1954,  §§ 1961-1968,  § 3331 et seq.,  §§ 3481-3502, and  § 6001 et seq.); Clinton, Enactment, at 32-35. Similar results occurred in Michigan with the Lake Superior Band of Chippewa Indians.; Clinton, Enactment, at 36-38.
Legislation
Beginning in 1984, Congress began to hold hearings on Indian gaming.Clinton, Enactment, at 52. Based on the Supreme Court decision in Cabazon that basically prohibited state regulation while allowing federal enforcement, Congress had to take some type of action.Clinton, Enactment, at 52. The Department of Justice (DOJ) took the position that it would be unable to prevent organized crime from being involved in Indian gaming operations.Clinton, Enactment, at 55. At the same time, the National Congress of American Indians (NCAI) called for preemptive legislation allowing tribal control and prohibiting state interference.Clinton, Enactment, at 60. States and non-tribal gaming interests opposed any tribal gaming.Clinton, Enactment, at 61-62.
In 1988 Congress passed the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act (IGRA).Indian Gaming Regulatory Act, Pub.L. 100-497, 102 Stat. 2467 (1988) (codified at  and ); Clinton, Enactment, at 17. The final result was a compromise between the competing interests, and established three classes of gaming: Class I, traditional, low value gaming, often for ceremonial purposes; Class II, bingo and like games such as pull-tabs, and punchboards; and Class III, which included all other gaming, such as slot machines, craps, poker, and so on. Tribes are allowed to regulate all Class I/II Indian gaming, and the act set requirements for regulating Class III gaming, which was regulated by compacts between the tribes and the states, and overseen by the NIGC.Clinton, Enactment, at 81.
Many of the American Indian tribes were opposed to the legislation and the Mescalero Apache and Red Lake Band of Chippewa sued in an attempt to declare the law unconstitutional. Clinton, Enactment, at 18. The lawsuit was the first major attempt by an Indian Tribe to reverse the federal policy announced in Lone Wolf v. Hitchcock,; Clinton, Enactment, at 18. which allowed Congress to exercise plenary power over the tribes, to include reneging on treaties. The attempt was unsuccessful, with the D.C. District Court holding that existing precedent allowed Congress to regulate actions of the tribes.; Clinton, Enactment, at 18. 
The IGRA required the states to negotiate with Indian tribes to create compacts governing Indian gaming. The statute provided that if a state failed to enter into such negotiations, or to negotiate in good faith, the Tribes could sue the state in federal court in order to compel the states to negotiate. If the states still refused, the statute provided that the matter would ultimately be referred to the Secretary of the Interior. Congress had asserted its power under the part of the Commerce Clause relating to commerce with Indians to pass such a statute, abrogating the immunity of states pursuant to its express powers.
Case history
Facts of the case
The Seminole Tribe of Florida requested that the state enter into such a negotiation. When the state refused, the Tribe filed suit,,  1-2 (1992) (hereinafter cited as ""). as allowed by the statute, against both the state of Florida and the governor, Lawton Chiles. The District Court declined to dismiss the case, but the Eleventh Circuit reversed, holding that the Eleventh Amendment barred the suit, and that the doctrine of Ex parte Young could not be used to force good faith negotiation., at 1-2. The tribe then filed a petition for certiorari to the Supreme Court, which granted the petition and docketed the case., at 1-2. While Florida prepared to argue the case, thirty-one additional states filed amicus briefs supporting Florida's position., at 1-2.
A little less than two decades earlier, in Fitzpatrick v. Bitzer, the Court had held that Congress can abrogate state sovereign immunity pursuant to its powers under the Fourteenth Amendment, which clearly contemplates limiting the power of the states.Fitzpatrick, 427 U.S. at 456. In Pennsylvania v. Union Gas Co., the Court had held that Congress could also abrogate sovereign immunity under the Commerce Clause – but there was no majority in that decision. Justice Brennan was joined by three other justices in asserting that the Eleventh Amendment was nothing more than a reflection of common law sovereignty that could be swept aside by Congress; Justice Scalia was also joined by three other justices in taking the opposite view; and Justice Byron White wrote a separate opinion holding that Congress had such power, but stating his disagreement with Brennan's opinion (but not his own rationale).
Now, the Supreme Court was once again presented with the question of whether Congress has the power to abrogate the sovereign immunity of the states, pursuant to the powers granted to it in Article One.
Supreme Court
Arguments
Opinion of the Court
thumb |left |200px |alt=photograph of Chief Justice William Rehnquist|Chief Justice William Rehnquist, author of the opinion
The Court, in an opinion by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, struck down this abrogation as unconstitutional and further held that the doctrine of Ex parte Young does not apply in this situation.
The Court began by repudiating the precedential value of Union Gas, noting that there was no single majority rationale, and characterizing it as a major departure from the 19th century case of Hans v. Louisiana,. which had established the modern doctrine of sovereign immunity. The Court suggested that allowing Congress to abrogate sovereign immunity improperly expanded the jurisdiction of the federal courts beyond what Article Three of the U.S. Constitution permitted. The Eleventh Amendment, it contended, had further protected the states' sovereign immunity; the Fourteenth Amendment placed limitations on the Eleventh Amendment, but only with respect to the rights guaranteed in the Fourteenth Amendment.
The Court also found that the doctrine of Ex parte Young did not apply, invoking the rationale of an earlier case, Schweiker v. Chilicky,. for the proposition that where Congress had provided a remedial scheme, the Courts would not imply the existence of additional remedies.
Dissenting Opinions
Justice Souter wrote a lengthy dissent in which he was joined by Justices Ginsburg and Breyer. Souter's dissent focuses on the language of the Eleventh Amendment, which only appears to eliminate diversity jurisdiction between states and citizens of other states. He rejects the "critical errors" in Hans, which had read common law sovereign immunity to extend the jurisdictional bar of the Eleventh Amendment to suits between states and their own citizens. Souter discounts the importance of the common law in interpreting the Constitution because the Constitution itself was such a new and unprecedented device at the time of its creation that it was clearly intended as a rejection of the common law that came before it. As support for this contention, Souter notes that the framers of the U.S. Constitution did not include language adopting the common law that had already been adopted by many of the states in their own constitutions. Souter also notes that Congress had rejected proposed language for the Eleventh Amendment which would clearly have barred suits between states and their own citizens, and which would clearly have prevented Congress from abrogating this bar.
Souter also disagrees with the Court's rejection of Ex parte Young, noting that where Chilicky was a rejection of the extra-statutory remedy proposed, Young was merely a jurisdictional device. Souter found it implausible that Congress would wish to see their statute made completely unenforceable simply because they had included a remedy for those injured by the failure of states to abide by it.
Justice Stevens dissented separately, agreeing with the points raised in Souter's dissent, but adding some additional observations. In particular, Stevens noted that neither Justice Iredell's dissent in Chisholm v. Georgia,. nor the majority opinion in Hans had addressed situations in which Congress had specifically authorized a lawsuit against a state and suggested that both opinions had in fact presumed that such a suit was possible.
Subsequent developments
The decision in Seminole Tribe was described as having "exemplified the Court's increasingly adamant refusal to countenance the headlong expansion of Congress's regulatory power under the Constitution's Commerce Clause"., at 121. In Alden v. Maine (1999), the Court clarified:
In Central Virginia Community College v. Katz (2006), the Court narrowed the scope of its ruling in Seminole Tribe v. Florida. It held the Bankruptcy Clause of Article I abrogated state sovereign immunity.Central Va. Community College v. Katz, 546 U.S. __ (2006).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 517
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 Copyright Remedy Clarification Act
Footnotes
References
External links
Category:1996 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:United States Native American gaming case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:Seminole Tribe of Florida
Category:Casinos in Florida
Category:1996 in Florida
Category:Bingo
Category:History of Fort Lauderdale, Florida
"""

From "Semtek International Inc. v. Lockheed Martin Corp." ==> """
Semtek v. Lockheed Martin, 531 U.S. 497 (2001), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the claim preclusive effect of a federal judgment on a claim over which subject matter jurisdiction is based solely on diversity is determined by the common law of the state in which the federal district court rendering the decision is located.
 Background 
Petitioners Semtek International Incorporated filed a complaint against Lockheed Martin in California state court, alleging a breach of contract. The case was removed to the local federal district court due to the diversity of citizenship in the case. The trial judge then dismissed the complaint, writing that California's 2-year statute of limitations made the claim "barred".
Semtek International had also filed a claim in Maryland's state court. The court here also dismissed the complaint, but on the grounds that "the res judicata effect" precludes this separate claim in a different state. Since another federal court had dismissed a similar action already, Semtek could not proceed in a different court on virtually similar contentions.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Antonin Scalia wrote the unanimous decision of the Supreme Court, reversing the decision of the Maryland courts. Scalia wrote that there was no final "judgment on the merits" in the California case and thus the Maryland trial was not precluded. A reading of the appropriate rule could be seen as still permitting other actions. Therefore, Semtek was entitled to a trial before the Maryland courts and the case was remanded with such instructions.
 See also 
 Erie Doctrine
 Jurisdiction
 U.S. Supreme Court
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:Lockheed Martin
Category:Diversity jurisdiction case law
Category:United States res judicata case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Conflict of laws case law
Category:United States Erie Doctrine
"""

From "Seneca Nation of Indians v. Christy" ==> """
Seneca Nation of Indians v. Christy, 162 U.S. 283 (1896),. was the first litigation of aboriginal title in the United States by a tribal plaintiff in the Supreme Court of the United States since Cherokee Nation v. Georgia (1831). It was the first such litigation by an indigenous plaintiff since Fellows v. Blacksmith (1857) and its companion case of New York ex rel. Cutler v. Dibble (1858).  The New York courts held that the 1788 Phelps and Gorham Purchase did not violate the Nonintercourse Act, one of the provisions of which prohibits purchases of Indian lands without the approval of the federal government, and that (even if it did) the Seneca Nation of New York was barred by the state statute of limitations from challenging the transfer of title. The U.S. Supreme Court declined to review the merits of lower court ruling because of the adequate and independent state grounds doctrine.
According to O'Toole and Tureen, "Christy is an important case in that it revived the concept that states had special powers to deal with Indian tribes within their borders."Francis J. O'Toole & Thomas N. Tureen, "State Power and the Passamaquoddy Tribe: A Gross National Hypocrisy"; 23  1, 4 n.12 (1971).
Although the case has not been formally overruled, two Supreme Court decisions in the 1970s and 1980s have undone its effect by ruling that there is federal subject-matter jurisdiction for a federal common law cause of action for recovering possession based on the common-law doctrine of aboriginal title. Moreover, the New York courts' interpretation of the Nonintercourse Act is no longer good law. Modern federal courts hold that only Congress can ratify a conveyance of aboriginal title, and only with a clear statement, rather than implicitly.
Background
thumb|right|James Clark Strong, lawyer for the Seneca
Conveyance
The land in question, which had been part of the Seneca Nation's traditional territory for centuries before the American Revolution, comprised part of the Phelps and Gorham Purchase, a tract of land disputed after the war between claims of New York and Massachusetts. By a December 16, 1786 interstate compact, the states agreed that Massachusetts would retain the proprietary rights and the pre-emption rights, but New York would retain governmental rights.Seneca Nation, 162 U.S. at 284–85 After the adoption of the United States Constitution in 1787, the federal government ratified their compact.Seneca Nation, 162 U.S. at 285
Three private individuals—Robert Troup, Thomas L. Ogden, and Benjamin W. Rogers—obtained the proprietary and preemptive rights from Massachusetts. They executed a treaty of conveyance with the Seneca on August 31, 1826, purchasing 87,000 acres for $48,216. Massachusetts approved the conveyance, but the United States Senate was never consulted and never ratified the treaty, as required for treaties with Native American nations. In 1827, the money was deposited in Ontario Bank in Canandaigua, New York, and in 1855 it was paid to the United States treasury, which began remitting the interest to the Seneca Nation.Seneca Nation, 162 U.S. at 286
Dispute
The Seneca Nation could not have brought the lawsuit until 1845, when the New York legislature granted the nation the right to bring suits in courts of law and equity.Act of May 8, 1845, ch. 150, § 1, 1845 N.Y. Laws. The Seneca filed a petition with the Bureau of Indian Affairs on January 5, 1881, requesting restoration and possession of certain lands related to the Phelps and Gorham Purchase. This petition was ignored by the BIA.
The Seneca hired the lawyer James Clark Strong to represent them, a "prominent lawyer and civic-minded resident of Buffalo." Strong was a former lieutenant colonel in the Union army (brevetted to general after the war). He had a permanent limp from his wounds in the American Civil War. At the law practice of his brother, John C. Strong, he had also represented the Cayuga in a claim against New York state.
Procedural history
New York trial court
The Seneca brought suit in the Circuit Court of Erie County, New York on October 13, 1885. The Seneca requested the ejectment of Harrison B. Christy from 100 acres of land in the town of Brant, New York (purchased from the Ogden Land Company), known as the "mile strip." These lands were formerly part of the Cattaraugus Indian Reservation, as established by the New York Treaty of Big Tree (1797).
The Seneca contended that the purchase was invalid because the treaty was not approved by the Senate, as required by the Constitution; therefore it violated the Nonintercourse Act. Christy's "answer consisted of a general denial, the plea of the statute of limitations of 20 years, and that the plaintiff had not the legal right, title, capacity, or authority to maintain the action."Seneca Nation, 162 U.S. at 284.
New York intermediate appellate court
thumb|right|The Seneca claim disputed the Phelps and Gorham Purchase.
The General Term of the Fifth Department of the New York Supreme Court heard the intermediate appeal.Seneca Nation of Indians v. Christy, 2 N.Y.S. 546 (Sup. Ct. 1888). Bradley J., writing for himself and Dwight J.J., affirmed. The court considered whether the Indians had properly surrendered the land and whether the consideration had been paid. As to the first question, the court noted that, while "in view of the known habits of Indians they may not be supposed to represent their occupation or possession by improvements or inclosures of all or great portions of their lands":
[I]n this case the abandonment and surrender were not only practically made, but have been characterized by such circumstances and by such recognition, not only by the Indians, but by the government, in such manner as to determine the situation, and in legal effect to sever the prior relation of the Indians to the lands from them. The quantity of land covered by the treaty of conveyance was large.Seneca Nation, 2 N.Y.S. at 549–50.
The court cited Johnson v. M'Intosh (1823) for the proposition that: "[t]he title of the Indians was possessory, and embraced the right of occupancy only. And when abandoned by them the possession attached itself to the fee of the lands."Seneca Nation, 2 N.Y.S. at 551.
As to the second question, the court noted:
The suggestion that the entire amount of the purchase money was not paid, and that such fact is in the way of supporting the claim to the Indian title, is not sustained. We are not called upon to consider the effect of default in payment of any portion of the purchase money. The treaty recites the payment of it, and as no such question seems ever before to have been raised, or full payment questioned, either by government or the Indians, it must at this late day be assumed, until the contrary is quite clearly made to appear, that the contract in that respect was performed.
Finally, the court noted: 
The plaintiff not being a corporation, and having no such corporate name, could not at common law maintain an action. This right, however, was more than 40 years ago conferred by statute, which, among other things, provides that the Seneca Nation of Indians may maintain any action of ejectment to recover the possession of any part of the Allegany and Cattaraugus reservations unlawfully withheld from them.Seneca Nation, 2 N.Y.S. at 551 (internal citation omitted).
As a result, the intermediate appellate court did not reach the question of whether the statute of limitation applies.Seneca Nation, 2 N.Y.S. at 551 ("The further question presented and by counsel discussed is whether the statute of limitations is applicable, and a bar to the plaintiff's right of action. In the view taken the determination of that question is not essential, and for that reason it has no consideration on this review.").
New York Court of Appeals
thumb|right|New York State Court Chief Justice Charles Andrews held that the conveyances were valid under the Nonintercourse Act, and that the claim was barred by the state statute of limitations.
Chief Justice Charles Andrews, writing for a unanimous New York Court of Appeals, affirmed.Seneca Nation of Indians v. Christy, 27 N.E. 275 (N.Y. 1891). 
Validity of the transaction
After reviewing the facts, Andrews began by arguing that there were many ways to extinguish aboriginal title. He said: "It is material to observe that there was no uniform procedure on the part of the purchasers from Massachusetts in acquiring the Indian title," and gave examples of conveyances he believed to have been implicitly ratified by the federal government.Seneca Nation, 27 N.E. at 277–78. As to the Seneca argument that, after the ratification of the Constitution, only the federal government could extinguish aboriginal title, Andrews noted that:
These claims challenge the title not only of every purchaser and holder of lands within the boundaries of the grant of August 31, 1826, but also the title to many millions of acres of lands in this state, held under Indian treaties made by the state of New York with the Indian tribes within its borders, or under grants made by Indians to individuals under the authority of the state, where no treaty had been made between the United States and the Indian occupants.Seneca Nation, 27 N.E. at 278.
Andrews expressed the view that the U.S. states, not the federal government, inherited from Great Britain the sole power to extinguish aboriginal title:
On the Declaration of Independence the colonies became sovereign states. They were so acknowledged by the treaty of peace of 1783, and Great Britain by that treaty ‘relinquished all claims to the government, property, and territorial rights' within the several colonies. It is the received opinion that the colonies succeeded to the title of the crown to all the ungranted lands within their respective boundaries, with the exclusive right to extinguish by purchase the Indian title, and to regulate dealings with the Indian tribes. ‘There was no territory in the United States,’ said JOHNSON, J., in Harcourt v. Gaillard, 12 Wheat. 523, ‘that was claimed in any other right than that of one of the confederated states; therefore there could be no acquisition of territory made by the United States distinct from or independent of some one of the United States.’
Andrews rejected the argument that the federal government had acquired Indian lands by treaty out of a legal requirement to do so:
But the dealing by the general government with the Indian tribes through treaties was resorted to as a convenient mode of regulating Indian affairs, and not because, as with other nations, it was the only mode, independently of the arbitrament of war, of dealing with them.Seneca Nation, 27 N.E. at 279.
Andrews relied upon the argument of federal acquiescence:
The practical construction given by the state of New York to the federal constitution, as shown by the numerous treaties made by it with the Indian tribes, and the recognition by the federal authority of their validity, is very strong evidence that the clause in the federal constitution prohibiting the states from entering into treaties does not preclude a state, having the preemption right to Indian lands, from dealing with the Indian tribes directly, for the extinguishment of the Indian title.Seneca Nation, 27 N.E. at 280.
Effect of the Nonintercourse Act
As to the Nonintercourse Act, Andrews questioned both whether it applied to purchases by a state and whether it applied to purchases within a state.Seneca Nation, 27 N.E. at 280–81. However, Andrews proceed to assume that the Act applied and held that it had not been violated.Seneca Nation, 27 N.E. at 281 ("But, assuming that the statute applies to the transaction of August 31, 1826, we are of opinion that the purchase then made was not in violation of the true meaning and effect of the twelfth section."). Andrews proceeded to argue that the treaty requirement of the Act was satisfied by state treaties:
The purchase must be made at a treaty, as in other cases. This insures publicity, and affords a protection against fraud. But the proviso does not require that the treaty should be one between the United States and the tribe from whom the purchase is made, as in the cases coming under the first clause of the section. It is sufficient if the purchase is made at a treaty held ‘under the authority of the United States,’ and in the ‘presence and with the approbation of the commissioner or commissioners of the United States,’ etc.Seneca Nation, 27 N.E. at 281.
Andrews also placed reliance on the fact that later versions of the Act excluded the clause "or to any state, whether having the right of pre-emption or not" and instead simply prohibited acquisitions by persons.
Applicability of the statute of limitations
Independently, Andrews indicated he would have dismissed the action under the statute of limitations:
 We are also of opinion that as the right of the plaintiff to sue was given by, and is dependent upon, the statute, the statute of limitations is a bar to the action. By the act of 1845, the actions thereby authorized are to be brought and maintained ‘in the same time’ as if brought by citizens of the state. The question is not whether an Indian title can be barred by adverse possession, or by state statutes of limitation. The point is that the plaintiff cannot invoke the special remedy given by the statute, without being bound by the conditions upon which it is given.Seneca Nation, 27 N.E. at 282 (citations omitted).
Andrews emphasized this latter ground because of his desire to prevent any similar lands claims by Indian tribes:
In view of the numerous Indian titles in this state originating in treaties by the state, or in purchases made with its sanction by individuals, we prefer to place our judgment on the broader ground, which will remove any cloud upon the validity of those titles.Seneca Nation, 27 N.E. at 282.
Opinion
thumb|right|U.S. Supreme Court Chief Justice Melville Fuller declined to reach the merits because of the doctrine of adequate and independent state grounds.
Chief Justice Melville Fuller, for a unanimous Court, dismissed the writ of error, relying on the adequate and independent state grounds for the New York Court of Appeals' decision. After reviewing the facts and the judgment below, he wrote that:
The proper construction of this enabling act, and the time within which an action might be brought and maintained thereunder, it was the province of the state courts to determine.
The Seneca Nation availed itself of the act in bringing this action, which was subject to the provision, as held by the court of appeals, that it could only be brought and maintained ‘in the same manner and within the same time as if brought by citizens of this state in relation to their private individual property and rights.’ Under the circumstances, the fact that the plaintiff was an Indian tribe cannot make federal questions of the correct construction of the act and the bar of the statute of limitations.
As it appears that the decision of the court of appeals was rested, in addition to other grounds, upon a distinct and independent ground, not involving any federal question, and sufficient in itself to maintain the judgment, the writ of error falls within the wellsettled rule on that subject, and cannot be maintained.Seneca Nation, 162 U.S. at 289–90 (internal citations omitted).
Legacy
A 19th-century New York Times article claimed that "[t]he decision is one of local, state, and national importance alike . . . .""The Treaty Upheld: And with it the Title to Lands Acquired from the Indians", N.Y. Times, Apr. 24, 1891 In 1998 Prof. Hauptman summed up the case by the following:
The Treaties of 1823 and 1826, although fraudulent at their roots, were allowed to stand. The legal obstacles to Indian land suits at the time made it almost impossible to obtain redress until monetary compensation was awarded the Senecas under the Indian Claims Commission in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
Seneca Nation has never been overruled. But, the effect of the decision was undone by rulings in Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y. State v. Oneida County (1974), known as Oneida I, and Oneida County v. Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y. State (1985), known as Oneida II, which held that there is a federal common law cause of action for ejectment based upon aboriginal title for which there is federal subject-matter jurisdiction. Therefore, Indian tribes no longer have to rely on state statutes for a cause of action. In the words of Prof. Hauptman, Oneida I "overturned one hundred forty-three years of American law."Laurence M. Hauptman, "Seneca Nation of Indians v. Christy: A Background Story", 46 Buffalo L. Rev. 947 (1998)
References
External links
Category:Seneca Nation of New York
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Aboriginal title case law in the United States
Category:Aboriginal title in New York
Category:Adequate and independent state ground
Category:1896 in United States case law
"""

From "Serbian Orthodox Diocese v. Milivojevich" ==> """
Serbian Orthodox Diocese v. Milivojevich, 426 U.S. 696 (1976), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the judicial determination of the Illinois Supreme Court violated the First Amendment and Fourteenth Amendments. In matters of dispute within hierarchal religious organizations, the Establishment Clause precludes intervention by civil courts regarding internal disputes of church governance. Per the Establishment Clause, decisions imposed by hierarchal religious organizations are binding in civil courts.
 Background 
Bishop Dionisije (Milivojevich) of the Serbian Eastern Orthodox Diocese of the United States and Canada was defrocked after being investigated for claims of misconduct. The mother church located in Belgrade, Yugoslavia made this decision and in doing so, also divided the American-Canadian contingent into three distinct dioceses. Bishop Dionsije sued the Mother Church and requested that the courts declare him the ‘true diocesan bishop’ of the undivided diocese.
The Illinois Supreme Court determined that the Mother Church was in violation of its own procedures, and internal regulations. The court further concluded that the diocese could not be divided. This finding rendered the church’s decision arbitrary and invalid. The United States Supreme Court reversed the ruling of the Illinois Supreme Court holding that the lower courts had violated the First Amendment by interpreting and drawing conclusions about church law.
The headquarters and home of the Serbian Eastern Orthodox Diocese at the time of this case was based in Belgrade, Yugoslavia. There are two governing bodies: The highest executive branch of the church is the Holy Synod. This branch includes the Patriarch and four diocesan bishops elected by the Holy Assembly. The Holy Assembly possesses the legislative, judicial, ecclesiastical and legislative authority and is composed of all Diocesan Bishops. The hierarchal authority of the church reserves the right, and holds in its power the ability to manage and control properties, finances, and the appointment or removal of clergy.
In the early 1900s, a small independent diocese of the church was founded by Serbian immigrants, and headquartered in Illinois. A Father Mardary established what became known as the American-Canadian Diocese of the Serbian Eastern Orthodox Church. This was the only diocese of the church to create its own constitution. This allowed relative autonomy from the Mother Church while working within the constructs of the hierarchy. Several not-for-profit organizations were created and purchased properties in the states of Illinois, New York, Pennsylvania and California. These assets would later be considered in litigation of property rights within the church.
Bishop Dionisije Milivojevich was appointed bishop of the American-Canadian Diocese by the Mother Church in 1939, and under his leadership the diocese grew substantially over the years. Years later, he requested support from the mother church to more efficiently manage the affairs of the growing diocese. Although the diocese had grown, complaints had been filed against Dionisije during his tenure. The response to Dionisje's request for additional staff support resulted in a delegation arriving to investigate diocesan needs, but also the claims against him. 
As a result of their investigation, the Mother Church endeavored to divide the American-Canadian Diocese into three separate dioceses, and appointed three of the investigators as bishops of the new dioceses. The delegation also suspended and eventually defrocked Dionisije due to canonical findings of misconduct.
Dionisije refused to recognize his suspension and petitioned the Patriarch arguing the Mother Church had not worked within the parameters of their own penal code or the American-Canadian Serbian Orthodox constitution. Dionisije refused to recognize his suspension, or the rulings held by the Mother church and continued officiating in his role as bishop. While he refused to accept the holding of the Holy Synod, he also refused to participate in intra-church litigation. Dionisije rallied the Diocesan National Assembly refuting the Mother Church and declared the diocese completely autonomous from the mother church.
Dionisije also filed with the circuit court in Illinois proclaiming his post, and continued control of assets and properties owned by his diocese. The case went to the Illinois Supreme Court who held that the Holy Synod had in fact acted in violation of their own penal code, and the American-Canadian constitution when reorganizing the diocese. In effect, the court determined that Dionisije should be reinstated to his former position.
 Opinion of the Court 
 Majority 
Justice Brennan authored and delivered the majority ruling. The Court overturned the decision of the Illinois Supreme Court stating that that court had overstepped its bounds in deciding issues related to ecclesiastical and political intra-church matters. The holding by the Illinois Supreme Court was in violation of the First and Fourteenth Amendments which prohibit secular legal interference in rulings determined by hierarchical religious tribunals. According to the First Amendment as described in the Establishment and Free Exercise Clauses, decisions made by the church must be accepted as binding by civil courts.
The defrockment of clergy directly corresponded to assets held by the church as the officiating bishop has control over church properties. This dispute was seen by the majority as a religious rather than a civil matter. Brennan referred to interpretation of the First Amendment involving church property dispute in Presbyterian Church v. Hull Church, 393 U.S. 440, 449 (1969).  The Hull resolution determined that civil courts may only regard the issue of property, and not the underlying religious doctrine pertaining to church property where the potential for entanglement of the secular courts and religious bodies may occur.
The Establishment Clause clearly prohibits civil courts from interpreting canon law to resolve intra-church disputes. Civil courts must defer to hierarchical tribunals to avoid civil interpretation of, and subsequent entanglement in ecclesiastical law and politics. It is here that the Illinois Supreme Court infringed upon religious freedom and due process with regard to the property disputes in the case. The church property dispute was based on religious doctrine and practice, and secular courts should not have intervened. Although courts may examine doctrinal documents, the review and use of said documents may not place the courts in the position to resolve religious controversy.
 Dissent 
Justice Rehnquist disagreed with the majority opinion stating that he found that there was no constitutional indisposition with regard to First Amendment infringement by the Illinois Supreme Court. Rehnquist believed that the Illinois court was simply expected to determine the correct choice of law and apply it to the canonical dispute through its own interpretation. While he agreed with the Illinois Supreme Court, he also agreed that the higher church was in violation of its own standards.
Although the First Amendment states explicitly that courts are restricted from delving into the evaluation of religious documents in settling property disputes, or other issues that have been settled in an ecclesiastical court or judicatory of a hierarchical church, Rehnquist was arguing that courts should in some cases be able to interpret church law under neutral principles.
Rehnquist referred to Watson v. Jones further stating that equating religious organizations with other voluntary associations has no bearing on or influence by the First Amendment. He suggested that common sense must be applied in decisions where majority rule displaces an attempt by the minority to usurp documented policies and procedures – much the same as it would be in a non-sectarian intra-organizational dispute. He does however agree that the First Amendment prohibits government from displacing free choice of the citizens of the United States by placing bias on one religious organization over another. He also states that he agreed with Illinois in applying neutral principles with judicial deference to the church and that court did not in any way transgress the aforementioned Amendments of the Constitution of the United States.
Rehnquist acknowledged that the court was placed in the position of choosing one side over another in a religious dispute. The difficulty in the court was how far into church doctrine, and ecclesiastical law the civil court needed to go to decipher an appropriate choice. He did allow that unless there are unambiguous rules stated that can be interpreted separate from any religious affect, the courts cannot make determinations in church matters. Courts are restricted from delving too far into the evaluation of religious documents in settling property disputes. This may be unfair to the petitioner because if the issue were with a non-religious entity, the courts are allowed to perform extensive text evaluation. In Rehnquist’s opinion the Illinois Supreme Court did in fact rule well within the parameters of the U.S. Constitution, and its decision should not have been overturned by the Supreme Court of the United States.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:Serbian Orthodox Church in the United States
"""

From "Sereboff v. Mid Atlantic Medical Services, Inc." ==> """
Sereboff v. Mid Atlantic Medical Services, Inc., 547 U.S. 356 (2006), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States involving the ability of an Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) plan fiduciary to recover medical costs from a beneficiary who has been reimbursed for injuries by a third party.  The Court ruled unanimously that ERISA permitted the fiduciary to recover costs from the settlement proceeds a beneficiary received in a personal injury lawsuit..
Background
ERISA plan, injuries, and settlement
Marlene Sereboff and her husband Joel were the beneficiaries of a health insurance plan administered by Mid Atlantic Medical Services, Inc., and covered by ERISA. et seq.  The plan contained an "Acts of Third Parties" provision, which applied if a third party was responsible for their illness or injury, and required the beneficiaries to reimburse Mid Atlantic for plan benefits from any recovery from that third party.  The provision further stated that Mid Atlantic's share of the recovery would not be reduced because the beneficiary did not receive the full damages claimed.
The Sereboffs were injured in a car accident in California, and the plan paid the couple's medical expenses.  They filed a tort action in state court against several third parties, seeking compensatory damages for their injuries.  Beginning soon after the suit was commenced, Mid Atlantic sent the Sereboffs and their attorney several letters in which it asserted a lien on the anticipated proceeds from the suit for paid medical expenses eventually totaling $74,869.37.  The Sereboffs eventually settled their tort suit for $750,000, but did not distribute anything to Mid Atlantic.
Collection suit
Mid Atlantic filed suit in the U.S. District Court for the District of Maryland, claiming a right to collect from the Sereboffs under § 502(a)(3) of ERISA..  Because the Sereboffs' attorney had already distributed the settlement proceeds to them, Mid Atlantic sought a temporary restraining order and preliminary injunction requiring the couple to retain and set aside at least $74,869.37 from the proceeds.  The District Court approved a stipulation under which the Sereboffs agreed to preserve the amount claimed in an investment account until after the case was decided on the merits and all appeals exhausted.
The District Court ruled for Mid Atlantic and ordered the Sereboffs to pay $74,869.37, plus interest, with a deduction for Mid Atlantic's share of the attorney's fees and court costs that the Sereboffs had incurred in state court.  On appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit affirmed in relevant part. though it observed that the circuits were divided on the question of whether § 502(a)(3) authorized recovery in those circumstances.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court unanimously affirmed the Fourth Circuit in an opinion delivered by Chief Justice John G. Roberts.This was the sixth opinion Chief Justice Roberts had written for the Court since his confirmation on September 29, 2005; it was the fifth that was unanimous.
Under § 502(a)(3) of ERISA, A fiduciary may bring a civil action "(A) to enjoin any act or practice which violates [*11]  any provision of this subchapter or the terms of the plan, or (B) to obtain other appropriate equitable relief (i) to redress such violations or (ii) to enforce any provisions of this subchapter or the terms of the plan."  The Court believed the only question remaining in the case was whether the relief Mid Atlantic sought from the District Court was "equitable" under § 502(a)(3)(B).  The Court analyzed this issue by considering both the nature of the remedy Mid Atlantic sought, and the basis for its claim against the Sereboffs.
Equitable nature of relief sought
The Court had previously construed section 502(a)(3)(B) of ERISA to only authorize remedies "that were typically available in equity." (ruling claim for compensatory damages not available).  This was elaborated upon in Great-West Life & Annuity Ins. Co. v. Knudson,. in which the Court rejected an ERISA fiduciary's claim for restitution.  Knudson had involved similar facts, and the Court had ruled that the restitution sought was not equitable because the funds were not actually in the beneficiary's possession.  The liability sought was therefore personal and legal.  By contrast, equitable restitution sought to impose a constructive trust or equitable lien on specific funds or property that were in the defendant's possession.
The Court believed that Mid Atlantic's claim was one for equitable restitution, because the Sereboffs' possession of the settlement funds satisfied the requirement that was missing in Knudson.  Mid Atlantic was not simply seeking to recover from the Sereboffs' assets generally, but rather to recover through a constructive trust or equitable lien on a specifically identified fund.  That this action involved a breach of contract claim did not mean that the relief was not equitable, because that would make the ERISA provision that expressly provides for equitable relief to enforce plan terms "an empty promise.".
Equitable basis for claim
Regarding the basis for Mid Atlantic's claim, the Court considered Barnes v. Alexander to be instructive, in which attorneys sued their supervisor to recover the promised one third of the contingency fee in the case on which they had worked..  The Court had ruled that a lien attached to the fee and followed it into the hands of the supervisor, based upon "the familiar rule of equity that a contract to convey a specific object even before it is acquired will make the contractor a trustee as soon as he gets a title to the thing."232 U.S. at 121.  The Court considered the "Acts of Third Parties" provision in the Sereboffs' ERISA plan analogous to the contingency fee claim, as the provision specifically identified a particular fund and a particular share of that fund to which Mid Atlantic was entitled.  Under the rule of equity set forth in Barnes, Mid Atlantic could "follow a portion of the recovery into the Sereboffs' hands as soon as the settlement fund was identified, and impose on that portion a constructive trust or equitable lien."Internal marks and citation omitted.
See also
Ark. Dep't of Human Servs. v. Ahlborn, 547 U.S. 268 (2006), a case decided the same term regarding the ability of a state agency to recover Medicaid expenditures from personal injury settlement proceeds
 Professor Roger Baron, an ERISA expert who consulted on the Sereboff case and has written extensively about the court's decision in Sereboff.
References
External links
Category:Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2006 in United States case law
"""

From "Sessions v. Dimaya" ==> """
Sessions v. Dimaya, 584 U.S. ___ (2018), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that 18 U.S.C. § 16(b),. a statute defining certain "aggravated felonies" for immigration purposes, is unconstitutionally vague. The Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) classifies some categories of crimes as "aggravated felonies", and immigrants convicted of those crimes, including those legally present in the United States, are almost certain to be deported. Those categories include "crimes of violence", which are defined by the "elements clause" and the "residual clause". The Court struck down the "residual clause", which classified every felony that, "by its nature, involves a substantial risk" of "physical force against the person or property" as an aggravated felony.
Background
James Dimaya was a native of the Philippines who legally immigrated to the United States in 1992. He was convicted on two separate counts of residential burglary in 2007 and 2009. Due to these convictions, the United States government sought to deport Dimaya in 2010, asserting that these convictions were "aggravated felonies" under the Immigration and Nationality Act to support his deportation. Specifically, the government argued that Dimaya's convictions fell within the "residual clause" of the definition of a violent crime, which included "any other offense that is a felony and that, by its nature, involves a substantial risk that physical force against the person or property of another may be used in the course of committing the offense.", 2018 U.S. LEXIS 2497 at *11 (quoting ). A federal immigration judge ordered Dimaya deported, agreeing that the convictions constituted violent aggravated felonies. The Board of Immigration Appeals upheld the immigration judge's ruling on appeal.
left|thumb|Oral arguments in the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals.
Dimaya's lawyers appealed the Board's decision to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. While the Ninth Circuit was hearing this case, the Supreme Court of the United States ruled in Johnson v. United States (2015) that a residual clause in the definition of a violent crime in the Armed Career Criminal Act, which stated "otherwise involves conduct that presents a serious potential risk of physical injury to another", was unconstitutionally vague and violated due process. The Ninth Circuit considered the Supreme Court's rationale in Johnson, and subsequently found that the residual clause in the Immigration and Nationality Act was also unconstitutionally vague, overturning the Board of Immigration Appeals's decision. The October 2015 decision by Circuit Judge Stephen Reinhardt was joined by Judge Kim McLane  Wardlaw, over the dissent of Judge Consuelo Callahan.
Supreme Court
The United States Government filed a petition for a writ of certiorari to the Supreme Court in June 2016, on the question presented: "Whether 18 U.S.C. 16(b), as incorporated into the Immigration and Nationality Act's provisions governing an alien's removal from the United States, is unconstitutionally vague."Petition for Writ of Certiorari, Sessions v. Dimaya, 15-1498 (U.S. June 10, 2016). In September, the Court granted certiorari, agreeing to hear the case.Dimaya v. Lynch, 803 F.3d 1110 (9th Cir. 2015); cert. granted sub nom. Lynch v. Dimaya, 137 S. Ct. 31 (2016).
The case was first heard on January 17, 2017; the Court at that time only had eight members following the death of Justice Antonin Scalia and prior to confirmation of Justice Neil Gorsuch. The Justices were deadlocked 4 to 4 in their decision, and a new oral hearing was held on October 2, 2017, before the full nine-member court.
Opinion of the Court
The Court announced judgment in favor of the alien on April 17, 2018, affirming the Ninth Circuit by a vote of 5-4. The Court held that the residual clause in the Immigration and Nationality Act was unconstitutionally vague. Justice Elena Kagan wrote the majority decision and was joined by Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen G. Breyer and Sonia Sotomayor, and in part by Neil Gorsuch. Kagan referred to Scalia's majority opinion from Johnson to justify that the language of the residual clause was sufficiently vague. Justice Gorsuch wrote an additional concurring opinion, reiterating the importance of the vagueness doctrine within Scalia's opinion from Johnson.
Commentators widely discussed Justice Gorsuch's decisive vote joining the four liberal justices on the Supreme Court. Gorsuch, who was appointed by President Trump and began serving in April 2017, broke a 4–4 tie in favor of the liberal justices on the Supreme Court, ruling against the Trump administration's position in upholding the existing law. Several news organizations noted that Gorsuch's vote mirrored Scalia's displeasure with vague laws or excessive government power.
This was the first time that Ginsburg was able to assign the majority opinion in her tenure on the Court, since she was the most senior justice voting in the majority.
Dissents
Chief Justice John Roberts wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justices Anthony Kennedy, Clarence Thomas, and Samuel Alito. Roberts argued that the language in the residual clauses of the Immigration and Nationality Act and the Armed Career Criminal Act was significantly different and that the vagueness doctrine did not apply to the Immigration and Nationality Act. Thomas also wrote an additional dissenting opinion, joined in part by Kennedy and Alito.
Subsequent developments
The question of the vagueness of "crime of violence" arose again in the 2019 case Davis v. United States. In this case, two men were arrested and convicted of several charges under the Hobbs Act, which had similar language that required longer mandatory minimum sentences for "crimes of violence", with a similar residual clause to define this. In this case, the residual clauses were triggered by the men brandishing but not using or firing shotguns during the crime. Both challenged this longer sentence. Their case at the Fifth Circuit ruled against their claims that the "crimes of violence" residual clause was vague and thus unconstitutional, but this was prior to the Sessions ruling. On review following the Supreme Court's decision in Sessions, the Fifth Circuit agreed with the claim that the residual clause was vague and unconstitutional, a decision upheld when the case was brought to the Supreme Court.
See also
 Johnson v. United States (2015)
 Vagueness doctrine
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 584
References
Further reading
External links
 Case page at SCOTUSblog
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:2018 in United States case law
"""

From "Seymour v. Superintendent of Washington State Penitentiary" ==> """
Seymour v. Superintendent of Wash. State Penitentiary, 368 U.S. 351 (1962), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States that the state of Washington did not have jurisdiction to try an Indian (Native American) for a crime committed within the boundaries of the Colville Indian Reservation, even if the crime was committed on land now owned by a non-Indian.Seymour v. Superintendent of Wash. State Penitentiary, .
Background
History
Paul Seymour was an enrolled member of the Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation, a group of twelve Indian tribes that are based at the Colville Indian Reservation.  The reservation is located in the western part of Oregon and the eastern part of Washington.  The reservation was established by the executive order of President Ulysses S. Grant on 2 July 1872. 915-916 (Charles J. Kappler, ed., 1904).  In 1892, Congress opened up part of the reservation to white settlement.. 441-443 (Charles J. Kappler, ed., 1904).  In 1916, President Woodrow Wilson, with Congressional authorization, opened up more reservation land for settlement.. 966-969 (Charles J. Kappler, ed., 1929).
Lower courts
Seymour was charged with burglary in Okanogan County, Washington and pleaded guilty to attempted burglary.  He was sentenced to  years in the state penitentiary.  While incarcerated, he filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus in the Washington Supreme Court.  The state Supreme Court denied the petition on the grounds that the offense did not take place in "Indian country".In re Seymour v. Schneckloth, 55 Wash. 2d 109, 346 P.2d 669 (Wash. 1959).  Indian country is defined in federal law as including all land within an Indian reservation, and within Indian country, only the Federal government has jurisdiction over crimes committed by Indians.., A Revisionist History of Indian Country,  (1997).,  24 (1969).  The court reasoned that the Congressional action that had opened the Colville Indian Reservation to settlement had reduced or diminished the size of the reservation and since the crime was committed outside of the diminished reservation, it was not in Indian country.  The court denied the writ.  Seymour then appealed to the United States Supreme Court, which agreed to hear the appeal and granted a writ of certiorari.
Opinion of the court
thumb|left|200px|alt=Justice Hugo Black portrait|Justice Hugo Black, author of the unanimous opinion
Arguments
Glen A. Wilkinson argued the case for Seymour.  Washington Assistant Attorney General Stephen C. Way argued the case for the state of Washington.  At the request of the court United States Solicitor General J. Lee Rankin filed a memorandum with the court.
Unanimous opinion
Justice Hugo Black announced the opinion of a unanimous court.  Black looked to the statutes that affected the Colville Indian Reservation and noted that the 1892 act expressly reserved the southern half for use of the tribes under control of the federal government.  The 1916 presidential proclamation merely set forth the procedure for settlement, and neither the proclamation nor the enabling act had any language terminating the reservation., The Legacy of Solem v. Bartlett: How Courts have used Demographics to bypass Congress and Erode the Basic Principles of Indian Law,  (2009).  Black further noted that a 1956 statute. 750-751 (Charles J. Kappler, ed., 1971). recognized the continued existence of the reservation, and a 1953 statute. 591-592 (Charles J. Kappler, ed., 1971). explained how the state could obtain jurisdiction once certain conditions were met.  Black observed that those conditions had not yet been met.  The statutes opening up the reservation to settlement merely allowed non-Indians to move onto the reservation and did not end reservation status.,  178-181 (1982).
Black stated that "Since the burglary with which petitioner was charged occurred on property plainly located within the limits of that reservation, the courts of Washington had no jurisdiction to try him for that offense."  The case was reversed and remanded to the Washington Supreme Court.
References
External links
Category:1962 in American law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Shafer v. South Carolina" ==> """
Shafer v. South Carolina, 532 U.S. 36 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case decided in 2001. The case concerned the ability of a defendant to tell the jury that, absent a penalty of death, a penalty of life imprisonment would not permit early release of a prisoner on parole. While the question had been decided in the case of Simmons v. South Carolina, this case dealt with the extent of the ruling.
Background
In 1994, the United States Supreme Court decided the case of Simmons v. South Carolina. The U.S. Supreme Court held in this case that where a capital defendant's future dangerousness is at issue, and the only sentencing alternative to death available to the jury is life imprisonment without possibility of parole, due process requires that the jury be informed of the defendant's parole ineligibility. The state of South Carolina had changed its sentencing laws in the succeeding years to include the actual possibility of parole in absence of the death penalty, after sentencing questions were answered by the jury.Baarsma, William. Shafer v. South Carolina. Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, 2002, p. 1-3.. 
In the late Fall of 1997, Wesley Aaron Shafer, Jr., was found guilty of, inter alia, murder. During the sentencing phase, Shafer's counsel argued that Simmons required the trial judge to instruct the jury that under South Carolina law, a life sentence carries no possibility of parole. The prosecution responded that because the state did not plan to argue to the jury that Shafer would be a danger in the future, no Simmons instruction was required. During deliberations, the jury asked under what conditions someone convicted of murder could become available for parole. The trial judge stated that parole eligibility or ineligibility was not a matter for the jury's consideration.Shafer, 532 U.S. at 41-43. Ultimately, the jury recommended the death penalty and the judge imposed the sentence. In affirming, the South Carolina Supreme Court held that Simmons generally did not apply to the State's sentencing scheme because an alternative to death other than life without the possibility of parole existed.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote the Opinion of the Court, which reversed the decision of the South Carolina Supreme Court, finding in favor of Shafer. She wrote that "whenever future dangerousness is at issue in a capital sentencing proceeding under South Carolina's new scheme, due process requires that the jury be informed that a life sentence carries no possibility of parole."Shafer, 532 U.S. at 51. She continued with this line of thinking, explaining "[i]t is only when the jury endeavors the moral judgment whether to impose the death penalty that parole eligibility may become critical. Correspondingly, it is only at that stage that Simmons comes into play, a stage at which South Carolina law provides no third choice, no 30-year mandatory minimum, just death or life without parole." Therefore, South Carolina's actions violated Shafer's Due Process rights, and the case was sent back for renewed sentencing determinations.
Dissenting opinions
Justice Antonin Scalia wrote a brief dissent from the majority's decision. He agreed that under Simmons, Shafer would probably have to have a new chance at sentencing; instead, he argued that this new criminal rule made by the courts was not proper for the American system of jurisprudence.Shafer, 532 U.S. at 55 (Scalia, J., dissenting). 
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a separate dissent in the same lines as Scalia's. He also agreed that the majority decision was the "next logical step of Simmons"Shafer, 532 U.S. at 56 (Thomas, J., dissenting). However, he argued that the instructions by the judge in this case were adequate under the standards set forth by the Court. He reasoned that the jury clearly understood what the two possibilities were, and thus no due process violation had occurred.Shafer, 532 U.S. at 57-58 (Thomas, J., dissenting).
See also
 Jury instructions
 Parole
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:United States death penalty case law
Category:Capital punishment in South Carolina
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Shaffer v. Heitner" ==> """
Shaffer v. Heitner, 433 U.S. 186 (1977), is a United States corporate law case in which the Supreme Court of the United States established that a defendant's ownership of stock in a corporation incorporated within a state, without more, is insufficient to allow that state's courts to exercise jurisdiction over the defendant. The case set forth a framework for evaluating when a defendant will be deemed to have minimum contacts with the forum state sufficient for the exercise of jurisdiction to be consistent with due process under the Fourteenth Amendment.
Facts
Arnold Heitner, who as trustee owned one share of stock in Greyhound Corporation, a Delaware corporation, instituted a shareholder’s derivative suit in the Delaware Court of Chancery against 28 of the company's directors and officers. Most of these individuals resided outside Delaware. To secure jurisdiction over these defendants, at the outset of the litigation Heitner filed a motion for an order to "sequester" the shares of Greyhound stock owned by the defendants, meaning that they would be unable to sell the stock. The defendants were notified by certified mail and by publication of a legal notice in a newspaper.
By sequestering defendants' property, Delaware sought to exercise quasi in rem jurisdiction over the defendants. The defendants at issue were not subject to personal jurisdiction because they did not reside in Delaware and had not taken any actions in Delaware that were the subject matter of the lawsuit. However, because Delaware law deemed all stock in Delaware corporations to have a situs within the state, Delaware exercised jurisdiction over the stock itself. The defendants then had the choice of either filing an appearance in the lawsuit, thereby subjecting themselves to jurisdiction, or failing to appear to defend themselves, thus risking losing their stock.
The defendants responded by entering a special appearance in the Delaware court for the purpose of moving to quash service of process and to vacate the sequestration order, thus contesting Delaware's exercise of jurisdiction over them. They contended that none of them had ever set foot in Delaware or conducted any activities in that state. They contended that the ex parte sequestration procedure did not accord them due process of law as required by the Fourteenth Amendment, as construed by Supreme Court cases defining the requirements of personal jurisdiction, and that exercising quasi in rem jurisdiction over property in the forum state that was unrelated to the subject-matter of the litigation was constitutionally impermissible.
As the Supreme Court explained:
The Delaware state court found that it had quasi in rem jurisdiction, based on a Delaware statute that declared stock owned in a Delaware corporation to be legally located 'in' Delaware.
The primary purpose of 'sequestration' is not to secure possession of property pending a trial between resident debtors and creditors on the issue of who has the right to retain it. On the contrary, as here employed, 'sequestration' is a process used to compel the personal appearance of a nonresident defendant to answer and defend a suit brought against him in a court of equity. It is accomplished by the appointment of a sequestrator by this Court to seize and hold property of the nonresident located in this State subject to further Court order. If the defendant enters a general appearance, the sequestered property is routinely released, unless the plaintiff makes special application to continue its seizure, in which event the plaintiff has the burden of proof and persuasion. [Citations removed]
The defendants sought review by the United States Supreme Court, which granted certiorari.
Result
In an opinion written by Justice Thurgood Marshall, the Court determined that the minimum contacts rule of International Shoe Co. v. Washington applies to actions brought in rem as well as to ordinary "in personam" actions. Justice Marshall theorized that in rem actions would remain mostly unaffected by the ruling but "Type 2" quasi in rem actions (actions seizing property for the purpose of settling a dispute unrelated to that property) would be greatly affected because the mere ownership of property in a state is not a sufficient contact to subject the property owner to a lawsuit in that state, unless that property is the issue of the lawsuit. The state in which property is located will still generally have personal jurisdiction over disputes concerning the ownership of property within that state, because the owner will be receiving the benefits and protections of that state, while the state will have a strong interest in the peaceful resolution of disputes, and records and witnesses will probably be located therein.
Heitner argued that Delaware's interest in controlling the behavior of its corporations justified its assertion of personal jurisdiction over the defendants. The Court responded that this could be a reason to apply Delaware law in resolving the dispute, but that this did not need to take place in a Delaware forum.
Concurring opinions
Justices Lewis F. Powell, Jr. and John P. Stevens each authored concurring opinions. Both agreed with the outcome in this case, but differed on the question of whether the analysis would be the same if the property in question was real estate instead of stock.  Powell would reserve judgment on whether ownership of real property would constitute minimum contacts.  Stevens saw no in rem jurisdiction for stocks because of the lack of notice to purchasers of securities that the purchase may subject them to such jurisdiction, but would not say the same for real estate.
Dissenting opinion
Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. wrote a dissenting opinion, largely concurring in the Court's method of analyzing the jurisdictional issue, but disagreeing with the ultimate result. Brennan agreed that International Shoe required a determination whether the defendants had at least minimum contacts sufficient to subject them to jurisdiction in Delaware. However, he would have held that defendants did have such contacts because the directors voluntarily associated themselves with Delaware by becoming directors of a Delaware corporation. Justice William H. Rehnquist did not participate in the decision of the case.
See also
United States corporate law
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 433
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
 References 
External links
 [ Official Website of the Supreme Court of the United States]
 Case Brief for Shaffer v. Heitner at Lawnix.com
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States personal jurisdiction case law
Category:Greyhound Lines
Category:Legal history of Delaware
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Shapiro v. McManus" ==> """
Shapiro v. McManus, 577 U.S. ___ (2015), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States clarified when United States District Court judges must refer cases to three-judge panels. In a unanimous opinion written by Justice Antonin Scalia, the Court ruled that federal district courts are required to refer cases to a three-judge panel when plaintiffs challenge the constitutionality of the apportionment of congressional districts., slip op. at 1, 4 (2015).
The case results from citizens in Maryland that had challenged the state's redistricting based on the 2010 Census created by Democratic leaders in the state, leading to Republican voters in the 6th district to find their votes diluted and causing ten-term U.S. Representative Roscoe Bartlett to lose in the 2012 election. The plaintiffs charged that their rights of equal representation and protection under the Article One, Section Two of the U.S. Constitution and freedom of association of the First Amendment had been violated. At the United States District Court for the District of Maryland, the judge denied the request for a full three-judge hearing, considering that the plaintiff's claims were insubstantial; the decision was summarily affirmed in the Fourth Circuit Appeals Court.Benisek v. Mack, 11 F. Supp. 3d 516 (D. Md. 2014); affirmed, 584 F. App'x 140 (4th Cir. 2014). The plaintiffs subsequently challenged the District Court's ruling via petition to the Supreme Court on the basis that the dismissal did not properly consider their claims. The Supreme Court agreed, ordering a full three-judge hearing at the District Court.
The hearing at District Court led to another Supreme Court case, Benisek v. Lamone, accepted in December 2017 and heard in March 2018, in which the Supreme Court found that the District Court's denial of an injunction was not improper, but otherwise did not weigh in on the merits of the gerrymandering aspects..
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States civil procedure case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2015 in United States case law
"""

From "Shapiro v. Thompson" ==> """
Shapiro v. Thompson, 394 U.S. 618 (1969), was a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States that invalidated state durational residency requirements for public assistance and helped establish a fundamental "right to travel" in U.S. law.  Although the Constitution does not explicitly mention the right to travel, it is implied by the other rights given in the Constitution.Schram, Sanford. 2006. "Shapiro v. Thompson". Federalism in America: An Encyclopedia.Although the right was recognized under the Equal Protection clause in this case, pre-Fourteenth Amendment, the right to travel was understood as protected by the Privileges and Immunities Clause (Article IV), as a privilege of citizenship, and therefore might have been applied to the states under the Privileges or Immunities Clause of Amendment XIV, as J. Stewart wanted.
Facts of the case
The Connecticut Welfare Department invoked Connecticut law denying an application for Aid to Families with Dependent Children assistance to appellee Vivian Marie Thompson, a 19-year-old pregnant unwed mother of one child, because she had changed her residence in June 1966 from the Dorchester neighborhood of Boston, Massachusetts, to Hartford, Connecticut, to live with her mother. When her mother was no longer able to support her, she and her infant son moved  to her own apartment in Hartford in August 1966. Thompson could not work or enter a work training program. Her application for assistance, filed in August 1966, was denied in November solely on the ground that she had not lived in the State for a year before her application was filed, a requirement under Connecticut law.
Case history
Thompson brought suit in the United States District Court for the District of Connecticut where a three-judge panel, one judge dissenting, declared the provision of Connecticut law unconstitutional, holding that the waiting-period requirement is unconstitutional because it "has a chilling effect on the right to travel" and also holding that the provision violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, "because the denial of relief to those resident in the State for less than a year is not based on any permissible purpose but is solely designed, as 'Connecticut states quite frankly,' 'to protect its fisc by discouraging entry of those who come needing relief'" (decision of the Court).
This case examined laws that required a period of residence in a jurisdiction before welfare benefits would become available to a new resident.  The state asserted that its interest in requiring this waiting period was to deter needy citizens from other states from coming to the state for the sole purpose of receiving superior welfare benefits.  The Court held that the purpose of inhibiting the migration of needy people was a constitutionally impermissible objective.  The state also argued that this requirement was an attempt to apportion services based on how much residence has contributed (i.e. longer residence means more taxes paid) but such apportionment is not allowed under the Equal protection clause.
The state asserted that the requirement served the states interest in efficient administration of welfare by providing an objective test of residence, allowing for planning a budget, minimizing fraud, and encouragement entry into the workforce before seeking welfare.
Decision of the Court
Because the constitutional right to free movement between states was implicated, the Court applied a standard of strict scrutiny and held none of these interests were sufficient to sustain the waiting requirement.  The Court held that there was no evidence that the requirement would make planning a budget more predictable, and that if a waiting period encouraged  new residents to enter the workforce it should also be applied to current residents, and that the interest in deterring fraud and having an objective verification of residence could be better served by less restrictive means (e.g. calling welfare recipients periodically).
Finally the Court rejected the argument that Congress had authorized the waiting period because Congress does not have the power to authorize violations of the equal protection clause.
The Court reaffirmed the right to travel under the 14th Amendment's Privileges or Immunities clause in Saenz v. Roe (1999).
Dissenting opinions
Chief Justice Warren, joined by Justice Black, dissented.  Congress has the power to authorize these restrictions under the commerce clause.  Under the commerce clause, Congress needs only a rational basis to a legitimate state interest, not a necessary relation to a compelling interest.
Justice Harlan also dissented, arguing that the requirement of a compelling interest and necessary relationship between the law and that interest serve as an example of intermediate scrutiny.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 394
 Saenz v. Roe (1999)
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1969 in United States case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
"""

From "Sharp v. Murphy" ==> """
Sharp v. Murphy, 591 U.S. ___ (2020), was a Supreme Court of the United States case of whether Congress disestablished the Muscogee (Creek) Nation reservation. After holding the case from the 2018 term, the case was decided on July 9, 2020, in a per curiam decision following McGirt v. Oklahoma that, for the purposes of the Major Crimes Act, the reservations were never disestablished and remain Native American country.
In 1866, Congress established reservation boundaries for the Muscogee (Creek), Cherokee, Chickasaw, Choctaw, and Seminole Nations. The Muscogee (Creek) Nation boundaries composes three million acres in Eastern Oklahoma, including most of the city of Tulsa. The boundaries for all five nations consist of over 19 million acres and nearly the entire eastern half of Oklahoma.  In 1907, Congress admitted Oklahoma to the Union as the 46th state and federal territorial courts immediately transferred all non-federal cases involving Native Americans to state courts.Brief for Petitioner However, in the process, it has been found that Congress never officially disestablished the tribal reservations, a requirement for a tribal reservation to lose that status as demanded under Solem v. Bartlett (1984)..
The situation arose following the appeal of a convicted murderer, Patrick Murphy, a member of the Muscogee-Creek tribe, with his crime taking place within the boundaries of Muscogee-Creek reservation as delimited by Congress in 1866. The appeal addressed whether the federal territorial courts had congressional authorization to make this transfer, as if the lands were still a tribal reservation, Murphy's crime would become subject to federal jurisdiction rather than Oklahoma. Although this case is specific to the Muscogee (Creek) Nation, the Court's decision is likely to also apply to reservations of the Cherokee, Choctaw, Chickasaw, and Seminole Nations because all five tribes have similar histories within the state of Oklahoma.
The case was first heard by the Supreme Court in its 2018–2019 term; Justice Neil Gorsuch recused himself due to having participated as a federal appellate judge when the case was heard in lower courts, which created a potential deadlock between the remaining eight Justices. The Supreme Court announced at the end of the term that it would hold additional oral arguments during the 2019 term. It also heard a second case, McGirt v. Oklahoma, in May 2020 involving similar matters and which Justice Gorsuch had no prior conflict with.
 Background 
thumb|upright=1.4|right|Boundaries of the Five Tribes in 1866
From the colonial and early federal period in the history of the United States the Cherokee, Chickasaw, Choctaw, Muscogee (Creek), and Seminole Nations became known as the Five Civilized Tribes.Clinton, Fred S. Oklahoma Indian History, from The Tulsa World. The Indian School Journal, Volume 16, Number 4, 1915, page 175-187. These are the first five tribes that Anglo-European settlers generally considered to be "civilized". The "Five Tribes" once occupied much of the land in current day Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Mississippi, South Carolina and Tennessee.
In the 1830s, Congress forcibly removed these tribes from their ancestral homelands to designated Indian Territory. The migration from these homelands to the designated territory is infamously known as the Trail of Tears. During the American Civil War, some of the tribes supported the Confederates.  After the Union victory, the "Five Tribes" ceded all its territory in western Oklahoma. The Muscogee (Creek)'s present boundaries reflect two cessions. In 1856, the Muscogee (Creek) Nation "cede[d]" lands to the Seminoles.1856 Treaty arts. I, V. In 1866, Congress signed the Treaty with the Creek where the Muscogee (Creek) Nation "cede[d] ... to the United States" lands in return for $975,168.Treaty with the Muscogee (Creek), art. III, June 14, 1866, 14 Stat. 785.
In the 1880s, the "Allotment Era" swept the Western United States. The Dawes Act of 1887 (also known as the General Allotment Act or the Dawes Severalty Act of 1887) authorized the President of the United States to survey Native American tribal land and divide it into allotments for individual Native Americans. Those who accepted allotments and lived separately from the tribe would be granted United States citizenship. The Curtis Act of 1898 amended the Dawes Act to extend its provisions to the Five Civilized Tribes; it required abolition of their governments, allotment of communal lands to people registered as tribal members, and sale of lands declared surplus, as well as dissolving tribal courts.
The Muscogee (Creek) Nation reached a negotiated agreement with the federal government for the allotment of tribal lands, and Congress passed it into law in 1901. The original agreement specified that its terms would control over conflicting federal statutes and treaty provisions, but it in no way affected treaty provisions consistent with the agreement. The agreement's central purpose was to facilitate a transfer of title from the Muscogee (Creek) Nation generally to its members individually. It provided that "[a]ll lands belonging to the Creek tribe", except for town sites and lands reserved for public purposes, should be appraised and allotted "among the citizens of the tribe".Murphy, 866 F.3d at 1209. In 1906, Congress passed the Oklahoma Enabling Act, which empowered the people residing in Indian Territory and Oklahoma Territory to elect delegates to a state constitutional convention and subsequently to be admitted to the union as a single union. The question before the Supreme Court is whether these laws and other similar federal statutes clearly disestablished the reservation of the Muscogee (Creek) Nation.
Statement of the case
Patrick Murphy, a member of the Muscogee (Creek) Nation, murdered George Jacobs near Henryetta, Oklahoma, on August 28, 1999. He confessed to the murder to Mr. Jacobs' former acquaintance, Ms. Patsy Jacobs, whom he was living with, and was arrested. An Oklahoma state court jury convicted Patrick Murphy of murder and imposed the death penalty in 2000.
After his conviction, Murphy filed an application for post-conviction relief in an Oklahoma state court seeking to overturn his conviction by claiming the federal government had exclusive jurisdiction to prosecute murders committed by Indians in Indian country; Henryetta lies within the former boundaries of the Moscogee reservation. The state district court concluded state jurisdiction was proper because the crime had occurred on state land. Murphy appealed to the Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals which also determined that the state had jurisdiction. Murphy then sought habeas relief in the Federal District Court of Eastern Oklahoma. The Federal District Court determined the Oklahoma state court decisions were not contrary to federal law and denied the habeas petition. Murphy then appealed to the Tenth Circuit, which reversed the decision of the District Court. The Tenth Circuit found no prior court had reviewed whether Congress disestablished the Muscogee reservation under the tests of Solem v. Bartlett (1984), a prior case that established that only Congress has the power to disestablish native reservations. On its own analysis of all laws passed by Congress related to the tribal reservation and Oklahoma's statehood, found no explicit statement of disestablishment. The Tenth Circuit also found that other acts of Congress around the time still treated the reservation as if it were Indian-owned land, contrary to the disestablishment intent if that had occurred. Thus, the Tenth Circuit ruled in favor of Murphy that he should have been prosecuted under federal jurisdiction.
Supreme Court
The state of Oklahoma petitioned for writ of certiorari to the Supreme Court of the United States in February 2018, specifically asking the Supreme Court to rule on "whether the 1866 territorial boundaries of the Creek Nation within the former Indian Territory of eastern Oklahoma constitute an "Indian reservation" today under 18 U.S.C. §1151(a).17-1107".Question Presented Since Murphy had filed a federal habeas corpus petition in his challenge to the Tenth Circuit, the opposing party to his challenge was the "authorized person having custody of the prisoner", this being Interim Warden for the Oklahoma State Penitentiary, Mike Carpenter. Carpenter was represented by attorneys that also represent the interest of the state of Oklahoma. The Supreme Court granted the petition in October 2018, with affirmation that because Justice Neil Gorsuch had participated in the case while at the Tenth Circuit but before becoming a Supreme Court Justice, he would abstain from participating in the case at the Supreme Court level.
Argument for the petitioner
In addition to the state's statements, the federal government also filed an amicus curiae brief in support of Carpenter with the concern that if the Supreme Court affirmed the federal appellate court's decision, then "the federal government would have—and the State would lack—criminal jurisdiction over crimes by or against Indians in nearly all of eastern Oklahoma". Other amicus curiae briefs in support of Carpenter were filed by the International Municipal Lawyers Association, the Oklahoma Independent Petroleum Association, the Oklahoma Sheriffs' Association, the Environmental Federation of Oklahoma, and a consolidated brief on behalf of ten other state governments.
Carpenter's attorneys argued that
 Congress never established reservations for the Five Tribes. Although Congress established boundaries for the Five Tribes, these territorial boundaries do not meet the legal definition of a reservation.
 Even if the boundaries meet the definition of a reservation, Congressional laws during the "Allotment Era" disestablished reservations.
 Congress rescinded the Five Tribes' territorial sovereignty by stripping the Five Tribes of the most basic executive, legislative, and judicial functions to bestow those powers upon the new State.
 Congress's transfer of jurisdiction over Indians to Oklahoma state courts is incompatible with the reservation status.
Argument for the respondent
Murphy was represented by his criminal defense attorneys. Amicus curiae briefs in support of Murphy were filed by the Muscogee (Creek) Nation, the Chickasaw Nation and Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma (joined by several former officials of the State of Oklahoma), the National Congress of American Indians, the Cherokee Nation (joined by historians and legal scholars), a group of former United States Attorneys, and the National Indigenous Women's Resource Center.
Murphy's attorneys argued that
 Congress in 1866 established a reservation for the Muscogee (Creek) Nation.
 The Supreme Court has clearly and resolutely affirmed that Solem v. Bartlett provides the “well settled” framework for assessing disestablishment.
 The test provided in Solem to determine whether a reservation has been disestablished has not been met.
 Although Congress established the Muscogee (Creek) Nation over 150 years ago, it is a well-established rule that courts will not repeal a statute unless Congress's intention is clear and manifest.
Proceedings
The original name of this case was Murphy v. Royal. Terry Royal, the Warden at Oklahoma State Penitentiary, accepted another job and resigned in good standing prior to briefings in the case. Before his resignation, Royal filed a petition for writ of certiorari with the Supreme Court on February 6, 2018. The Court granted the petition on May 21, 2018. On July 25, 2018, the case was renamed Carpenter v. Murphy to reflect the appointment of Mike Carpenter as Interim Warden of the Oklahoma State Penitentiary.
The case's first oral arguments were heard on November 27, 2018. Attorneys for Mike Carpenter, Oklahoma State Penitentiary Interim Warden, argued that Congress has clearly disestablished the Muscogee (Creek) Nation Reservation. Carpenter is backed by attorneys for the state of Oklahoma and the United States Solicitor General. Attorneys for Patrick Dwayne Murphy argued that there is no clear intention of Congress to disestablish the Muscogee (Creek) Nation Reservation. Murphy is backed by the National Congress of American Indians and other American Indian organizations. The Justices raised concerns about the practicality of deciding that much of Oklahoma would be classified as an Indian Reservation, which would potentially affect the livelihood of 1.8 million residents.
With Tommy Sharp named as Interim Warden of the Oklahoma State Penitentiary, the case was renamed Sharp v. Murphy in July 2019.
Because of Gorsuch's recusal on the case, it is believed the remaining eight justices remained deadlocked on the case. In the 2019–20 term, the Supreme Court accepted the case of McGirt v. Oklahoma (Docket 18-9526) which deals with a similar matter of jurisdiction related to the former Indian reservations, but in which Gorsuch had no prior involvement, allowing all nine justices to hear the issue.
Decision
Sharp was decided per curiam on the basis of McGirt, with both decisions issued on July 9, 2020. From McGirt, the Supreme Court ruled in a 5–4 decision, with Gorsuch joined by Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor, and Elena Kagan, that Congress had failed to disestablish the former reservation lands, and thus for purposes of the Major Crimes Act, those lands should be treated as "Indian country". The Sharp per curiam opinion upheld that decision, though Justices Clarence Thomas and Samuel Alito dissented.
The per curiam decision affirmed the Tenth Circuit's decision, which overturned the state's conviction against Murphy. The Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals reviewed the conviction in 2020 and under McGirt, ruled the state did not have jurisdiction to prosecute Murphy. He was transferred to the U.S. Marshal Service and was given a federal jury trial, which convicted him in August 2021 on three felony counts including second-degree murder.
Impact
The rulings in Sharp and McGirt have had a significant impact on the state of Oklahoma, particularly on past criminal convictions, where the Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals has broadly ruled that any crime involving Native Americans on the tribal lands in the state fall outside the prosecution of the state. This has included crimes where the perpetrator was non-Native while the victims were Native. The state has argued that this stance has created difficulties in enforcing the law in the state, and it has an interest to help protect Native citizens from crimes committed against them by non-Natives, and as of September 2021, has currently petitioned the Supreme Court to overturn some or all of McGirt based on this situation.
See also
 Native American civil rights
 Native Americans in the United States
 References 
External links
ca
Category:United States Native American criminal jurisdiction case law
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Muscogee (Creek) Nation
Category:Okmulgee County, Oklahoma
Category:Native American history of Oklahoma
"""

From "Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel. Mezei" ==> """
Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei, 345 U.S. 206 (1953), was a United States Supreme Court case that established the federal government's power to detain migrants at the border pending deportation. The Supreme Court, in a five to four decision, held that the Attorney General's continued exclusion of the unauthorized immigrant without a hearing does not amount to an unlawful detention, and the court may not temporarily admit such individuals into the United States pending arrangements for their departure abroad."U.S. Reports: Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei, 345 U.S. 206. 1953", Library of Congress, p. 207-216 Some consider the decision in Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei as the Court's strongest statement of the plenary power doctrine as the power to permanently exclude noncitizens is based in U.S. sovereignty and largely immune from judicial control.Weisselberg, Charles D. “The Exclusion and Detention of Aliens: Lessons from the Lives of Ellen Knauff and Ignatz Mezei.”, University of Pennsylvania Law Review 143, no. 4, 1995, p. 967
 Background 
Ignatz Mezei arrived in the United States in 1923 and lived in Buffalo, New York as an unauthorized immigrant for 25 years."U.S. Reports: Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei, 345 U.S. 206. 1953", Library of Congress, p. 216 In 1948, Ignatz Mezei left his wife, four stepchildren, and a carpenter job to visit his dying mother in Romania.Weisselberg, Charles D. “The Exclusion and Detention of Aliens: Lessons from the Lives of Ellen Knauff and Ignatz Mezei.”, University of Pennsylvania Law Review 143, no. 4, 1995, p. 967 However, Mezei found himself unable to secure entry into Romania and decided to return to the United States.McDonough, Conor. “Mezei’s Day in Court: Debtors’ Prisons, Substance Abuse, and the Permissiveness of Civil Detention in American Immigration Law”, Northwestern University Law Review 114, no. 6, 2020, p. 1632 After spending 19 months overseas, Mezei was able to secure a quota immigration visa issued by the American Consul in Budapest, Hungary; then returning to the U.S. by a ship bound for Ellis Island."U.S. Reports: Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei, 345 U.S. 206. 1953", Library of Congress, p. 208 On February 9, 1950, Ignatz Mezei’s ship arrived and he was informed by an immigration inspector that he was temporarily excluded from the U.S. due to the Passport Act of 1918, as amended."U.S. Reports: Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei, 345 U.S. 206. 1953", Library of Congress, p. 208 While the formal charges and evidence against Mezei were unknown to him, he was aware that the IRS wanted to exclude him due to his activities with the Hungarian lodge of the Internal Workers Order (IWO).Weisselberg, Charles D. “The Exclusion and Detention of Aliens: Lessons from the Lives of Ellen Knauff and Ignatz Mezei.”, University of Pennsylvania Law Review 143, no. 4, 1995, p. 975 Prior to his exclusion hearing, Mezei’s attorney met with a Justice Department official who disclosed the government alleged Mezei was excludable on three grounds:Weisselberg, Charles D. “The Exclusion and Detention of Aliens: Lessons from the Lives of Ellen Knauff and Ignatz Mezei.”, University of Pennsylvania Law Review 143, no. 4, 1995, p. 975
 That Mezei was a member of the Communist Party at some point during 1929-1945;
 Mezei was convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude (petty larceny in 1935);
 That the information he provided to consular officers in Hungary to obtain an immigrant quota visa was false.
However, Mezei was not provided with the evidence the government had against him. Ignatz Mezei was detained for two years on Ellis Island without bail by order of the Attorney General before filing a writ of habeas corpus to the District Court."U.S. Reports: Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei, 345 U.S. 206. 1953", Library of Congress, p. 217 The District Court held that Mezei would be granted a $5000 bail and the Court of Appeals approved; the Supreme Court then granted certiorari."U.S. Reports: Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei, 345 U.S. 206. 1953", Library of Congress, p. 207
 Issues  
On March 16, 1953, Justice Clark delivered the opinion of the Court. The issues held by the Court include:"U.S. Reports: Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei, 345 U.S. 206. 1953", Library of Congress, p. 206-207
 The denial of a retrial in exclusion cases after the Attorney General’s statutory determination that the immigrants entry would be prejudicial to the public interest.
 Neither an immigrant's harborage on Ellis Island nor their prior residence in the U.S. grants anything other than an exclusion proceeding.
 Lawful resident immigrants may not be deprived of their constitutional rights to due process; however, Ignatz Mezei is an “entrant alien” or “assimilated to that status” for constitutional purposes.
 Therefore, the Attorney General may exclude Mezei without a hearing, as authorized by the emergency regulations under the Passport Act, need not disclose the evidence upon which the determination rests.
 Mezei’s continued detention on Ellis Island does not deprive him of any statutory or constitutional right.
 Mezei’s right to enter the United States depends solely on congressional will; the courts cannot substitute their judgment for the legislative mandate.
The major holdings in this case include treating Mezei, a noncitizen resident of the U.S. for 25 years, no differently than a noncitizen seeking admission for the first time,Parker, Kunal M. “Making Foreigners: Immigration and Citizenship Law in America, 1600-2000”, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015, , p. 206 that Mezei’s continued and possibly indefinite exclusion on Ellis Island does not deprive him of any statutory or constitutional right, and that Mezei’s exclusion is a fundamental sovereign attribute dependent on congressional will and largely immune from the courts.McDonough, Conor. “Mezei’s Day in Court: Debtors’ Prisons, Substance Abuse, and the Permissiveness of Civil Detention in American Immigration Law”, Northwestern University Law Review 114, no. 6, 2020, p. 1642-1643
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Clark gave the opinion of the Court. Justice Clark reaffirmed the right for the government to exclude Ignatz Mezei as a fundamental sovereign attribute exercised by the Government’s political departments largely immune from judicial control, citing the precedent cases of The Chinese Exclusion Case, Fong Yue Ting v. United States, Knauff v. Shaughnessey, and Harisiades v. Shaughnessey."U.S. Reports: Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei, 345 U.S. 206. 1953", Library of Congress, p. 210 Due to the plenary power of the legislature in immigration, Mezei was lawfully excluded under the expressed authority of Congress, authorizing the president to impose additional restrictions on noncitizen entry under the Passport Act."U.S. Reports: Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei, 345 U.S. 206. 1953", Library of Congress, p. 210 The Passport Act, originally enacted in 1918, authorized the additional restrictions on the entry or exit of noncitizens during periods of international tension or strife. The international tension or strife that authorized the exclusion of Mezei was the post-World War II Red Scare (1947–1957). Under the Passport Act, the Court held that the Attorney General made the necessary decision to exclude Mezei from entering the United States without a hearing due to Mezei’s entry being prejudicial to the public interest."U.S. Reports: Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei, 345 U.S. 206. 1953", Library of Congress, p. 214
Regarding the 25 years that Ignatz Mezei was a resident noncitizen of the United States, the Court held that neither Mezei’s harborage on Ellis Island nor his prior residence here grants Mezei anything except an exclusion hearing. Justice Clark found that Mezei left the United States without any authorization or reentry papers and remained “behind the Iron Curtain” for 19 months."U.S. Reports: Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei, 345 U.S. 206. 1953", Library of Congress, p. 214 Therefore, the Court held that the status of Mezei is that of newly arrived noncitizens or “assimilated to that status” for constitutional purposes."U.S. Reports: Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei, 345 U.S. 206. 1953", Library of Congress, p. 214
Due to the Court finding that Ignatz Mezei’s release into the United States would be prejudicial to the public interest, his continued exclusion on Ellis Island is a pressing issue. The Court reaffirmed Congress’s meticulously specified statute shelter ashore the U.S., including Ellis Island, is not considered a landing and, therefore, grants no additional rights or protections."U.S. Reports: Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei, 345 U.S. 206. 1953", Library of Congress, p. 215 Thus, the Court will treat him as if he had been stopped at the border for constitutional purposes, he can be turned back at the border with nothing more.McDonough, Conor. “Mezei’s Day in Court: Debtors’ Prisons, Substance Abuse, and the Permissiveness of Civil Detention in American Immigration Law”, Northwestern University Law Review 114, no. 6, 2020, p. 1644 In this final holding, the Court stated that Ignatz Mezei’s continued exclusion on Ellis Island does not deprive him of any statutory or constitutional right."U.S. Reports: Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei, 345 U.S. 206. 1953", Library of Congress, p. 215
 Dissents 
In the narrow five to four decision, four Justices join the dissenting opinion. Justice Black, with whom Justice Douglas concurs, emphasizes that Ignatz Mezei’s continued imprisonment without a hearing violated due process of the law."U.S. Reports: Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei, 345 U.S. 206. 1953", Library of Congress, p. 217 In this case, due process has been violated because “neither the federal police nor the federal prosecutors nor any other governmental official, whatever his title, can put or keep people in prison without accountability to courts of justice.”"U.S. Reports: Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei, 345 U.S. 206. 1953", Library of Congress, p. 218 Therefore, the dissenters hold that Mezei has been deprived of his individual liberty indefinitely due to the denial of a fair open court hearing where the evidence is evaluated by the court, not the prosecutor."U.S. Reports: Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei, 345 U.S. 206. 1953", Library of Congress, p. 218
The final two dissenters, Justice Jackson joined by Justice Frankfurter, further emphasize Ignatz Mezei’s denial of liberty and expand on the denial of due process of the law."U.S. Reports: Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei, 345 U.S. 206. 1953", Library of Congress, p. 221 The federal government states that Mezei was not denied liberty or due process because his imprisonment was simply exclusion from the United States and he could depart to another country at any time. The dissenter's response to this claim was, “That might mean freedom, if only he were an amphibian!”"U.S. Reports: Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei, 345 U.S. 206. 1953", Library of Congress, p. 220 In their opinion, Mezei was unjustly incarcerated and effectively kept as a prisoner by the forces of U.S. immigration authority."U.S. Reports: Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei, 345 U.S. 206. 1953", Library of Congress, p. 220 Although, Justice Jackson and Justice Frankfurter were cautious in saying that the concept of due process does not forbid all preventative detention of potentially dangerous noncitizens."U.S. Reports: Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei, 345 U.S. 206. 1953", Library of Congress, p. 223 Expanding on this point, the dissenters stated that in situations where indefinite confinement becomes the means to enforcing exclusion, such as in Mezei’s case, due process of the law requires the noncitizen to have a fair open court hearing where transparency is given on the charges against the individual."U.S. Reports: Shaughnessy v. United States ex rel Mezei, 345 U.S. 206. 1953", Library of Congress, p. 227
 References 
Category:1953 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
"""

From "Shaw v. Murphy" ==> """
Shaw v. Murphy, 532 U.S. 223 (2001), is a decision of the United States Supreme Court rejecting the First Amendment right of prisoners to provide legal assistance to other prisoners..
 Background 
While incarcerated, Murphy learned that a fellow prisoner was charged with assaulting a correctional officer. Murphy authored a letter to the accused prisoner offering legal assistance in his defense. The letter was intercepted pursuant to prison regulations and was reviewed, at which point Murphy was sanctioned for violating the prison's rule against interference in due process hearing. 
Procedural history
Murphy sought declaratory and injunctive relief from the district court, which applied the Supreme Court precedent from Turner v. Safley,. and ruled against the petitioner. On appeal, the Ninth Circuit reversed the decision. The Supreme Court granted certiorari..
 Opinion of the Court 
Writing for a unanimous Court, Justice Clarence Thomas found that the district court had correctly applied the Turner standard, which upheld regulatory impingements on the constitutional rights of prisoners where the regulation is reasonably related to a legitimate penological interest. Under Turner, prisoner communication may be monitored and regulated, and the content of the communication (i.e., the legal advice) makes no difference in the assessment of the legality of the regulation.
 Ginsburg's concurrence 
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg noted in her concurrence that the respondent argued on appeal before the Ninth Circuit that the regulation under which he was charged was vague and overbroad. Because the Ninth Circuit did not rule on the merits of that argument, Ginsburg argued that the remand for which the Court provided should not impede Murphy's ability to raise the issue of vagueness and overbreadth again.
References
External links
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2001 in United States case law
"""

From "Shaw v. Reno" ==> """
thumb|250px|Shaw v. Reno revolved around claims that North Carolina's 12th congressional district (pictured) was affirmatively racially gerrymandered.
Shaw v. Reno, 509 U.S. 630 (1993), was a landmark United States Supreme Court case in the area of redistricting and racial gerrymandering. After the 1990 census, North Carolina qualified to have a 12th district and drew it in a distinct snake-like manner in order to create a “majority-minority” Black district. From there, Ruth O. Shaw sued this proposed plan with the argument that this 12th district was unconstitutional and violated the Fourteenth Amendment under the clause of equal protection. In contrast, Reno, the Attorney General, argued that the district would allow for minority groups to have a voice in elections. In the decision, the court ruled in a 5–4 majority that redistricting based on race must be held to a standard of strict scrutiny under the equal protection clause and on the basis that it violated the fourteenth Amendment because it was drawn solely based on race.
Shaw v. Reno was an influential case and received backlash. Some southern states filed against majority-Black districts. This decision played a role in deciding many future cases, including Bush v. Vera and Miller v. Johnson. However, the phrasing of irregularly drawn districts has left room for much interpretation, letting judges use their opinions rather than relying on Shaw.
 History 
Gerrymandering
To contextualize the Shaw supreme court case, gerrymandering is the redrawing of electoral districts to help give a political advantage. Through this process, political parties can draw the boundaries of districts to favor their party's candidate as they allow for extra seats to be won. The census marks when states can redraw their congressional district lines and in accordance with the Voting Rights Act of 1965, districts must be redrawn equally populated. With new technology and tactics of packing and cracking, gerrymandering has become easier through the years but within gerrymandering, limitations exist. Gerrymandering has come before the Supreme Court in multiple cases but in Shaw, racial gerrymandering refers to Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act. Section 2 of this act opposes using discriminatory voting practices in the election process and that in itself prohibits gerrymandering based on race.
Racial Background
In 1870, following the Civil war and the abolishment of slavery, the 15th amendment was passed, giving all United States citizens the right to vote regardless of race, color, or previous conditions of servitude. This amendment ensured the voting rights of African Americans. However, after its enactment, many southern states began implementing new ways to bar African Americans from voting. Some of these methods included poll taxes, which many could not afford, literacy tests, that many could not pass, and grandfather clauses, which stated that one can only vote if their grandfather voted. This changed  with the passing of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which outlawed these racially discriminatory practices and required government supervision for states that had less than 50 percent of non-White citizens registered to vote. If any state wanted to change any voting rules, they had to receive pre-clearance to ensure no new rule was racist. The Voting Rights Act prohibited many of the tactics that hindered Black voters from getting their voices heard. This was due to the establishment of the Fourteenth Amendment, which granted citizenship and equal rights to all African-Americans. The law of redistricting had to comply with this act in order for the minority group to have impact in the U.S. government. In addition, any affected American citizen that felt that they are being affected by the Voting Rights Act can file a lawsuit stating that it violates Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act which led rise to the case. However, racial gerrymandering continued past 1965 because it is extremely difficult to prove if districts were drawn on the basis of racial discrimination. This was apparent in the Thornburgh V. Gingles case of 1986 in which Black citizens of North Carolina argued that all white-majority districts were drawn up so a Black representative wouldn't get elected. In this unanimous decision, it was decided that districts did indeed dilute Black votes and therefore did violate the Voting Rights Act.
 Case Background 
Janet Reno (appellant) was the 78th Attorney General, appointed by President Clinton.
Ruth O. Shaw (appellee) was a white Democratic resident of the 12th district in North Carolina.
After the 1990 census, the North Carolina General Assembly was entitled to a 12th seat in the U.S. House of Representatives and redrew its congressional districts to account for the changes in population. This district would be North Carolina's second "majority-minority" district of majority Black voters. The North Carolina General Assembly submitted the plan to the U.S. Attorney General for preclearance under the Voting Rights Act, but it was rejected by the US Department of Justice which was led by Attorney General Janet Reno. Attorney General Janet Reno instructed the North Carolina state assembly to add another majority-minority district in order to comply with the recent amendments to the Voting Rights Act. In 1982, the Voting Rights Act was amended to target the decrease in a specific minority's ability to ever gain a voting majority. The state revised its map and submitted a new plan, this one with two majority-minority districts. The proposed 12th district was 160 miles (260 km) long, winding through the state to connect various areas having in common only a large Black population and cut through five counties which split into three voting districts. The new district was described in Supreme Court's opinion as "snake-like."
After the General Assembly passed legislation creating the second district, a group of White voters in North Carolina, led by Ruth O. Shaw, sued on the grounds that the district was an unconstitutional gerrymander. Shaw's group claimed that drawing districts based on race violated the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
The Voting Rights Act of 1965 lead to the rise of the Shaw v. Reno court case which allowed for more representation of the Black (minority) representation in the state of North Carolina. However, five White residents of North Carolina, opposed against the redrawing because of the oddly shaped district in which they also stated it violated their Equal Protection Rights. This case was unlike others since the Voting Right Act, because it now didn't hinder the redistricting and impediment of the minority groups. Now the claim was whether making a district based on race was racially adequate and fair for everyone.
An essential case, repeatedly referred to throughout the Shaw v. Reno case was the United Jewish Organizations of Williamsburg V. Carey case. A federal District Court dismissed a lawsuit by North Carolina voters on the grounds that they had no claim for relief under a standard set by the previous Supreme Court case, United Jewish Organizations of Williamsburgh v. Carey. With a 7-1 decision the court ruled in favor of Carey, the respondent. The United Jewish Organizations of Williamsburg claimed that the plan violated their constitutional rights because the districts had been assigned solely on a racial basis. The court found that the reapportionment plan was valid under the Constitution as the Fourteenth and the Fifteenth Amendment do not prohibit the use of racial factors in districting and apportionment.
 Arguments 
 Shaw 
Shaw along with other five North Carolina residents filed an action against the state, declaring that the state had created an unconstitutional racial gerrymandering violating the Fourteenth Amendment. It was also argued that the racial gerrymandering hindered the voters from having a blind process of voting. This was a previous problem that discriminated against the minority voters however, the White residents thought it was hindering their voices racially. Then, the residents argued that the state had gone far this time by redrawing the district lines and creating a second district that was dominated by the minorities. Another argument that was made was the "snake-like" structure of the district and how it does not follow the reapportionment guidelines, which led to filling a lawsuit against both the state and federal government for political gerrymandering.
 Reno 
Reno, the Attorney General, argued that the creation of the second district was necessary in order to follow the request of the General Assembly that required them to abide by the Voting Right Act of 1965, which would increase the representation of the minority groups and allow them to have more of a voice when voting. This was to designed to prevent any discrimination by race and North Carolina thought this plan was completely aligned with the request of the General Assembly guidelines. It included that the Supreme Court of the United States and the federal government that allowed states to find any possible way to comply to the Voting Rights Act of 1965, even if it meant having a strangely structured district like this one which Reno argued against.
Decision
Majority opinion
In a 5-4 decision the courts ruled in favor of Shaw (the petitioner), finding that it was, in fact, unlawful to gerrymander on the basis of race. Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote the majority opinion in which she explains the court's ruling. In it, she writes that the court found that the shape of North Carolina's 12th district was so “bizarre” that the only reasonable explanation was that it had been drawn on the basis of race. The courts also noted that based on the Voting Rights Act, race can be taken into account when redistricting plans are made, but it cannot be the sole factor when drawing a new district because that would violate the fourteenth amendment. Therefore, such redistricting was held unconstitutional since it found intention to segregate voters by race and this segregation cannot be justified under a standard of strict scrutiny.“Racial gerrymandering even for remedial purposes, may balkanize us into competing racial factions; it threatens to carry us further from the goal of a political system in which race no longer matters-a goal that the Fourteen and Fifteenth Amendments embody, and to which the Nation continues to aspire.” -Shaw, 509 U.S. at 657Additionally, it was noted that allowing the 12th district to be drawn in that manner would be setting a dangerous precedent in our democratic system in which we are attempting to reach equality. “Racial classifications of any sort pose the risk of lasting harm to our society. They reinforce the belief, held by too many for too much of our history, that individuals should be judged by the color of their skin” -Shaw, 509 U.S. at 657
Dissents
The dissenting opinion by Justice White held that Shaw failed to present cognizable harm or that for Shaw to bring this case there had to have been harm done to them one way or another and that this failed to be presented in court. Additionally, he noted the voting interests of those who brought the case had not been violated. He also stated that drawing districts on the basis of race could prove to be beneficial for minority communities.
The dissenting opinions from Justice Blackmun and Stevens also brought many of the same points as White and they also added that the purpose of the equal protection clause was only to protect those who have been historically discriminated against. Therefore, it should not apply to the White voters who brought this case.
Justice Souter noted the arbitrary nature of the strict scrutiny applied in this case. He detailed that the 12th district was ultimately drawn to benefit a minority group hence making the strict scrutiny applied to feel unreasonable.“The difference between constitutional and unconstitutional gerrymanders has nothing to do with whether they are based on assumptions about the groups they affect, but whether their purpose is to enhance the power of the group in control of the districting process at the expense of any minority group, and thereby to strengthen the unequal distribution of electoral power.” - Shaw, 509 U.S. at 678
 Aftermath 
 Impact 
While Shaw intended to construct limitations on using race to gerrymander districts, it fell short to live up to those expectations. The Shaw v. Reno decision led to different interpretations as questions were left unanswered. The result of Shaw led to a mixed reaction and, soon after, lawsuits were filed against majority-Black districts in some southern states such as Florida, Georgia, and Louisiana. Shaw also does not add or address the criteria needed for creating districts. "Highly irregular" districts are called into question but Shaw does not unpack what that means. The impact of Shaw goes far beyond the case decision and has since paved the wave for future Supreme Court cases. Supreme Court cases, which build on Shaw, focus on majority-minority districts and try to answer if race can be used to redistrict districts. Grofman adds that he does not believe Shaw to be a game-changer, but he does emphasize that while their consequences might not be as far-reaching, its succeeding cases are. While Shaw failed to set clear criteria for gerrymandering, Shaw impacted the future of voting rights.The significance of the Shaw v. Reno decision is heavily debated but it is known that it had a lasting impact on how the Voting Rights Act was going to be enforced and the structure of the U.S. political system.
 Related Cases 
In the aftermath of the Shaw v. Reno decision, the Supreme Court reexamined the topic of racial gerrymandering in the other court cases. In Bush v. Vera, the state of Texas planned to add additional congressional districts after the 1990 census. These redistricting measures were found to be unconstitutional and in the decision of this case, Justice Sandra Day O'Connor referred back to her opinion from Shaw v. Reno. She noted that under the standard of "strict scrutiny", the districts were irregularly shaped and used race as a deciding factor. The redistricting plans of this case were overturned and the overall decision aligned with that of the Shaw case. Likewise, Miller v. Johnson is another case that was influenced by Shaw. In Miller v. Johnson, Georgia's racial gerrymandering was questioned to violate the Equal Protection Clause, as it aimed to create a majority-Black district. Justices looked to Shaw v. Reno for guidance as they ruled on the legality of racial gerrymandering. Using the Shaw v. Reno decision, the justices decided that using racial reasons for redistricting is unconstitutional. Since Georgia's General Assembly used “race for its own sake and not other districting principles,” their actions were rendered unconstitutional.
 Controversies 
There  have been controversies and misinterpretations associated with Shaw v. Reno. Shaw fails to give criteria for an irregular drawing. It is, therefore, unclear how to prove when a shape is bizarre enough to constitute a clear racial motive, making it hard for courts to decide on rulings. As a result, it is possible for courts to interpret Shaw differently. For example, a Georgia court ruled that a district of “average appearance” was invalidated, but North Carolina's snake-like shaped district which could be described as irregular was upheld. There are many discrepancies that each judge must take into account when using Shaw v. Reno as a precedent. In addition to being unclear, Shaw has the ability to disenfranchise minorities. In Reynold v. Sims, the phrase “people, not trees of pastures, vote” can be applied to Shaw, as people, not highways, vote. Despite this, voter rights are being controlled by district shapes in the redistricting process. Shaw v. Reno places a lot of importance on the actual lines drawn, rather than who they contain. This outlook has the potential to disenfranchise minorities, as courts may place more importance on the shape of the district, rather than the underrepresented people.
See also
 Wesberry v. Sanders, : Earlier Georgia congressional redistricting case
 Wright v. Rockefeller, 
 Miller v. Johnson, 
 Bush v. Vera, 
 Hunt v. Cromartie, 
 Easley v. Cromartie, 
 Georgia v. Ashcroft, :  Georgia State Senate redistricting case
 League of United Latin American Citizens v. Perry, 
 Alabama Legislative Black Caucus v. Alabama, 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 509
Further reading
Whitaker, L. Paige (April 13, 2015). "Congressional Redistricting and the Voting Rights Act: A Legal Overview". Congressional Research Service.
References
External links
 Google Scholar
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
Category:1993 in United States case law
Category:Gerrymandering in the United States
Category:Congressional districts of North Carolina
Category:African-American history of North Carolina
Category:Legal history of North Carolina
"""

From "Shaw v. United States" ==> """
Shaw v. United States, 580 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case that clarified the application of the federal bank fraud statute to cases where a defendant intends to only defraud a customer of the bank, rather than the bank itself.Shaw v. United States, No. 15–5991, 580 U.S. ___ (2016), slip. op. at 1. 
 Background 
Lawrence Shaw received the information from a bank account at Bank of America that belonged to a customer, Stanley Hsu. Shaw used that information to take money from Hsu but did not directly steal from the bank. Shaw was convicted under a federal statute criminalizing fraud against banks and appealed, arguing his target was its customer.
 Decision 
In a unanimous opinion written by Justice Stephen Breyer, the Court held that a scheme to defraud customers also deprives the bank of money in which the bank held a "property right", and criminal defendants may therefore be convicted under the federal statute for schemes to defraud bank customers.Shaw, slip. op. at 1-3. However, the Supreme Court remanded the case to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit to determine whether the trial court administered an erroneous jury instruction.Shaw, slip. op. at 8-9.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States banking case law
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:Bank of America
Category:Fraud in the United States
"""

From "Shearson/American Express Inc. v. McMahon" ==> """
Shearson/American Express Inc. v. McMahon, 482 U.S. 220 (1987), is a United States Supreme Court decision concerning arbitration of private securities fraud claims arising under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. By a 5–4 margin the Court held that its holding in a 1953 case, Wilko v. Swan, that the nonwaiver provisions of the Securities Act of 1933 prevented the mandatory arbitration of such claims, did not apply to claims under the 1934 Act due to differences in the corresponding language of the two statutes, reversing a decision of the Second Circuit Court of Appeals that had affirmed what had been considered settled law, despite the lack of a precedent. It likewise held that claims under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO) were arbitrable, affirming an order from the district court that the Second Circuit had also upheld.
The question of whether claims under the 1934 Act were likewise exempt from the Federal Arbitration Act had first been raised in a 1974 case, Scherk v. Alberto-Culver Inc.. At that time Potter Stewart had found them not relevant to the case and upheld the arbitration order on the grounds that the case involved an international dispute. They had resurfaced in the previous term, in Justice Byron White's concurrence in Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. v. Byrd. Lower courts began embracing White's analysis, eventually creating a conflict in the circuits on appeal.
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote the majority opinion, reiterating  and deepening White's analysis. Harry Blackmun dissented for himself and justices Brennan and Marshall, who had written for a unanimous Court in Byrd. John Paul Stevens wrote a separate dissent. Both of those dissents concurred in the holding that the RICO claims were arbitrable. On remand, the case remained unresolved for another three years. The district judge fined the McMahons' counsel for filing frivolous motions, sanctions which were reversed on appeal, setting another precedent.
McMahon greatly expanded the use of arbitration in securities disputes, since many of them take place under the 1934 Act, which regulates the secondary market in which most investors trade. It also signaled a greater acceptance of arbitration as a desirable and fair method of dispute resolution. This was cited by the Court three years later in Rodriguez de Quijas v. Shearson/American Express Inc., when it overturned Wilko completely and held that claims under the 1933 Act could also be arbitrated if the parties had clearly chosen to do so. The expansion in securities arbitration as a result led to reforms during the 1990s to make the process more investor-friendly.
Underlying dispute
In 1979, Eugene and Julia McMahon, who owned two funeral homes in Yonkers, New York, became friendly with Walter and Mary Ann McNulty, fellow parishioners at their church. Mrs. McNulty, a broker with what was then Shearson/American Express, persuaded Mrs. McMahon to invest not only their personal savings but also their employee's retirement and profit sharing funds with her company. Two years later, McNulty persuaded the McMahons to sign power of attorney forms allowing Shearson to make trades without their consent. Those standard form contracts contained an arbitration clause committing either party to use that method of resolving disputes.
By that time, they had invested over a half a million dollars with Shearson. The McMahons claimed that after they signed the power of attorney forms, McNulty began trading at a faster pace. The account statements they received in the mail showed at least three trades a day, sometimes as many as 50 a week. Most were in high-risk options, and the McMahons said they did not have sufficient financial sophistication to make sense of what was occurring. Eugene McMahon says his accountants could not, either.
However, they were able to see that their account was showing losses. McNulty reassured them, but their misgivings increased. When they closed the account early in 1983, it was nearly empty. Their trading losses reached $350,000 ($ in modern dollars) and commissions accounted for the rest.
Relations between the two couples collapsed. Mrs. McNulty filed a defamation lawsuit against Eugene McMahon alleging he had promised to destroy her reputation in revenge. In late 1984, the McMahons sued Shearson and McNulty in federal court for the Southern District of New York alleging the defendants had churned their account, or traded simply to generate commissions. They claimed violations of the regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) based on the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, often referred to as "the 1934 Act" by securities lawyers, and violations of the more recent Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO), along with violations of corresponding New York state laws. In addition to being reimbursed for their losses they sought $5 million in punitive damages.
Arbitration vs. litigation
The McMahons' suit was one of a rising number filed against brokers by disgruntled investors during a bull market. Many brokers felt, as McNulty and Shearson did about the McMahons, that clients expected ever-increasing returns and did not understand that these were just ordinary, unavoidable market losses. "The brokerage relationship is not a guarantee relationship or an insurance relationship," said Edward O'Brien, president of the Securities Industry Association. "You're not supposed to simply turn things over to someone else." They wanted arbitration clauses to be enforced so that they would spend less time and money defending lawsuits.
Juries, the brokerages felt, could not understand the complexities of securities trading and law as well as arbitrators with experience in the industry. They saw arbitration as cheaper, faster yet still fair. "[T]he industry person is often likely to bend over backward in favor of the customer," said Edward Morris, director of arbitration for the New York Stock Exchange. More than half the time, the industry said, arbitration panels ruled in the customer's favor.
Investors and their lawyers did not agree. "The houses basically like the present system because they own the stacked deck", said Sheldon Elsen, director of the American Bar Association's securities arbitration task force. "I would rather defend a capitalist before the comrades' court than a client before an arbitration panel of the New York Stock Exchange," said a Los Angeles lawyer who had, with his client, walked out of a hearing because of the conflicts of interest they believed panelists had.
They said the investors' victory rate was misleading as a measure of arbitration's effectiveness since they often merely reimbursed investors for their losses, most of which then went to pay legal bills, and did not include punitive damages such as a court might award that could deter future misconduct. Nor did investors arbitrating claims have access to the full range of procedures they would in court. They could not force the brokerage to produce evidence, and they often charged that the brokerages falsified or improperly withheld documents. Arbitrators also did not have to provide a written explanation for their decisions.
Applicability of Wilko to 1934 Act claims
In 1950, when a brokerage firm had tried to compel arbitration with an investor alleging his broker left him holding the bag in a pump and dump scheme, the case had gone all the way to the Supreme Court. In 1953 it had held in Wilko v. Swan that three provisions of the Securities Act of 1933 (or, the 1933 Act), which regulates the primary market in which securities issuers sell directly to buyers, were controlling, allowing investors to take their claims to court regardless of what contracts and the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA) said. It found that the language in the 1933 Act voiding any waiver of any provision of the statute was broad enough to cover arbitration clauses, and deduced congressional preference for the courts in language that allowed a special cause of action where the burden of proof was on the seller of the security to show that they were unaware of the dubious nature of the security sold, and allowed buyers to sue in any state or federal court of competent jurisdiction.Wilko v. Swan, .
Lower courts, when faced with similar attempts to force arbitration in claims under the 1934 Act, which regulates the secondary market where previously sold securities are resold and the vast majority of trades take place, held that Wilko applied to it as well since the language of the latter statute was similar. Several appellate circuits upheld this interpretation and it was never considered by the Supreme Court, until 1974. That year, in Scherk v. Alberto-Culver Co., a German company had sought to compel arbitration in a dispute with an Illinois company alleging it had misrepresented several trademarks prior to the sale.Scherk v. Alberto-Culver Co., 
Wilko had been part of the respondent's argument against arbitration, since the deal had also included some stock. During his majority opinion holding for the petitioner, Justice Potter Stewart noted that "a colorable argument could be made" that Wilko did not reach the 1934 Act due to differences in the corresponding sections of the statutes. The non-waiver provision was narrower, the private right of action only implied, and the 1934 Act only provided for federal jurisdiction. Stewart found those concerns irrelevant to the case, since it concerned an international transaction under which arbitration might be a better solution.Scherk at 513–14, Stewart, J.
The question had not been before the Court in Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. v. Byrd, the next time the Court had considered arbitration in a securities dispute, decided as the McMahons were filing their lawsuit. But Justice Byron White, who had joined William O. Douglas's Scherk dissent (which had not considered the "colorable argument") had devoted a short concurrence with the unanimous opinion to noting that it was still an open question.Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. v. Byrd, , 224–25, White, J., concurring. In the wake of the decision, many district court judges, and some on the appellate circuits, began following his analysis.Durrer, Michael; Enforcing Arbitration of Federal Securities Law Claims: The Effect of Dean Witter Reynolds, Inc. v. Byrd 28 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 335, 346–48 (1987).
In lower courts
Before trial began, Shearson filed for a motion to compel arbitration per the contract. District Judge Lloyd MacMahon granted it, citing the Supreme Court's recent holding in Byrd. Since it went against Second Circuit precedent, the order to arbitrate the 1934 Act claims was reversed on appeal by a panel from the circuit, while the order to arbitrate the RICO claims was affirmed.
District court
To counter the defense motion to compel arbitration, the McMahons relied on Wilko. In that 1953 case, the Supreme Court had held that the provisions of the Securities Act of 1933 invalidating any contractual requirement that a securities buyer waive rights under the statute, allowing for a special right to recover for misrepresentation and granting jurisdiction to all state and federal courts created an exception to the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA), which says that an arbitration clause "shall be valid, irrevocable, and enforceable, save upon such grounds as exist at law or in equity for the revocation of any contract". More specifically to the case, they argued that fraud was not arbitrable under the language of the arbitration clause, that their agreement with Shearson was an unenforceable adhesion contract and that McNulty's action in state court voided the arbitration clause.
MacMahon found their arguments "wholly unconvincing." There was no evidence of fraud in the inducement of the contract, and even if there had been the Prima Paint separability rule required that the arbitrator decide that question unless the fraud claim was specific to the arbitration clause itself, which was not the case in the McMahons' suit.Prima Paint Corp. v. Flood & Conklin Mfg. Co., , at 402–04. Fraud was also well within the scope of the arbitration clause, he wrote. Nor did the state action waive the arbitration clause since it largely concerned different issues and "that proceeding has no bearing on this action and certainly no effect on plaintiffs' agreement to arbitrate".McMahon v. Shearson/American Express Inc., at 387.
The applicability of the Wilko doctrine to 1934 Act claims, the judge wrote, "merits some discussion". Allegaert v. Perot had set precedent within the Second Circuit eight years earlier by making explicit what had long been taken as settled law in all federal courts. He further distinguished Allegaert from the instant case by noting that Allegaert had involved industrywide allegations of massive fraud, and thus there was a public policy reason to prefer litigation, whereas McMahon was between one brokerage firm and one client. Combined with the Court's declaration two years earlier in Moses H. Cone Memorial Hospital v. Mercury Constr. Corp. that the FAA enacted "a liberal federal policy favoring arbitration agreements, notwithstanding any state substantive or procedural policies to the contrary,"Moses H. Cone Memorial Hospital v. Mercury Constr. Corp.,  24, Brennan, J. MacMahon followed the lead of district courts in other circuits and ordered the parties to arbitrate per their contract. He further held that the RICO claims were non-arbitrable, but stayed them pending the outcome of arbitration. Following Byrd, he also required arbitration of the McMahons' claims under state law.McMahon v. Shearson/American Express Inc., at 387-89.
Appeals court
Both parties appealed to the Second Circuit. The McMahons sought to reverse the order to arbitrate the 1934 Act claims, and Shearson sought to have the RICO claims arbitrated as well. In early 1986 a panel composed of the circuit's then-chief judge, Wilfred Feinberg, Jon O. Newman, and William Homer Timbers heard oral arguments. They held for the McMahons on both issues, reversing Judge MacMahon on the arbitration order and thus ordering that the RICO claims proceed since there was no longer any reason to stay them.
Writing for the panel, Timbers called MacMahon's holding that the 1934 Act claims were arbitrable "an unwarranted departure from the settled law of this Circuit" and reviewed Allegaert and the other cases that had established that.Colonial Realty Co. v. Bache & Co., 358 F.2d 178 (2d Cir. 1966); Greater Continental Corp. v. Schechter, 422 F.2d 1100 (2d Cir. 1970) and 
 He reiterated that they expressed a belief that litigation better protected investors' rights, and only in cases of disputes between member firms of the exchanges had the Circuit allowed arbitration to proceed.Coenen v. RW Pressprich & Co., 453 F.2d 1209 (2d Cir. 1972) and 
Shearson had asked the court to overrule those precedents in its briefs and arguments, citing White's Byrd concurrence, but Timbers demurred. While he allowed that the Supreme Court might accept that argument, "it would be improvident for us to disregard clear judicial precedent in this Circuit based on mere speculation," he wrote. "We think that the orderly administration of justice will be best served if we as one of the inferior courts follow Supreme Court precedent and adhere to the settled law of this Circuit, and a fortiori the district courts should do likewise."McMahon, at 96–98. At the end of his opinion he said in a footnote that it would have been easier to decide the issue if the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) had submitted an amicus curiae brief giving its perspective on arbitration.McMahon, at 99n8.
The RICO claims were likewise non-arbitrable, Timbers held. He cited two reasons. First was the public-policy doctrine he had invoked earlier, adding that circuit precedent held claims under the Sherman Antitrust Act non-arbitrableAmerican Safety Equipment Corp. v. J.P. Maguire, 391 F.2d 821 (2nd Cir., 1968). because that statute was "designed to promote the national interest in a competitive economy." He distinguished it from Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler Chrysler-Plymouth, Inc.Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler Chrysler-Plymouth, Inc., . the previous year, where the Supreme Court had ordered arbitration of Sherman Act claims, because that case involved international litigants and arbitration was a more efficient way of resolving disputes across borders. Also, since RICO was fairly new legislation, it was important that it be interpreted and applied in a public judicial forum, where legal precedents could be set and appealed.McMahon, at 98–99.
On one final issue the panel affirmed MacMahon. Citing Byrd, it held that the state-law claims were arbitrable even if it bifurcated the proceedings. In a footnote, Timbers suggested that the McMahons might consider withdrawing their state-law claim in the interest of efficiency.McMahon, at 99n7.
Supreme Court
Shearson appealed to the Supreme Court, and certiorari was granted before the end of the year.  The Court heard oral arguments in March 1987. Theodore Krebsbach appeared for Shearson, joined by Richard Taranto from the Solicitor General's office, urging reversal on behalf of the federal government. The McMahons were represented by Theodore Eppenstain, who with his wife and partner Madelaine had been highly visible in the media on their behalf.
While the case was pending, the SEC filed an amicus brief softening previous concerns it had expressed about arbitration and saying those procedures had improved since Wilko. Two amici briefs were filed urging affirmance. Amici urging reversal were filed by 20 different brokerage firms.
Decision
Near the end of its term, in June 1987, the Court announced its decision. By a 5–4 margin it ruled for Shearson, holding that Wilko did not cover claims under the 1934 Act and that the RICO claims, too, were to be arbitrated. Sandra Day O'Connor wrote for the majority. Harry Blackmun wrote an opinion that concurred with the RICO holding but dissented from the 1934 Act holding, joined by William Brennan and Thurgood Marshall, who had written for the Court in Byrd. John Paul Stevens wrote a separate opinion along the same lines.Shearson/American Express Inc. v. McMahon, 
Majority
After recounting the history of the case, O'Connor set forth the Court's reasoning. The nonwaiver language in the 1933 Act had forbidden the waiver of "any provision" of the statute, whereas the 1934 Act only prohibited waiver of "compliance with any provision". Since the federal court jurisdiction granted elsewhere in the 1934 Act, another of the three foundations of the McMahons' argument, was not a duty with which investors and brokers had to comply, it was not affected by the nonwaiver provision.Shearson at 227–28, O'Connor, J.
Wilkos holding that the right to litigate could not be waived, O'Connor continued, "can only be understood in the context of the Court's ensuing discussion explaining why arbitration was inadequate as a means of enforcing 'the provisions of the Securities Act, advantageous to the buyer' ... The conclusion in Wilko was expressly based on the Court's belief that a judicial forum was needed to protect the substantive rights created by the Securities Act." The Court's pro-arbitration holding in Scherk, she wrote, "supports our understanding that Wilko must be read as barring waiver of a judicial forum only where arbitration is inadequate to protect the substantive rights at issue."Shearson at 228–29.
O'Connor rejected as well the McMahons' contention that the involuntary, adhesive nature of the arbitration agreement made it unenforceable, since that was not relevant to the statute. In rejecting the McMahons' next argument, that arbitration would not sufficiently protect their rights, she conceded that that concern had been central to the Court's holding in Wilko. But, she noted, Justice Felix Frankfurter's dissent had criticized the majority for so holding without any facts in the record supporting that conclusion. More recent decisions of both the Supreme Court and lower courts had indicated a growing acceptance of arbitration and improved procedural safeguards, especially as mandated by the SEC. "[T]he mistrust of arbitration that formed the basis for the Wilko opinion in 1953 is difficult to square with the assessment of arbitration that has prevailed since that time," she concluded.Shearson at 229–34.
The last argument she considered was that Congress had intended the 1934 Act to be interpreted consistently with Wilko. An extensive overhaul of the 1934 Act passed in 1975, the McMahons claimed, included the language "Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to modify existing law" and in any event did not change the relevant language. They pointed to a conference committee report on that section stating that "it was the clear understanding of the conferees that this amendment did not change existing law, as articulated in Wilko v. Swan."Shearson at 234–38.
"We find this argument fraught with difficulties." O'Connor responded. "We cannot see how Congress could extend Wilko to the Exchange Act without enacting into law any provision remotely addressing that subject." The passage and amendment discussed in the conference report were specifically intended to assure that the self-regulatory organizations of the securities industry, such as the exchanges and what was then the National Association of Securities Dealers, had legal authority to enforce disciplinary rulings against their members made by their own arbitration panels. In fact, she proposed, Congress may well have been aware of the Scherk ruling the year before and avoided the issue specifically with the intent of leaving it to the courts.
O'Connor then considered the RICO claims. "Unlike the Exchange Act, there is nothing in the text of the RICO statute that even arguably evinces congressional intent to exclude civil RICO claims from the dictates of the Arbitration Act," she observed. "This silence in the text is matched by silence in the statute's legislative history." Because of this, the McMahons would have had to show "an irreconcilable conflict between arbitration and RICO's underlying purposes." To this end, it was suggested that the case was too complex for arbitration or, as the Second Circuit had, that there were public policy considerations behind the statute.Shearson at 238–42.
Many of those arguments had already been addressed by the Court in Mitsubishi Motors the previous year. There, O'Connor noted, the Court had enforced an arbitration agreement in an international transaction regarding antitrust claims. If those were not too complex to be arbitrated, securities claims were not, either.
The McMahons further contended that the overlapping civil and criminal provisions in RICO rendered that statute unarbitrable. O'Connor disagreed, noting that most RICO civil cases were not being brought against genuinely criminal organizations but legitimate businesses.
"The McMahons," she concluded, "'having made the bargain to arbitrate,' will be held to their bargain."
Dissents
Blackmun concurred with the majority on the RICO issue. He devoted the rest of his lengthy dissent to a detailed criticism of the majority. By deferring to the SEC's change of position on the effectiveness of arbitration, he charged, "the Court effectively overrules Wilko ... [approving] the abandonment of the judiciary's role in the resolution of claims under the Exchange Act, and leave[ing] such claims to the arbitral forum of the securities industry at a time when the industry's abuses towards investors are more apparent than ever."Shearson, at 243, Blackmun, J., dissenting.
"At the outset", he wrote, "it is useful to review the manner by which the issue decided today has been kept alive inappropriately by this Court." He relegated his discussion of and response to Stewart's "colorable argument" to his footnotesShearson at 244n1, 245n2. since the majority had not, he claimed, relied on it and in any event "[i]t simply constituted a way of keeping the issue of the arbitrability of [1934 Act] claims alive for those opposed to the result in Wilko." Of greater relevance was Congress's refusal to address Wilko during the process of drafting and passing the 1975 amendments. "One would have thought that, after these amendments, the matter of Wilko'''s extension to Exchange Act claims at last would be uncontroversial," he wrote. "Yet, like a ghost reluctant to accept its eternal rest, the 'colorable argument' surfaced again" in White's Byrd concurrence.Shearson, at 243–48.
He focused his criticism on the Court's reading of Wilko:
Blackmun agreed with the majority that a possible exemption to the FAA must be supported by a finding of Congressional intent. "Where the Court first goes wrong, however, is in its failure to acknowledge that the Exchange Act, like the Securities Act, constitutes such an exception," he wrote. "This failure is made possible only by the unduly narrow reading of Wilko that ignores the Court's determination there that the Securities Act was an exception to the Arbitration Act." He found this particularly surprising given that it had relied on Wilko in Mitsubishi Motors to support exactly the same conclusion.
Even absent that recent reaffirmance, Wilko would have made the same point on its own. "The Court's misreading is possible because, while extolling the policies of the Arbitration Act, it is insensitive to, and disregards the policies of, the Securities Act." Blackmun reminded his colleagues that it was passed eight years after the FAA specifically meant to protect investors in the wake of abuses uncovered after the 1929 stock market crash that, many believed at the time, had brought on the Great Depression. Its primary policy goal had been investor protection. "Accordingly, the Court seriously errs when it states that the result in Wilko turned only on the perceived inadequacy of arbitration for the enforcement of [1933 Act] claims" since that had been preceded by a lengthy reiteration of the purposes of the statute, which then led to whether mandatory arbitration served those purposes. Nor had Scherk led to a re-examination of the question as the majority had suggested, since the case was distinguished from Wilko by its international nature, a special circumstance.Shearson, at 251–54.
"In light of a proper reading of Wilko," Blackmun wrote, "the pertinent question then becomes whether the language, legislative history, and purposes of the Exchange Act call for an exception to the Arbitration Act for ... claims [under the former]." While the 1933 and 1934 Acts governed different markets, they shared investor protection as a common goal, as the Court itself had recognized in Ernst & Ernst v. HochfelderErnst & Ernst v. Hochfelder, . and held even more recently was to be promoted to the maximum extent possible.Herman & MacLean & Huddleston, , at 384, Marshall, J. "It is clear that Wilko, when properly read, governs the instant case and mandates that a pre-dispute arbitration agreement should not be enforced as to [1934 Act] claims."Shearson, at 254–56.
And even if the effectiveness of arbitration had been the central issue in Wilko, Blackmun continued, the goal of investor protection still required that holding. "Despite improvements in the process of arbitration and changes in the judicial attitude towards it, several aspects of arbitration that were seen by the Wilko court to be inimical to the policy of investor protection still remain. Moreover, I have serious reservations about the [SEC]'s contention that its oversight of the SROs' arbitration procedures will ensure that the process is adequate to protect an investor's rights under the securities Acts."Shearson, at 256–58.
In Wilko, the court had noted that arbitrators were not required to explain their decisions nor keep a complete written record. Further, the FAA gave only four grounds under which judges could vacate an arbitrator's award (fraud in procuring the award, partiality or gross misconduct by arbitrators, and arbitrators' failure to make a final decision). Judges could only consider "manifest disregard" for the law in their review of arbitrators' handling of the case.
Blackmun conceded that arbitration procedures had improved since then, citing specifically the SEC's development of code governing the process, with industry and public input. But "[e]ven those who favor the arbitration of securities claims do not contend, however, that arbitration has changed so significantly as to eliminate the essential characteristics noted by the Wilko Court," he wrote. "Indeed, proponents of arbitration would not see these characteristics as 'problems,' because, in their view, the characteristics permit the unique 'streamlined' nature of the arbitral process." Arbitrators were still not required to keep records or follow legal precedent, and were discouraged from explaining their decisions. Nor had the scope of judicial review of arbitral awards been expanded since Wilko, he observed.Shearson, at 258–61.
More than any procedural improvements in arbitration, Blackmun continued, it was "the Court's present assumption that the distinctive features of arbitration, its more quick and economical resolution of claims, do not render it inherently inadequate for the resolution of statutory claims" that was spurring an increased acceptance of the process. "Such reasoning, however, should prevail only in the absence of the congressional policy that places the statutory claimant in a special position with respect to possible violators of his statutory rights." He did not see that reflected in the current securities-industry arbitration procedures, in which at best the two parties were on equal footing. At worst, which he felt to be more frequently the case, the brokerages had the upper hand:
Blackmun was incredulous that the majority gave such great weight to the SEC's change of position, without noting that it was a change, and a very recent one at that. The agency's current power, he wrote, would not be enough to adequately regulate arbitration. "It is most questionable, then, whether the Commission's recently adopted position is entitled to the deference that the Court accords it."Shearson, at 261–66.
Even after the 1975 amendments that had reassured the majority as to the SEC's ability to properly oversee arbitration, Blackmun noted, it had continued to express a negative view of the process. At one point it proposed a rule prohibiting mandatory arbitration. Its own description of its powers over arbitration belied the majority's faith in the agency, he wrote.
"[T]he Court's complacent acceptance of the Commission's oversight is alarming when almost every day brings another example of illegality on Wall Street," wrote Blackmun. While many of those examples, he conceded, did not involve arbitrable disputes between brokers and clients such as the McMahons,
In the last section of his dissent Blackmun found some prospect for relief. Rep. John Dingell of Michigan, then chair of the House Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, had had similar concerns and was surprised to hear the SEC take the opposite position in its amicus brief from what its representatives had consistently told his subcommittee. He advised lower courts to "take seriously their duty to review the results of arbitration to the extent possible under the Arbitration Act." In fact, he concluded, he foresaw more investors bringing such complaints to their attention. "It is thus ironic that the Court's decision, no doubt animated by its desire to rid the federal courts of these suits, actually may increase litigation about arbitration."Shearson, at 266–68.
Stevens' short dissent reminded his colleagues that "after a statute has been construed, either by this Court or by a consistent course of decision by other federal judges and agencies, it acquires a meaning that should be as clear as if the judicial gloss had been drafted by the Congress itself." That was what the Court had done in Wilko, and eight circuits had held that case applicable to the 1934 Act. "This longstanding interpretation creates a strong presumption, in my view, that any mistake that the courts may have made in interpreting the statute is best remedied by the legislative, not the judicial, branch." He, too, concurred with the majority and Blackmun in regard to the RICO claims' arbitrability.Shearson, at 268–69, Stevens, J., dissenting.
Subsequent proceedings
The case was remanded to the Second Circuit and then back to district court, where it was assumed to have been disposed through arbitration. However, procedural disputes stalled resolution of the case for two years, requiring another hearing before Judge MacMahon. Sanctions imposed against Eppenstein were reversed on appeal.
District court sanctions plaintiffs' counsel
In a 1988 status conference, it surfaced in that the parties had not resolved a disagreement about whether a separate court order was necessary for the arbitration to commence. MacMahon issued a stipulation to that effect, but the parties were back before him a month later. It turned out that the order had not specified the forum under which the arbitration was to take place. While the original contract had specified the NYSE, the McMahons responded to the order with a motion in state court to enjoin the arbitration and instead allow them to arbitrate the case before the American Arbitration Association (AAA), per the rules of the American Stock Exchange, instead.
The McMahons offered three reasons why the original notice of intent to arbitrate was not valid. First, the original litigation was still pending in 1985 when it had been issued; second, the notice was defective under the New York State Civil Practice Law and Rules and finally that the court's recent stipulation allowed the plaintiff to choose their forum. MacMahon prefaced his discussion with a quote from O'Connor's opinion in the case, bolstering his reminder that "arbitration is strictly a creature of contract ... The method agreed upon by the parties for naming an arbitrator is explicit and unambiguous and therefore must be given controlling effect."McMahon, at 372.
Turning to the plaintiffs' arguments, he wrote, "these contentions are frivolous, and flaunt the agreement, the Arbitration Act, and the mandate of the Supreme Court." The 1985 notice was proper because according to the agreement the requirement to arbitrate was triggered by the mere occurrence of a controversy, not any formal proceedings. "The pendency of an action does not stay arbitration, but instead forces a demand and application by defendants to compel arbitration and to stay the trial pending arbitration ... Plaintiffs' imposition of such a condition without an order staying the arbitration and preserving the exercise of the right to select an arbitrator, was simply a unilateral, futile, and legally unjustifiable attempt to change the terms of the agreement."McMahon, at 373.
Had a stay been in effect, he suggested, the first argument might have been legitimate. But it wasn't, and MacMahon cited Eppenstein's letter responding to the arbitration notice as indicated his own awareness of this requirement. The attorney had apparently believed he would prevail in court. "His mistaken prediction, however well founded, was not a preservation of plaintiffs' right to choose the forum." MacMahon wrote. "On the contrary, his reliance on his own misjudgment was a voluntary and knowing waiver of plaintiffs' right to choose the forum under both federal and state law."McMahon, at 373.
Nor had the notice failed to comply with the state statutes. It had the address of the defendants and their attorney, a statement of what was to be arbitrated and why, and notice that the plaintiffs had 20 days to seek a stay or they would lose all right to challenge the arbitrability of the dispute. MacMahon found that all these elements were present.McMahon, at 374.
MacMahon reserved his greatest scorn for the last argument, where he expressed his opinion that Eppenstein had deliberately misinterpreted his order to delay proceedings. "There is nothing on the face of the stipulated order naming an arbitration forum different from the one already named by defendants in accordance with the agreement", he observed. "All it did was order plaintiffs to commence arbitration, something they already had been ordered to do." While Shearson's attorneys had argued against issuing the order, they had not formally objected to it, he noted.McMahon, at 374.
At best, he continued, Eppenstein had been in error in maintaining that arbitration proceedings were stayed absent a final order by the court to that effect. When MacMahon had signed the initial stipulation he had not been aware the forum-selection issue had not been resolved. Eppenstain's subsequent actions made it clear to MacMahon that the lawyer was aware of that. "The action of plaintiffs' counsel was a blatant evasion of our ongoing jurisdiction and a misleading interpretation of the order," MacMahon wrote.McMahon, at 374.
He once again ordered arbitration, issued a permanent injunction against any further state-court proceedings, and sharply criticized Eppenstein.
MacMahon fined Eppenstein personally $1,000 for filing frivolous and vexatious papers under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 11 and Title 28, Section 1927 of federal law.McMahon, at 375.
Sanctions overturned on appeal
Eppenstein appealed, and a year after MacMahon's original stipulation, the Second Circuit heard the case. It reversed the sanctions.
Richard J. Cardamone, writing for a three-judge panel, reviewed the case. He noted that MacMahon had been asked to resolve the forum issue at the status conference, but had instead asked the parties to work out an order for him to sign. They did, but while the issue was still pending, Shearson had started arbitration. Eppenstein was therefore, he wrote, forced to seek resolution of the issue in state court because MacMahon had refused to make a ruling. When Shearson responded by filing for an order to show cause in district court, Eppenstein agreed to postpone the state-court action.McMahon, at 20.
Second Circuit precedent allowed (as opposed to some other circuits), three different standards by which to review Rule 11 sanctions. A claim that there was no legal basis for the action called for de novo review, and the panel proceeded from there. "The Rule does not license a district court to sanction any action by an attorney or party that it disapproves of," Cardamone noted.McMahon, at 22.
Eppenstein, they found, had not misinterpreted the stipulation, since it had only directed "the commencement by plaintiffs of an arbitration." His affidavit to the state court had quoted this explicitly, and included it as an attached exhibit. "It is difficult to understand how appellant's three-page [affidavit] can be deemed a 'misrepresentation' when it uses the exact language of the district court's order," Cardamone wrote. Eppenstein, in fact, could hardly be blamed for interpreting the terse command any other way. "Given that the district court refused to provide any guidance as to the arbitral forum, Eppenstein was justified in interpreting the order to give his client the right of election ... Rule 11 is not intended to chill an attorney's creative, imaginative or enthusiastic advocacy on his client's behalf." Further, it only covered papers filed in federal court, so any of Eppenstein's state-court pleadings were beyond its scope.
Cardamone next turned to the statutory justification for the proceedings, asking whether it could be considered a vexatious attempt to multiply proceedings. He reiterated his earlier findings, adding to the record his observation that Shearson's attorney had also told MacMahon in writing that the judge had never considered the issue of the proper forum. In fact, he suggested, it was Shearson who had engaged in underhanded behavior:
Shearson had also moved for Eppenstein to be sanctioned for filing the appeal of his sanctions in the first place. "The outcome of this appeal refutes appellees' argument" Cardamone responded. He concluded by chastising Shearson for making that argument: "[A] motion for sanctions ... should not be a reflex response when served with an appellant's brief." he wrote. "The request in the instant appeal is particularly inappropriate because, as noted, appellees' actions vexatiously multiplied the proceedings at the trial level ... [I]n this case, counsel revealed a woeful lack of understanding of the increased personal responsibility imposed upon each individual attorney under these salutary rules".
Subsequent jurisprudence
In the wake of McMahon, an unusual duality persisted. Investors bringing claims under the 1934 Act could be forced into arbitration, but not those with claims under the 1933 Act, since Wilko still applied. Commentators wondered if the Court would uphold that case, especially given its change of heart over arbitration.
"The Supreme Court in McMahon has cast serious doubt on the continuing viability of Wilko, even with respect to Securities Act claims", wrote Lori Stewart Blea, a Pace law student. "Therefore, it seems highly likely that, when provided the opportunity, the Court will hold all securities claims to be subject to pre-dispute arbitration agreements."Blea, Lori Stewart; Enforceability of Predispute Arbitration Agreements under the Federal Securities Laws:Shearson/American Express, Inc. v. McMahon, 8 Pace L. Rev. 193, 234 (1988). Retrieved March 12, 2012. Brigham Young law student Craig L. Griffin suggested that Wilko had effectively been overruled already: "The Court in McMahon attempted to distinguish its earlier holding by showing that Wilko was based on erroneous assumptions. Rather than distinguishing McMahon, this portion of the Court's opinion appears to impliclitly overrule Wilko," he wrote.Griffin, Craig L.; ; BYU Law Review 1988 (2):443, 449. Retrieved March 13, 2012. "In sum, McMahon cannot really be reconciled with Wilko."Griffin, at 451. An article in the University of Miami Law Review on the subject was subtitled "Wilkos Swan Song".Taylor, F. Chet; "The Arbitrability of Federal Securities Claims: Wilko's Swan Song", September 1987, 42 U. Miami L. Rev. 203.
Rodriguez de Quijas v. Shearson/American Express Inc.
The case that would bring that question before the Court directly was not long in coming. Within a few months of McMahon a California district judge held that it "so seriously undermined Wilko's rationale" as to require him to order arbitration of 1933 Act claims. Others soon followed.Rosenblum v. Drexel Burnham Lambert, 700 F. Supp. 874 (E.D.La. 1987); 
Pessimism about Wilko's future was shared by at least one circuit judge. As district courts were ordering 1933 Act claims arbitrated in spite of it, the Fifth Circuit reconsidered Noble v. Dexel Burnham Lambert in light of McMahon, which had been decided in the interim. Thomas Gibbs Gee noted that "McMahon undercuts every aspect of [Wilko]; a formal overruling of Wilko appears inevitable—or, perhaps, superfluous."Noble v. Drexel Burnham Lambert, 823 F.2d 849, 850n3 (5th Cir. 1987).
Gee's colleagues got the chance to test that assumption within a year. Several cases brought by investors from Brownsville, Texas, also Shearson clients, who claimed to have lost almost half a million dollars in fraudulent or malfeasant trades were combined under Rodriguez de Quijas v. Shearson/American Express Inc., filed suit under both acts. The district court had followed McMahon and ordered arbitration of the 1934 Act claims but not those under the 1933 Act. Shearson appealed, claiming Wilko had effectively been overruled by that decision, and a three-judge panel heard the case in the middle of 1988.
"As McMahon makes clear, the Supreme Court no longer considers arbitration inadequate to protect substantive rights,"  Judge Jerre Stockton Williams wrote for the panel. As Justice Blackmun had in his McMahon dissent, the plaintiffs pointed to Congress's apparent intent to leave Wilko undisturbed in its otherwise extensive 1975 amendments to the Acts. writing for the court, was unpersuaded. "We find it implausible that Congress intended to prohibit arbitration of Securities Act claims but intended to allow courts to determine the arbitrability of Exchange Act claims."Rodriguez de Quijas, at 1298–99.
Following circuit precedent, he held that the similarities between the two Acts were more significant than the differences and that on this issue they should be interpreted similarly because of McMahon: "The Supreme Court opinion in McMahon, which binds us here, turns solely on the adequacy of arbitration to resolve securities disputes. It does not distinguish between the Exchange Act and the Securities Act." That holding, and the circuit's own Noble case the year before "lead directly to the obsolescence of Wilko and the arbitrability of Securities Act § 12(2) claims."
The plaintiffs appealed to the Supreme Court, and certiorari was granted later that year.Rodriguez de Quijas v. Shearson/American Express Inc., certiorari granted, . Following a timetable similar to that of McMahon, the Court heard arguments in March 1988 and issued its decision in May. By a 5–4 margin, it overturned Wilko.Rodriguez de Quijas v. Shearson/American Express Inc., .
Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote for the majority, the same five justices who had formed the corresponding bloc in  McMahon. He reiterated that Court's finding that arbitral procedures had improved sufficiently that judicial skepticism was no longer warranted. "To the extent that Wilko rested on suspicion of arbitration as a method of weakening the protections afforded in the substantive law to would-be complainants, it has fallen far out of step with our current strong endorsement of the federal statutes favoring this method of resolving disputes," he wrote. "Once the outmoded presumption of disfavoring arbitration proceedings is set to one side, it becomes clear that the right to select the judicial forum and the wider choice of courts are not such essential features of the Securities Act that § 14 is properly construed to bar any waiver of these provisions. Nor are they so critical that they cannot be waived under the rationale that the Securities Act was intended to place buyers of securities on an equal footing with sellers."Rodriguez de Quijas, at 481, Kennedy, J.
Kennedy argued that the language of the 1933 Act offered "no sound basis" for holding that the non-waiver provision reached pre-dispute arbitration clauses. Since it allowed investors to file cases in state court without the possibility of removal to federal court and whatever additional procedural protections that venue would offer, it could not have been Congress's intent to have held investors to the statute's procedural provisions against their interests. In McMahon and Mitsubushi Motors, the Court had also held that similar language did not bar arbitration of claims.Rodriguez de Quijas, at 482.
The Fifth Circuit came in for some criticism:
Kennedy then declared that Wilko was "incorrectly decided, and is inconsistent with the prevailing uniform construction of other federal statutes governing arbitration agreements in the setting of business transactions." The Court took this drastic step, he explained, not only to correct its earlier error but to harmonize the interpretation of both Acts, which it had recognized as "interrelated components of the federal regulatory scheme governing transactions in securities" in Ernst & Ernst v. Hochfelder.Ernst & Ernst v. Hochfelder, , 206, Powell, J.
Justice John Paul Stevens wrote the brief dissent, joined by Harry Blackmun, who had written the main McMahon dissent, William Brennan and Thurgood Marshall. He began by noting that the Court had properly repudiated the "indefensible brand of judicial activism" the Fifth Circuit had shown in ruling against Wilko. While the Court itself was not so bound to uphold its own precedents, it should be circumspect in doing so in cases like this that had become so settled that Congress had carefully avoided any legislative changes which might complicate or overrule it.Rodriguez de Quijas, at 486, Stevens, J., dissenting.
"In the final analysis," he wrote, "a Justice's vote in a case like this depends more on his or her views about the respective lawmaking responsibilities of Congress and this Court than on conflicting policy interests. Judges who have confidence in their own ability to fashion public policy are less hesitant to change the law than those of us who are inclined to give wide latitude to the views of the voters' representatives on nonconstitutional matters." While he had admittedly helped start the discussions about the various interpretations of Wilko in his dissent in Scherk v. Alberto-Culver, Inc. while chief judge of the Seventh Circuit, he said "[n]one of these arguments, however, carries sufficient weight to tip the balance between judicial and legislative authority and overturn an interpretation of an Act of Congress that has been settled for many years."
Post-decision arbitration reform
In the wake of the decision, commentators anticipated a flood of new arbitration before the various industry panels and called for reform. "The practical effect of McMahon," wrote Costantine Katsoris, a Fordham Law professor and longtime NYSE arbitrator, "is that securities arbitrations will multiply, because it effectively sealed the escape valve of a separate ... 1934 Act hearing in federal court." A year after the decision, he noted, the 1987 stock market crash, made that prediction a reality.Katsoris, Constantine; Securities Arbitration After McMahon; 16 Fordham Urb. L. J. 3:361–387, at 368; 1988; retrieved March 28, 2012.
Arbitrators had already been discussing reforms to the process, and in a  Fordham Urban Law Journal article, Katsoris considered various proposals. "What is attractive about arbitration is that it is generally speedy,
economical and fair," he wrote. "Obviously, improvements can always be made; but, we should retain the basic characteristics of arbitration." He argued against Congressional action overruling McMahon, since that would only mean a return to the bifurcated proceedings left in the wake of Byrd.Katsoris, at 369–370.
Since many new arbitrants would have been expecting to litigate claims, the arbitration should be sensitive to that and allow more extensive discovery processes before the hearing, with the steady guidance of an arbitrator to ensure that aspect of the process did not become as time-consuming as it had in litigation.Katsoris, at 371–373. Arbitrators should also be more knowledgeable since they would now have to consider more complex claims than they previously had, and provide more extensive disclosure and biographical information.Katsoris, at 378–379.
However, Katsoris also argued against making arbitration clauses mandatory. "[They] should be entered into freely and their meaning expressed in plain open language." Their language should also be standardized to avoid "traps" such as one broker shortening the statute of limitations to a year, and another specifying New York law, under which punitive damages cannot be awarded in arbitration.Katsoris, at 374–376.
He was ambivalent about requiring written opinions of arbitrators. While generally opposing them on the grounds that they would slow the process down, since the losing party would in many instances simply use it as the starting point for an appeal, he allowed that arbitrators should at least have to put it in writing if they were making their decision on one aspect of the case.Katsoris, at 382–383. The SEC ultimately agreed and declined to order written opinions of arbitrators.Self-Regulatory Organizations; Order Approving Proposed Rule Changes by the New York Stock Exchange, Inc., National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc., and the American Stock Exchange, Inc. Relating to the Arbitration Process and the Use of Pre-dispute Arbitration
Clauses, 54 Fed. Reg. 21,144, 21,151-52 (1989), cited at Katzler, Lynn; ; 45 Am. U. Law Rev. 151-197, 165n101; 1995; accessed March 30, 2012.
Several years later, after Rodriguez de Quijas had expanded securities arbitration even further, Lynn Katzler, a Washington College of Law student, disagreed. "For the sake of fairness and investor protection, the SEC should have required written opinions," she wrote. "It should not have delegated the responsibility to the good sense of arbitrators."Katzler, at 174. She addressed many of the opposing arguments, and concluded that the benefits of requiring a written opinion from arbitrators more than offset the costs, and would be in accord with the Court's decisions. "[A] statement of reasons would effectuate Congress' intent behind the Securities Act and the Exchange Act, while recognizing the Federal Arbitration Act's special policy favoring arbitration."Katzler, at 197.
Reforms continued, and in the early 2000s students and faculty at the Pace Law School's Securities Arbitration Clinic wrote about the long-term effects. In 2003, Professor Barbara Black reviewed cases and found that increasingly it was the brokerage firms trying to use the courts to break arbitration clauses.Black, Barbara; The Irony of Securities Arbitration Today: Why Do Brokerage Firms Need Judicial Protection?; 72 U. Cin. L. Rev. 415; 2002–2003; retrieved March 30, 2012. The clinic's associate director, Jill Gross, reviewed the reforms 20 years after the case and concluded that the process was fairer to investors. While she noted some unresolved issues, such as the "paradox" created by McMahon under which investors would have a hard time proving that securities arbitration procedures did not meet FAA standards if those same standards had been approved by the SEC,Gross, Jill I.; McMahon Turns Twenty: The Regulation of Fairness in Securities Arbitration; Pace Law Faculty Publications.
Paper 451; 2007; retrieved March 30, 2012. she noted that the McMahons would probably turn to arbitration anyway were their case heard today since changes to the 1934 Act had shortened the statute of limitations and made it harder to prove scienter. "Instead, most customer arbitrations today are predicated on state securities acts and common law claims such as breach of fiduciary duty, negligent misrepresentation and fraud, and draw heavily on principles of equity" she wrote. "The ultimate irony is that, even though the Supreme Court opened the door to securities arbitration, even without the McMahon decision, today’s customers would continue to pursue their claims in arbitration."Gross at 31–32.
Analysis and commentary
In her otherwise laudatory paper on the results of the increase in arbitration, Gross noted a "paradox" of the decision: its reliance on both the FAA and an increased confidence in SEC oversight of the arbitration process. "If
the SEC has approved NASD rules for notice and a hearing, then how can a party convincingly argue that those same rules are fundamentally unfair within the meaning of the FAA?" she asked. "In other words, the SEC-approval process might strip parties of their right to argue that the arbitration hearing is not fundamentally fair under modern FAA jurisprudence."Gross at 30n151.
Nebraska law professor C. Steven Bradford examined the lower-court anticipatory overrulings of Wilko in the wake of McMahon that led to Rodriguez de Quijas in a 1990 article critical of the Court's response to the practice in the latter case. He noted that the practice had a long history and had been tolerated and tacitly encouraged by the Court in other cases. After McMahon, he noted, lower courts could have avoided the Wilko questions, particularly by relying on an SEC regulation that required arbitration clauses to allow claims to be brought in federal court, or looked to a narrow reading of the contractual language. Yet few did, and even courts that did not need to reach the Wilko question nevertheless did so.Bradford, C. Steven; Following Dead Precedent: The Supreme Court's Ill-Advised Rejection of Anticipatory Overruling; 59 Fordham L. Rev. 39 (1990), at 64–66; retrieved March 30, 2012.
"The lower courts that rejected Wilko in the aftermath of McMahon were not doing so to be unfaithful to Wilko," Bradford wrote, "they were doing so to be faithful to McMahon."Bradford, at 68. While he faulted them for "ignor[ing] scholarly commentary and a number of prior federal cases explicitly dealing with the effect of doubtful Supreme Court precedent" he found greater fault with the McMahon majority.
If Blackmun's dissent recognized that, he wondered, how could the majority not have? The ensuing decision in Rodriguez'' suggested to him that it did.Bradford, at 90n263. Lower courts, he concluded, must in such cases be free to use anticipatory overruling.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 482
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States arbitration case law
Category:United States securities case law
Category:American Express
"""

From "Shelby County v. Holder" ==> """
Shelby County v. Holder, 570 U.S. 529 (2013), was a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States regarding the constitutionality of two provisions of the Voting Rights Act of 1965: Section 5, which requires certain states and local governments to obtain federal preclearance before implementing any changes to their voting laws or practices; and Section 4(b), which contains the coverage formula that determines which jurisdictions are subject to preclearance based on their histories of discrimination in voting..
On June 25, 2013, the Court ruled by a 5 to 4 vote that Section 4(b) was unconstitutional because the coverage formula was based on data over 40 years old, making it no longer responsive to current needs and therefore an impermissible burden on the constitutional principles of federalism and equal sovereignty of the states. The Court did not strike down Section 5, but without Section 4(b), no jurisdiction will be subject to Section 5 preclearance unless Congress enacts a new coverage formula.
 Background 
Congress enacted the Voting Rights Act of 1965 to address entrenched racial discrimination in voting, "an insidious and pervasive evil which had been perpetuated in certain parts of our country through unremitting and ingenious defiance of the Constitution". Section 5 of the Act contains a "preclearance" requirement that requires certain states and local governments to obtain a determination by the United States Attorney General or a three-judge panel of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia that changes to their voting laws or practices do not "deny or abridge the right to vote on account of race, color, or membership in a language minority group" before those changes may be enforced. Section 4(b) contains the coverage formula that determines which states and local governments are subject to preclearance under Section 5. The formula covers jurisdictions that, as of November 1964, November 1968, or November 1972, maintained a prohibited "test or device" as a condition of registering to vote or voting and had a voting-age population of which less than 50 percent either were registered to vote or actually voted in that year's presidential election. Section 4(a) allows covered jurisdictions that have made sufficient progress in ending discriminatory voting practices to "bail out" of the preclearance requirement.
The Supreme Court upheld the preclearance requirement and coverage formula as constitutional enforcement legislation under Section 2 of the Fifteenth Amendment in South Carolina v. Katzenbach (1966).South Carolina v. Katzenbach, 383 U.S. 301 (1966). The preclearance requirement initially was set to expire five years after enactment, but amendments to the Act in 1970, 1975, and 1982 reauthorized Section 5; the 1970 and 1975 amendments also updated the coverage formula. The Supreme Court upheld these reauthorizations as constitutional in Georgia v. United States (1973),. City of Rome v. United States (1980),. and Lopez v. Monterey County (1999). In 2006, Congress reauthorized Section 5 for an additional 25 years, but did not change the coverage formula from the 1975 version.
Shortly after the 2006 reauthorization, a Texas utility district sought to bail out from Section 5 preclearance and, in the alternative, challenged the constitutionality of Section 5. The Supreme Court ruled unanimously in Northwest Austin Municipal Utility District No. 1 v. Holder that government entities that did not register voters, such as the utility district, had the right to file suit to bail out of coverage. Because this decision resolved the issue, the Court invoked constitutional avoidance and declined to address the constitutionality of Section 5. Judge Clarence Thomas dissented from this portion of the opinion and would have declared Section 5 unconstitutional.Northwest Austin Municipal Utility District No. 1 v. Holder, 557 U.S. 193 (2009).
History
 District Court 
Shelby County, in the covered jurisdiction of Alabama, sued the U.S. Attorney General in the U.S. District Court for D.C. in Washington, D.C., seeking a declaratory judgment that sections 4(b) and 5 are facially unconstitutional and a permanent injunction against their enforcement. On September 21, 2011, Judge John D. Bates upheld the provisions, finding that the evidence before Congress in 2006 was sufficient to justify reauthorizing Section 5 and continuing Section 4(b)'s coverage formula.
Arguing before Bates were Kristen Clarke, who argued that it was reasonable for Congress to "stay the course" in renewing Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act in order to root out discrimination, and Bert Rein, a lawyer for Shelby County, who argued that the environment in the country was "totally different" when Section 5 was first enacted.
 Court of Appeals 
On May 18, 2012, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit affirmed the District Court's decision upholding the constitutionality of Section 4(b) and Section 5. After surveying the evidence in the Congressional record associated with the 2006 reauthorization of Section 5, the appellate court accepted Congress's conclusion that Section 2 litigation remained inadequate in the covered jurisdictions to protect the rights of minority voters, that Section 5 was therefore still justified, and that the coverage formula continued to pass constitutional muster.
 Supreme Court 
The Supreme Court granted certiorari to hear the case on the limited question of "whether Congress' decision in 2006 to reauthorize Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act under the pre-existing coverage formula of Section 4(b) of the Voting Rights Act exceeded its authority under the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments and thus violated the Tenth Amendment and Article IV of the United States Constitution." The Supreme Court heard oral arguments on February 27, 2013. Media coverage of the justices' comments during oral arguments portrayed the Court as appearing likely to hold Section 5 or Section 4(b) unconstitutional. Justice Antonin Scalia drew criticism from civil rights leaders for expressing his belief during oral argument that Congress reauthorized Section 5 not because the legislation was necessary, but because it constituted a "racial entitlement" that Congress was unlikely to end.
A coalition of four states provided an amicus brief to the Supreme Court expressing support for Section 5 and noting that the preclearance provision did not impose a burden on them. The coalition was led by New York and included Mississippi, North Carolina and California.
 Opinion of the Supreme Court 
The Supreme Court struck down Section 4(b) as unconstitutional in a June 25, 2013 ruling. The majority opinion was delivered by Chief Justice John Roberts, joined by Justices Scalia, Anthony Kennedy, Clarence Thomas, and Samuel Alito. The Court held that Section 4(b) exceeded Congress' power to enforce the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments, reasoning that the coverage formula conflicts with the constitutional principles of federalism and "equal sovereignty of the states" because the disparate treatment of the states is "based on 40-year-old facts having no logical relationship to the present day" and thus is not responsive to current needs. The Court held that Congress cannot subject a state to preclearance based simply on past discrimination. It noted that since the coverage formula was last modified in 1975, the country "has changed, and while any racial discrimination in voting is too much, Congress must ensure that the legislation it passes to remedy that problem speaks to current conditions". The Court declared that the Fifteenth Amendment "commands that the right to vote shall not be denied or abridged on account of race or color, and it gives Congress the power to enforce that command. The Amendment is not designed to punish for the past; its purpose is to ensure a better future."
Roberts wrote that the Act was immensely successful "at redressing racial discrimination and integrating the voting process" and noted that the U.S. has made great progress thanks to the Act. But he added: "If Congress had started from scratch in 2006, it plainly could not have enacted the present coverage formula." According to the Court, "Regardless of how to look at the record no one can fairly say that it shows anything approaching the 'pervasive,' 'flagrant,' 'widespread,' and 'rampant' discrimination that faced Congress in 1965, and that clearly distinguished the covered jurisdictions from the rest of the nation."
The Court did not subject Section 4(b) to the "congruence and proportionality" standard of review or address whether that standard is the appropriate measure to use when determining the constitutionality of legislation passed pursuant to Section 2 of the Fifteenth Amendment. The Court also noted the federalism concerns the Section 5 preclearance requirement raised, but did not reach the issue of whether Section 5 is constitutional. However, because the Section 5 preclearance requirement applies only to jurisdictions covered by the Section 4(b) coverage formula, the decision rendered Section 5 inoperable unless Congress enacts a new coverage formula.
 Concurrence 
Thomas wrote a concurring opinion expressing his view that Section 5 is also unconstitutional for the same reasons the Court held Section 4(b) unconstitutional.
 Dissent 
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote a dissenting opinion that was joined by Justices Stephen Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor, and Elena Kagan. The dissent would have held that Congress had sufficient evidence before it to determine that the coverage formula remained responsive to current needs. The dissent acknowledged that discrimination in voting has decreased in the covered jurisdictions since the Voting Rights Act's enactment, but it attributed much of that decrease to the Act itself, noting that "[t]hrowing out preclearance when it has worked and is continuing to work to stop discriminatory changes is like throwing away your umbrella in a rainstorm because you are not getting wet."
Reaction
The opinion was controversial, prompting heavy media coverage of reactions from political leaders, activists, and the legal community.
 Public officials 
President Barack Obama expressed deep disappointment with the decision and called on Congress "to pass legislation to ensure every American has equal access to the polls". Attorney General Eric Holder also expressed disappointment, and pledged that the Department of Justice "will not hesitate to take swift enforcement action—using every legal tool that remains available to us—against any jurisdiction that seeks to take advantage of the Supreme Court's ruling by hindering eligible citizens' full and free exercise of the franchise". On July 25, 2013, Holder announced that the Department of Justice would ask a federal court to subject the formerly covered state of Texas to preclearance under the "bail in" provision in Section 3 of the Voting Rights Act, which was unaffected by the Court's decision.
When asked whether a polarized Congress could agree on a new coverage formula, Speaker John Boehner acknowledged the Voting Rights Act's importance over the previous 40 years and said he was reviewing the decision and trying to determine the next steps. House Majority Leader Eric Cantor expressed hope that Congress would "put politics aside" and determine how to ensure that voting rights remain protected. Representative John Lewis, a leader in the civil rights movement who was present when President Lyndon B. Johnson signed the Voting Rights Act into law, said that the decision disregarded the country's history of voting discrimination and that he feared the decision would allow local election officials "to go back to another period". He added: "the purpose of the Voting Rights Act is not to increase the numbers of minority voters or elected officials. That is a byproduct of its effectiveness. The purpose of the act is to stop discriminatory practices from becoming law. There are more black elected officials in Mississippi today not because attempts to discriminate against voters ceased but because the Voting Rights Act kept those attempts from becoming law." House Judiciary Committee chair Bob Goodlatte said the committee would review new voting data but that he was unsure whether it would take any action in response to the decision. On July 18, 2013, the House Judiciary Subcommittee on the Constitution and Civil Justice held a hearing to discuss how the House should respond to the ruling.
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid said that Democrats were concerned with the ruling in light of "Republicans doing everything they could to suppress voting" in the 2012 elections, and that the Senate would act to address the decision. Senator Bob Corker said that he "cannot imagine" Congress ever agreeing on the terms of a new coverage formula. On July 17, 2013, the Senate Judiciary Committee began to hold hearings on how to respond to the decision.
Republican Senator Ted Cruz supported the ruling: "Today, the Supreme Court recognized the enormous progress made toward voting equality in the United States since the Voting Rights Act was passed in 1965. The Court rightly decided that the statutory standard used decades ago to subject democratically-elected state legislatures to second-guessing by unelected federal bureaucrats no longer survives constitutional scrutiny."
At the state level, Texas and Mississippi officials pledged within hours of the decision to enforce voter ID laws that the attorney general had precleared. Florida Secretary of State Ken Detzner said it made no sense for five Florida counties to be subject to preclearance based on decades-old voting rights data and that the decision would save the state money. New York Governor Andrew Cuomo said the decision troubled him and called upon Congress to pass a new coverage formula.
 Others 
Edward Blum, director of the Project on Fair Representation, an Alexandria-based nonprofit legal defense foundation that provided counsel to Shelby County, commented that the Supreme Court restored "a fundamental constitutional order that America’s laws must apply uniformly to each state and jurisdiction. All 50 states are entitled to equal dignity and sovereignty under the law." Ilya Shapiro of the Cato Institute said that the decision "restore[d] the constitutional order, the status quo ante the temporary Sections 4/5, because there is no longer systemic racial disenfranchisement, or at the very least in the covered jurisdictions".
By contrast, Jon Greenbaum, chief counsel of the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, said that because of the decision, "[m]inority voters in places with a record of discrimination are now at greater risk of being disenfranchised than they have been in decades" and that their only recourse will be to pursue expensive litigation. Penda Hair, co-director of national racial justice organization Advancement Project, said, "The Supreme Court's ruling rolls back legislation that courageous Americans fought so hard for, even giving their lives in many cases, to ensure that all citizens can participate in our democracy. Today's decision threatens the promise of equal access to the ballot—especially when the majority of voters of color who voted last year, 65.8 percent, live in states covered by the Section 4 formula.""SCOTUS Removes Critical Protection for Voters of Color" , Advancement Project, June 25, 2013.
Former White House Counsel Gregory B. Craig was highly critical of the decision, calling it not only "an assault on Congress" but also "the single greatest example of legislating from the bench in my lifetime". He added: "This decision resurrects the discarded proposition that states’ rights are more important than individual rights and that federal efforts to protect citizens’ rights should defer to the sovereignty of the states. The struggle between states’ rights and individual rights—and the proper role of the federal government in that struggle— [...] has been deeply divisive and, on occasion, violent. [...] What was once a bipartisan consensus, achieved after many years of pain and struggle, is no longer. We can add voting rights to the list of polarizing issues that will divide Congress."
Richard H. Pildes, Professor at New York University School of Law, said that Sections 4 and 5 of the 1965 Voting Rights Act have limitations. He called for legislation protecting the right to vote in national and universal terms: "Such laws would be designed to eliminate unnecessary and unjustifiable barriers to political participation in general." He pointed to national laws enacted by Congress such as the Help America Vote Act and the National Voter Registration Act as examples that "might be the most effective way today to protect the rights of all voters, including minority voters."
An October 2017 ProPublica investigation analyzed the data Roberts used in the ruling. Roberts wrote that the registration gap between blacks and whites had shrunk dramatically in southern states since the Voting Rights Act of 1965, and questioned why six southern states were subject to stringent oversight. He included Hispanics as whites, including even those who could not register to vote because they were not U.S. citizens, thereby making the "white" registration rate lower than what it would otherwise have been.
Impact
According to the New York Times, the United States has a long history of limiting access to voting. It began during the Founding Fathers' era and reached a peak during the Jim Crow era. The idea that disenfranchising legitimate voters was unethical gained momentum after the Civil rights movement and the passage of the Voting Rights Act in 1965, but came to a halt almost "two decades after the Bush v. Gore stalemate", which "led to voting rules being viewed as key elements of election strategy ... the issue is playing an extraordinary role in the midterm elections." In light of this, restrictions on registering and voting after Shelby County was decided were made in most cases by Republicans. According to many Republicans, such restrictions are necessary to combat election fraud. The New York Times observed in 2018 that the aforementioned restrictions on registering and voting "reflect rising partisanship, societal shifts producing a more diverse America, and the weakening of the Voting Rights Act by the Supreme Court in 2013."
Since the ruling, 15 states have passed laws that removed provisions such as online voting registration, early voting, "Souls to the Polls" Sunday voting, in which shuttle services take people to the polls directly after church, same-day registration, and pre-registering people under the age of 18 to vote.
The ruling has also resulted in some states implementing voter identification laws and becoming more aggressive in expunging allegedly ineligible voters from registration rolls. States that have changed their voting policies post-Shelby include both jurisdictions that were previously required to undergo federal preclearance and some that were not, including Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, North Carolina, Ohio, Wisconsin and Texas. According to the Brennan Center for Justice, the states most likely to enact voting restrictions were states with the highest African-American turnout in the 2008 election.
Three years after the ruling, 868 U.S. polling places had closed. Five years after the ruling, nearly 1,000 polling places had closed, many of them in predominantly African-American counties. Research shows that changing and reducing voter locations can reduce voter turnout. A 2018 report by the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights (a bipartisan, independent commission of the United States federal government) found that there had been an increase in laws making it harder for minorities to vote. The commission found that at least 23 states enacted restrictive voter laws, such as closures of polling places, cuts to early voting, purges of voter rolls, and imposition of strict voter ID laws. The commission chair said people "continue to suffer significant and profoundly unequal, limitations on their ability to vote ... That stark reality denigrates our democracy and diminishes our ideals. This level of ongoing discrimination confirms what was true before 1965, when the Voting Rights Act became law and has remained true since 1965: Americans need strong and effective federal protections to guarantee that ours is a real democracy."
A 2017 study in the American Journal of Political Science by Boston University political scientist Sophie Schuit and Harvard University political scientist Jon C. Rogowski found that the Voting Rights Act's preclearance requirement led to greater representation of Black interests and that this effect persisted long after the Act's passage. Schuit and Rogowski note that this finding is contrary to the "majority's opinion in Shelby County v. Holder that 'things have changed' and that the issues addressed by the VRA are 'decades‐old problems'. To the contrary, preclearance under the VRA appeared to substantially increase Black representation in the contemporary era."
Journalist Vann R. Newkirk II asserted in July 2018 that in Shelby County v. Holder and the 2018 decisions Husted v. Randolph Institute and Abbott v. Perez, the Roberts Court has "set the stage for a new era of white hegemony", because these cases "furthered Roberts's mandate to distance the federal judiciary from Thurgood Marshall's vision of those bodies as active watchdogs for the Fourteenth and arbiters for America's racial injustices." According to Newkirk, with these three cases "the Court has established that not only are the legacies of Jim Crow no longer a valid justification for proactive restrictions on states, but the Court doesn't necessarily have a role in advancing the spirit of the franchise. Furthermore, with Alito's gerrymandering decision, the Court holds that past discrimination by states—even at its boldest and most naked—is not really a consideration in assessments of current policies. This part is crucial, because in an era where crafty state politicians have moved toward race-neutral language that clearly still seeks to disenfranchise people of color, a certain default suspicion by federal courts and the Department of Justice based on those state politicians' histories has been the main protective force for the minorities' voting rights. That suspicion is gone now, as are all vestiges of Marshall's intended vigilance. The full text of the Voting Rights Act may or may not be in danger depending on the nature of the challenges that arise for the next generation of justices, but the damage has already been done. If the act represented a commitment by the federal government to ensure the true fulfillment of the Fourteenth Amendment's right to due process and the Fifteenth Amendment’s erasure of race-based disenfranchisement, then Roberts's Court has all but dismantled that commitment."
A 2019 American Economic Journal study found that preclearance substantially increased turnout among minorities, even as late as 2012. The study estimates that preclearance led to an increase in minority turnout of 17 percentage points. Civil rights and voting rights groups described to Vox in June 2019 the consequences they saw six years after the Shelby decision, including an increase in litigation with states, growing costs because of monitoring and pursuing litigation over voting restrictions and an increase in laws that created new requirements in the voting process and disproportionately affected minority groups. Voting restrictions and new requirements in the voting process include "strict photo ID requirements, limitations on who can provide assistance at polling places, the curbing of early voting days, and the closing of hundreds of polling places across the US. Other measures, like the purging of voters from state voter rolls and drawing election districts in a way that curbs the power of voters of color, have affected how much power communities of color hold in elections." Automatic voter registration as a prerequisite for voting was passed in 16 states and the District of Columbia as of June 2019. Under these voter registration systems two things happen: if eligible citizens interact with government agencies they are registered to vote or have their existing registration information updated (this is not compulsory; citizens can refuse to participate in the system) and instead of using paper registration forms, government agencies transfer voter registration information to election officials electronically. The Brennan Center for Justice argues that automatic voter registration does not only "increase registration rates, clean up the voter rolls, and save states money", but is also "a new way forward that can help to open access to the franchise and improve American democracy. Particularly at a time when many states have enacted restrictive voting laws and voter turnout has hit record lows".
Numerous strict voter ID laws have passed in states that required preclearance under the Civil Rights Act. Such laws were passed for the stated reason of preventing vote fraud, but there is no evidence of widespread voter fraud, and critics say these laws are intended to make it harder for minorities to vote. Research is mixed as to whether voter ID requirements suppress turnout, with many studies finding that they reduce minority participation, and others finding no impact. A 2020 study found that the jurisdictions that had previously been covered by preclearance substantially increased the rate of voter registration purges after the Shelby decision.
Alabama
After Shelby, Alabama Republicans drew a new legislative apportionment map of the state that some, such as federal judge Myron Herbert Thompson, contended was illegal. Democrats said that the new map packs African-American voters into too few voting districts and is an effort to hamper the power of the largely Democratic voting base.
In 2014, the Supreme Court said it would hear appeals from the Alabama Legislative Black Caucus regarding the redistricting.
Arizona
In an opinion issued by Arizona's attorney general in 2013, Arizona residents who registered to vote using forms provided by the federal government must also provide documentation proving their citizenship, or their registration will be labeled invalid. Attorney General Tom Horne said those who registered using federal registration could vote in federal elections, but not state and local elections without showing proof of citizenship. The attorney general also held that these same registrants will not be able to sign petitions for candidates or ballot initiatives.
North Carolina
Shortly after the Shelby ruling, North Carolina Governor Pat McCrory signed into law H.B. 589, which terminated valid out-of-precinct voting, same-day registration during the early voting period, and pre-registration for those about to turn 18, while also enacting a voter ID law. Opponents criticized the law as adversely affecting minority voters.
The law was challenged on behalf of the North Carolina State Conference of the NAACP in a suit filed by Advancement Project, pro bono counsel Kirkland & Ellis, and North Carolina attorneys Adam Stein and Irv Joyner. The suit alleged that the law violates Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act and the 14th and 15th Amendments of the U.S. Constitution.
On July 29, 2016, a three-judge panel of the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed a trial court decision in a number of consolidated actions, finding that the new voting provisions targeted African Americans "with almost surgical precision" and that the legislators had acted with "discriminatory intent" in enacting strict election rules; the Court struck down the law's photo ID requirement and changes to early voting, preregistration, same-day registration, and out-of-district voting.
North Dakota
On October 10, 2018, the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit upheld an act of North Dakota that requires voters to have an ID with their name, street address, and date of birth. At the time the state's Native reservations did not generally have street addresses, only post boxes for residents; there was concern that this provision would disproportionately affect Native voting and speculation that it was drafted with that as a primary goal.
Dissenting Justices Ginsburg and Kagan wrote, "The risk of voter confusion appears severe here because the injunction against requiring residential-address identification was in force during the primary election and because the Secretary of State's website announced for months the ID requirements as they existed under that injunction."
Ohio
In February 2014, the Ohio House approved a bill that eliminated the so-called "Golden Week" during which Ohio voters could register and vote on the same day. The bill also cut six days from Ohio's early voting period. In a separate bill, the House made it easier for registrars to reject absentee ballots for missing information. This bill ends a program that mailed absentee ballot applications to all registered voters. Under the new law, Ohio's secretary of state would have to get lawmaker approval to mail these absentee ballot applications.
Texas
While its voter ID law was passed in 2011, Texas did not enact the law until 2013 after the Shelby ruling, when the state was no longer subject to federal preclearance for changes to its voting laws. Under the law, Texas voters must show a photo ID to vote. While there are some exemptions, such as for voters with disabilities, most are required to produce a Texas driver's license or state ID card. Other forms of acceptable ID include concealed handgun licenses, military ID, U.S. citizenship papers with photo, and a U.S. passport.
If the voter does not possess one of the forms of acceptable photo ID and cannot reasonably obtain one, the voter may present one of the following, after which they must execute a Reasonable Impediment Declaration: a copy or original of a government document that shows the voter's name and an address, including the voter's voter registration certificate; a current utility bill; a bank statement; a government check; a paycheck; or (a) a certified domestic (from a U.S. state or territory) birth certificate or (b) a document confirming birth admissible in a court of law that establishes the voter's identity (which may be a foreign birth document).
Examples of problems under the new law involved public figures: Texas judge Sandra Watts was unable to vote because the name on her photo ID did not match the name on the voter rolls. State Senator Wendy Davis and then-Attorney General Greg Abbott were delayed in voting under the new law. They were all able to vote after signing affidavits attesting that they were who they claimed to be.
Wisconsin
In 2014, the American Civil Liberties Union and the Advancement Project filed a petition asking the Supreme Court to block Wisconsin's voter ID law, charging the measure would disproportionately affect voters of color. Challenging the law under Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act and the U.S. Constitution, Advancement Project litigated on behalf of the League of United Latin American Citizens of Wisconsin, Cross Lutheran Church, Wisconsin League of Young Voters Education Fund, and the Milwaukee Area Labor Council of the AFL-CIO. Advancement Project claimed that Wisconsin's voter ID law, enacted in 2012, is "part of a broader attack on the right to vote". On October 9, 2014, the U.S. Supreme Court issued an emergency stay in this case, blocking a Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals order to implement Wisconsin's voter ID law and enabling registration under previous rules for the fall of 2014 elections. It has yet to rule on the provisions of Wisconsin's law.
 Legislative responses 
On January 16, 2014, a bipartisan group of members of Congress, consisting of Representatives Jim Sensenbrenner and John Conyers and Senator Patrick Leahy, introduced H.R.3899/S.R.1945, See also http://vrafortoday.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/2014-04-07-VRAA-Bill-Summary_c4.pdf the Voting Rights Amendment Act of 2014. The bill was introduced to strengthen the Voting Rights Act of 1965 (VRA) and vital protections of it after Shelby County v. Holder. The proposed Voting Rights Amendment Act of 2014 consists of five components:
 Based on empirical conditions and current data there is a new coverage formula for Section 4 based on a rolling calendar, updated with a current fifteen-year time period to exempt states who are no longer discriminating or add new ones who are. The last part is designed to create a deterrent against future voting rights violations. Under the new formula states with five violations of federal law to their voting changes over the past fifteen years will have to submit future election changes for federal approval. Local jurisdictions would be covered if they commit three or more violations or have one violation and "persistent, extremely low minority turnout" over the past fifteen years. While Voter ID laws can still be blocked by the Department of Justice in the new states covered under Section 4, objections to voter ID laws by the department will not count as a new violation.
 Section 3 of the bill makes it possible that a court may order jurisdictions not covered by Section 4 to have future changes to its election laws preapproved by the federal government after plaintiffs file a corresponding application with the court. Plaintiffs have to show evidence of intentional voting discrimination to enable such a bail-in. Any violation of the VRA or of federal voting rights law—whether intentional or not—can be under the new section 3 proposal grounds for a bail-in, but court objections to voter ID laws that are not found to be intentionally discriminatory cannot be used as grounds for "bail-in" under Section 3.
 Jurisdictions in all U.S. states have to provide notice in the local media and online of any election procedures related to redistricting, changes within 180 days of a federal election, and the moving of a polling place. Citizens can thus easier identify potentially harmful voting changes in states not subject to Sections 4 and 5 of the VRA.
 Plaintiffs seeking a preliminary injunction against a potentially discriminatory voting law must only show that the hardship to them outweighs the hardship to the state if a law is blocked in court pending a full trial.
 Affirming the attorney general's authority to send federal observers in states subject to Section 4 to monitor elections in these states the proposal expands the attorney general's authority to send observers to jurisdictions with a history of discriminating against language minority groups.
As of June 2014 the Voting Rights Amendment Act of 2014 was in limbo because there was no widespread support for amending the Voting Rights Act as it was by its reauthorization in 2006. The House and Senate versions of the bill died in their respective Judiciary Committees. The House introduced the Voting Rights Amendment Act of 2015 the next year. It was referred to the House Judiciary Committee on the day it was introduced, but did not move past the committee stage. The Voting Rights Advancement Act of 2015 (H.R. 2867), a similar measure to the Voting Rights Amendment Act of 2015, was introduced on June 24, 2015, but died with the end of the 114th United States Congress. The most recent legislative attempt, the Voting Rights Amendment Act of 2017 (H.R. 3239), was introduced on July 13, 2017, and again referred to the House Judiciary Committee.
New York Senator Kirsten Gillibrand proposed to make online voter registration universal. Under her proposal, states with existing online access would expand their system beyond those with state-issued IDs to allow more young people, seniors, minorities, and the poor access and update their own voter records online. To ensure security, online systems will verify voter's eligibility by checking each person's personal information, like date of birth, Social Security, and address. According to the Brennan Center for Justice at New York University Law School in 2014 several states (California, Colorado, Hawaii, Illinois, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Mississippi, Nebraska, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Utah) and Washington, D.C. passed laws improving voter access, while laws restricting voter access were only passed by a minority of states in 2014. Introduced and pending legislation to expand and improve access to registration and voting include, as of December 2014, electronic transfer of voter registration information, online registration; portability, i.e. the possibility to move a voter's registration with her when she moves to a new address within the same county or state); fail-safe protections; easier registration and voting for students, people with disabilities, military members, and voters who speak a language other than English; and expansion of opportunities for voting registration and for early in-person voting.
According to congressional Democrats, Shelby County v. Holder gave states more leeway to pass even more restrictive voting laws. In February 2019, congressional Democrats therefore introduced the Voting Rights Advancement Act of 2019 (H.R. 4 in the 116th Congress), which would restore the Voting Rights Act's preclearance provision, requiring certain jurisdictions to secure federal approval before enacting voting changes. Alabama, California, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, New York, North Carolina, South Carolina, Texas, and Virginia were predicted to be covered by the act. Since 2013, 19 states have implemented restrictive voter identification laws, closed polling places, and shortened early voting periods, according to U.S. Representative Terri Sewell. U.S. Senator Patrick Leahy added:In the wake of Shelby County—which gutted Section 5 of the Voting Right Acts and consequently crippled the federal government's ability to prevent discriminatory changes to state voting laws—states have unleashed this torrent of voter suppression schemes. Because of a single, misguided, 5 to 4 decision, the federal government can no longer effectively serve as a shield against disenfranchisement operations targeting minorities and the disadvantaged across the country. The proliferation of threats to the right to vote in the wake of Shelby County makes it unmistakably clear why we need the full protections of the Voting Rights Act. That is why I am introducing the Voting Rights Advancement Act of 2019 to restore Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act, improve and modernize that landmark legislation, and provide the federal government with other critical tools to combat this full-fledged assault on the franchise. The proposed bill was later referred to as "the Democrat Politician Protection Act" by Mitch McConnell.
Automatic voter registration as a prerequisite for voting was approved in 16 states and the District of Columbia as of June 2019. The Brennan Center for Justice argues automatic voter registration does not only "increase registration rates, clean up the voter rolls, and save states money", but is also "a new way forward that can help to open access to the franchise and improve American democracy. Particularly at a time when many states have enacted restrictive voting laws and voter turnout has hit record lows".
See also
 Abbott v. Perez (2018), a case dealing with Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, a core section of the Act in redistricting
 Brnovich v. Democratic National Committee (2021), a case dealing with Section 2 in voting laws passed after Shelby elimination of preclearance requirements
 Help America Vote Act (HAVA)
 National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (NVRA)
 Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act (UOCAVA)
 Voter suppression in the United States
 References 
External links
Category:United States elections case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:Shelby County, Alabama
Category:Legal history of Alabama
"""

From "Sheldon v. Metro-Goldwyn Pictures Corp." ==> """
Sheldon v. Metro-Goldwyn Pictures Corp., 309 U.S. 390 (1940), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held, in the case of an unauthorized adaptation, courts may elect to award only a portion of an infringer's profits to the plaintiff. The proportion that the defendant is entitled to keep is in proportion to the amount of original creative work that went into the adaptation, and the court may be assisted in determining that by expert witness testimony. The Court found that awarding more to the plaintiff "would be to inflict an unauthorized penalty.".
The case involved Metro-Goldwyn using material from the 1930 play Dishonored Lady by Edward Sheldon and Margaret Ayer Barnes for the 1932 film Letty Lynton. It was brought before various courts before ending up with the Supreme Court, which awarded one fifth of the profits.
 References 
External links
Category:1940 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
"""

From "Sheldon v. Sill" ==> """
Sheldon v. Sill, 49 U.S. (8 How.) 441 (1850), is a ruling by the Supreme Court of the United States holding that Congress  may restrict the jurisdiction of the lower federal courts by limiting the subjects those courts may hear, even if those subjects fall within the federal judicial power defined by the United States Constitution.
Article III of the Constitution vests "the Judicial Power of the United States...in one supreme Court, and in such inferior Courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and establish," and extends the jurisdiction of said courts to:
all Cases, in Law and Equity, arising under this Constitution, the Laws of the United States, and Treaties made, or which shall be made, under their Authority; to all Cases affecting Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls; to all Cases of admiralty and maritime Jurisdiction; to Controversies to which the United States shall be a Party; to Controversies between two or more States; between a State and Citizens of another State; between Citizens of different States; between Citizens of the same State claiming Lands under Grants of different States, and between a State, or the Citizens thereof, and foreign States, Citizens or Subjects. 
Congress exercised its power to "ordain and establish" such inferior Courts, the circuit courts, in the Judiciary Act of 1789. However:
The eleventh section of the Judiciary Act, which defines the jurisdiction of the Circuit Courts, restrains them from taking 'cognizance of any suit to recover the contents of any promissory note or other chose in action, in favor of an assignee, unless a suit might have been prosecuted in such court to recover the contents, if no assignment had been made, except in cases of foreign bills of exchange' . . . It must be admitted, that if the Constitution had ordained and established the inferior courts, and distributed to them their respective powers, they could not be restricted or divested by Congress. But . . . it has made no such distribution . . . [Consequentially, ] Congress, having the power to establish the courts, must define their [the inferior courts'] respective jurisdictions. 
In Sheldon, then, the Supreme Court ruled that: 
Congress may withhold from any court of its creation jurisdiction of any of the enumerated controversies. Courts created by statute can have no jurisdiction but such as the statute confers. No one of them can assert a just claim to jurisdiction exclusively conferred on another, or withheld from all . . . The Constitution has defined the limits of the judicial power of the United States, but has not prescribed how much of it shall be exercised by the Circuit Court; consequently, the statute which does prescribe the limits of their jurisdiction, cannot be in conflict with the Constitution, unless it confers powers not enumerated therein.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 49
 External links 
Category:Diversity jurisdiction case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
Category:1850 in United States case law
"""

From "Shelley v. Kraemer" ==> """
Shelley v. Kraemer, 334 U.S. 1 (1948), is a landmark United States Supreme Court case that held that racially restrictive housing covenants cannot legally be enforced.
The case arose after an African-American family purchased a house in St. Louis that was subject to a restrictive covenant preventing "people of the Negro or Mongolian Race" from occupying the property. The purchase was challenged in court by a neighboring resident and was blocked by the Supreme Court of Missouri before going to the U.S. Supreme Court on appeal.
In an opinion joined in by all participating justices, U.S. Supreme Court Chief Justice Fred Vinson held that the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause prohibits racially restrictive housing covenants from being enforced. Vinson held that while private parties could abide by the terms of a racially restrictive covenant, judicial enforcement of the covenant by a court qualified as a state action and was thus prohibited by the Equal Protection Clause.
Facts
In 1945, an African-American family by the name of Shelley purchased a house in St. Louis, Missouri. At the time of purchase, they were unaware that a restrictive covenant had been in place on the property since 1911. The restrictive covenant prevented "people of the Negro or Mongolian Race" from occupying the property. Louis Kraemer, who lived ten blocks away, sued to prevent the Shelleys from gaining possession of the property. The Supreme Court of Missouri held that the covenant was enforceable against the purchasers because the covenant was a purely private agreement between its original parties. As such, it "ran with the land" and was enforceable against subsequent owners. Moreover, since it ran in favor of an estate rather than merely a person, it could be enforced against a third party. A similar scenario occurred in the companion case McGhee v. Sipes from Detroit, Michigan, where the McGhees purchased property that was subject to a similar restrictive covenant. In that case, the Supreme Court of Michigan also held the covenants enforceable.
The Supreme Court consolidated Shelley v. Kraemer and McGhee v. Sipes cases for oral arguments and considered two questions:
 Are race-based restrictive covenants legal under the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution?
 Can they be enforced by a court of law?
Legal representation
George L. Vaughn was a black attorney who represented J. D. Shelley at the Supreme Court of the United States. The attorneys who argued the case for the McGhees were Thurgood Marshall and Loren Miller. The United States Solicitor General, Philip Perlman, who argued in this case that the restrictive covenants were unconstitutional, had previously in 1925 as the city solicitor of Baltimore acted to support the city government's segregation efforts.
Solicitor General's brief
The U.S. Office of the Solicitor General filed, for the first time in a civil rights case, an amicus curiae ("friend of the court") brief in support of the Shelleys. The Solicitor General's brief filed on behalf of the United States government was written by four Jewish lawyers: Philip Elman, Oscar H. Davis, Hilbert P. Zarky, and Stanley M. Silverberg. However, the Solicitor General's office chose to omit their names from the brief. Deputy Solicitor General Arnold Raum, who was also Jewish, stated that it was "bad enough that [Solicitor General Philip] Perlman's name has to be there, to have one Jew's name on it, but you have also put four more Jewish names on. That makes it look as if a bunch of Jewish lawyers in the Department of Justice put this out." As quoted in 
Decision
On May 3, 1948, the Supreme Court issued a unanimous 6–0 decision in favor of the Shelleys. The Supreme Court held "that the [racially] restrictive agreements, standing alone, cannot be regarded as violative of any rights guaranteed to petitioners by the Fourteenth Amendment."Shelley v. Kraemer, . Private parties might abide by the terms of such a restrictive covenant, but they might not seek judicial enforcement of such a covenant, as that would be a state action. Because such state action would be discriminatory, the enforcement of a racially based restrictive covenant in a state court would therefore violate the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
The court rejected the argument that since state courts would enforce a restrictive covenant against white people, judicial enforcement of restrictive covenants would not violate the Equal Protection Clause. The court noted that the Fourteenth Amendment guarantees individual rights, and that equal protection of the law is not achieved by the imposition of inequalities:
Companion cases
Hurd v. Hodge and Urciolo v. Hodge were companion cases from the District of Columbia. The Equal Protection Clause does not explicitly apply to a U.S. territory not in a U.S. state, but the Court found that both the Civil Rights Act of 1866 and treating persons in the District of Columbia like those in the states forbade restrictive covenants.
Later legislation
In 1968 Congress enacted the Fair Housing Act, which voided racially-discriminatory covenants in housing and made them illegal.
In popular culture
In 2010, Jeffrey S. Copeland published Olivia's Story: The Conspiracy of Heroes Behind Shelley v. Kraemer,Copeland, Jeffrey S. (2010) Olivia's Story: The Conspiracy of Heroes Behind Shelley v. Kraemer. Paragon House. a literary nonfiction account of events leading up to the Shelley v. Kraemer case. In 2017, a documentary film was made titled The Story of Shelley v. Kraemer. The script for the film was written by Copeland, and it was produced by Joe Marchesani and Laney Kraus-Taddeo of the Audio/Video Production Services division of Educational Technology and Media Services at the University of Northern Iowa (Cedar Falls, Iowa).Parker, Melody. "Docu-drama: UNI Prof Makes Film About Landmark Civil Rights Case". Waterloo/Cedar Falls Courier. (1 April 2017). The film has been a featured part of the exhibit titled "#1 in Civil Rights: The African American Freedom Struggle in St. Louis",Russell, Stefene. "At the Missouri History Museum, '#1 in Civil Rights' Corrects the Record". Missouri History Museum Newsletter. (20 July 2017). at the Missouri History Museum in St. Louis. The film was also nominated for the Sundance Film Festival.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 334
Shelley House (St. Louis, Missouri), a National Historic Landmark
Buchanan v. Warley (1917), a U.S. Supreme Court case which overturned racial zoning ordinances
Corrigan v. Buckley (1926), a U.S. Supreme Court case which upheld racially restrictive covenants
Hansberry v. Lee (1940), a U.S. Supreme Court case which allowed renewed challenges to racial covenants
Civil Rights Act of 1968, of which Titles VIII–IX prohibit discrimination in housing for multiple reasons
Noble v. Alley, a similar case decided by the Supreme Court of Canada in 1951
References
Sources
External links
"Orsel McGhee House", A Michigan State Historic Site. Detroit: The History and Future of the Motor City website. Accessed 26 March 2014.
Category:Covenant (law)
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States land use case law
Category:Legal history of Missouri
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:1948 in United States case law
Category:1948 in Missouri
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Housing rights activism
Category:African-American history between emancipation and the civil rights movement
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:Housing in Missouri
Category:African-American history in St. Louis
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
Category:Thurgood Marshall
"""

From "Shelton v. Tucker" ==> """
Shelton v. Tucker, 364 U.S. 479 (1960), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States. By a 5–4 vote, the Court struck down an Arkansas law imposing disclosure requirements on public schoolteachers, reasoning that they were unconstitutionally overbroad.
 Background 
In 1958, Arkansas's legislature held a special session to address school desegregation. It enacted a law that required each public schoolteacher to file a yearly affidavit listing all organizations to which they had belonged or given money in the preceding five years. The intent of the law was to discover which teachers were members of the NAACP, and the Capitol Citizens' Council stated that it would use the affidavits (which were not required to be kept confidential) to seek those teachers' removal. B.T. Shelton, an African-American schoolteacher and NAACP member from Little Rock, refused to sign the affidavit; when he lost his job after twenty-five years of service, he challenged the law in federal court, represented by the NAACP. Although the three-judge district court, which consisted of Judges John B. Sanborn Jr., John E. Miller, and J. Smith Henley, ruled unconstitutional a separate law forbidding public employees to be members of the NAACP, it upheld the affidavit requirement. Shelton sought review before the U.S. Supreme Court, which agreed to hear the appeal on January 25, 1960. The case was consolidated with another in which the Arkansas Supreme Court had upheld the law, and oral arguments were heard (with Shelton represented by Robert L. Carter) on November 7.
 Decision 
In a 5–4 decision delivered on December 12, 1960, the Supreme Court reversed the lower courts' judgments, holding that the affidavit law violated the First Amendment. The majority opinion was authored by Justice Potter Stewart and joined by Chief Justice Earl Warren and Justices Hugo Black, William O. Douglas, and William J. Brennan Jr. Justices Felix Frankfurter, Tom C. Clark, John Marshall Harlan II, and Charles Evans Whittaker dissented in two opinions written by Frankfurter and Harlan.
 Majority opinion 
In his majority opinion, Stewart accepted that it could sometimes be appropriate to question teachers about their associations, for instance to ensure that they could spend their time focused on teaching. He distinguished the previous cases of NAACP v. Alabama and Bates v. Little Rock on the basis that, unlike in those cases, the state had a legitimate interest in its inquiry (investigating teachers' competence and ability). The Court instead struck down the law on the grounds that it was too broad since it required teachers to disclose associations that "could have no possible bearing" on their ability to teach. For Stewart, forcing a teacher "to list, without number, every conceivable kind of associational ties—social, professional, political, avocational, or religious"—constituted a "comprehensive interference with associational freedom". He therefore struck down the law, writing that it was not narrowly tailored to its goal and instead possessed an "unlimited and indiscriminate sweep". By resolving the case on that basis, the Court did not have to address the legislature's motive for passing the law.
 Frankfurter's dissent 
In a dissent joined by Clark, Harlan, and Whittaker, Frankfurter conceded that, as an opponent of intrusions on academic freedom, he might "find displeasure with the Arkansas legislation under review". Still, seeking to maintain "the distinction between private views and constitutional restrictions", he argued that the law was not unconstitutional. He reasoned that the law reflected a valid state interest since teachers might participate in so many organizations as to interfere with their work, and he also suggested that the answers "may serve the purpose of making known to school authorities persons who come into contact with the teacher in all of the phases of his activity in the community, and who can be questioned, if need be, concerning the teacher's conduct in matters which this Court can certainly not now say are lacking in any pertinence to professional fitness". For Frankfurter, it was enough that the state have a rational basis for seeking the information.
 Harlan's dissent 
Harlan's dissent, which Frankfurter, Clark, and Whittaker joined, also argued that the law was constitutionally permissible, although it took a more speech-protective approach than Frankfurter's. Harlan wrote that while the Court's ruling had "a natural tendency to enlist support" in light of the context in which the case arose, he considered it impossible "to determine a priori the place where the line should be drawn between what would be permissible inquiry and overbroad inquiry".
 Further reading 
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1960 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Arkansas
Category:Overbreadth case law
Category:United States freedom of association case law
Category:United States education case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
"""

From "Sheppard v. Maxwell" ==> """
Sheppard v. Maxwell, 384 U.S. 333 (1966), was a United States Supreme Court case that examined a defendant's right to a fair trial as required by the Sixth Amendment and the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. 
In particular, the court sought to determine whether or not Sheppard, the defendant, was denied fair trial for the second-degree murder of his wife, of which he was convicted, because of the trial judge's failure to protect him sufficiently from the massive, pervasive, and prejudicial publicity that attended his prosecution.
Background
After suffering a trial court conviction of second-degree murder for the bludgeoning death of his pregnant wife, Sam Sheppard challenged the verdict as the product of an unfair trial.  Sheppard, who maintained his innocence of the crime, alleged that the trial judge failed to protect him from the massive, widespread, and prejudicial publicity that attended his prosecution. 
An appeal, from the Ohio district court ruling, supported his claim. Then the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed that decision. 
When Sheppard appealed again, the Supreme Court granted certiorari.
Decision
Justice Clark delivered the opinion of the court:
See also
 F. Lee Bailey
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 384
 Continuance
References
Bibliography
 The Wrong Man: The Final Verdict on the Dr. Sam Sheppard Murder Case (Random House, 2001) ISBN 978-0679457190
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment jury case law
Category:1966 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Sherbert v. Verner" ==> """
Sherbert v. Verner, 374 U.S. 398 (1963), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment required the government to demonstrate both a compelling interest and that the law in question was narrowly tailored before it denied unemployment compensation to someone who was fired because her job requirements substantially conflicted with her religion.. 
The case established the Sherbert Test, requiring demonstration of such a compelling interest and narrow tailoring in all Free Exercise cases in which a religious person was substantially burdened by a law. The conditions are the key components of what is usually called strict scrutiny.
In 1990, the Supreme Court decided that the Sherbert Test, as a judicial constitutional analysis tool, was too broad when applied to all laws. With respect to religiously neutral, generally applicable laws that incidentally burden religious exercise, the Sherbert Test was eliminated in Employment Division v. Smith.. For laws that discriminate along religious/secular lines or neutral laws that are enforced in a discriminatory way, the components of the Sherbert Test are still appropriate constitutional tools for courts to use.
In response to the 1990 Smith decision, Congress created an enhanced version of the Sherbert Test as a statutory, rather than constitutional, right in the federal Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA) of 1993. Its provisions were designed to apply broadly to all laws and regulations, both federal and state. Although Congress replaced the "narrowly tailored" constitutional requirement with a "least restrictive means" statutory requirement, the enhanced test is still referred to as the Sherbert Test.
However, the Supreme Court held in City of Boerne v. Flores that the law was unconstitutional because its enhanced Sherbert Test, as a purported change in constitutional rights, could not be enforced against the states..  It impermissibly interfered with the judiciary's sole power to interpret the Constitution. However, the ruling did not necessarily limit its effect on interpretation of federal statutes.
In 2000, Congress passed the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act (RLUIPA) that applied only to federal laws.  Both laws contain the same language for an even further enhanced Sherbert Test, one that broadens the definition of substantial religious burden.
The Supreme Court has since relied on the statutory Sherbert Test to decide several prominent cases, including Burwell v. Hobby Lobby, , and Gonzales v. O Centro Espírita Beneficente União do Vegetal, 546 U.S. 418 (2006).
Background of the case
Adell Sherbert, a member of the Seventh-day Adventist Church, worked as a textile-mill operator. Two years after her conversion to that faith, her employer switched from a five-day to a six-day workweek, including Saturdays. Since according to her belief, God in Exodus 20:8-11 forbade working on Saturdays (seventh day is the Sabbath), she refused to work that day and was fired. Sherbert could not find any other work and applied for unemployment compensation. Her claim was denied, even though the state's ineligibility provisions exempted anyone, whether religious or not, "for good cause."  The decision of the South Carolina Employment Security Commission, chaired by Charlie Verner, was affirmed by a state trial court and the South Carolina Supreme Court.
Decision
The Supreme Court, in a 7–2 decision, reversed the Commission and the lower courts and found that as applied, the government's denial of Sherbert's claim was an unconstitutional burden on the free exercise of her religion. The majority opinion effectively created the Sherbert Test, determining whether government action runs afoul of the Free Exercise Clause.
Brennan's majority opinion
Brennan, writing for the majority, stated that denial of Sherbert's unemployment claim represented a substantial burden upon her. Even if that burden took the form of denial of a privilege to unemployment compensation, instead of violating compensation she was entitled to by right, it still effectively impeded her free exercise of her religion. As Brennan wrote, "to condition the availability of benefits upon this appellant's willingness to violate a cardinal principle of her religious faith effectively penalizes the free exercise of her constitutional liberties." Brennan dismissed the claim that his decision violated the Establishment Clause by establishing the Seventh-day Adventist religion. Finally, the majority opinion did not consider the Equal Protection argument, since it had already ruled in Sherbert's favor on First Amendment grounds.
Douglas and Stewart's concurring opinions
Douglas wrote separately to explain that the issue was not the degree of injury to Sherbert, but South Carolina's denial of unemployment on the basis of her beliefs. The issue was not individual action, but government action, and under what basis government could deny someone benefits.
Stewart concurred in the result, but not in the majority's reasoning. He did not dismiss the Establishment Clause issue as the majority did. Instead, he identified as a "double-barreled dilemma" between Free Exercise Clause protection of Sherbert's actions and — as it had been interpreted, wrongly in his view, by the court — Establishment Clause prohibition of such protection. He also disagreed with the majority's claim that a cited precedent, Braunfeld v. Brown, was distinguishable from Sherbert.
Harlan's dissenting opinion
Harlan, in a characteristically formalist reading of the relevant law, argued that the Commission denied Sherbert unemployment based on the same reason they might any secular claimant, that she was not "available for work" because of a private decision she had made.  More centrally, he rejected the majority opinion, arguing that the Free Exercise Clause only required neutrality toward religion in this case, which would not include exempting Sherbert, though the Constitution would permit a legislature to create such an exemption.
Sherbert test
In Sherbert, the Court set out a three-prong test for courts to use in determining whether the government has violated an individual's constitutionally protected right to the free exercise of religion.
The first prong investigates whether government has burdened the individual's free exercise of religion. If government confronts an individual with a choice that pressures the individual to forego a religious practice by imposing a penalty or withholding a benefit, the government has burdened the individual's free exercise of religion.
However, not all burdens placed on religious exercise are constitutionally prohibited under the test. If the first prong is passed, the government may still constitutionally impose the burden on the individual's free exercise if the government can show
it possesses some compelling state interest that justifies the infringement (the compelling interest prong) and
no alternative form of regulation can avoid the infringement and still achieve the state's end (the narrow tailoring prong).
Limiting Sherbert test
The Supreme Court sharply curtailed the Sherbert Test in the 1980s, culminating in the 1990 landmark case Employment Division v. Smith. In Smith, the court held that free exercise exemptions were not required from generally applicable laws. In response to the Smith decision, Congress passed the 1993 Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA) to reinstate the Sherbert Test as a statutory right. The RFRA purported to restore strict scrutiny analysis to all free exercise cases in which the plaintiff proves a substantial burden on the free exercise of his or her religion. However, four years later, the court struck down RFRA as applied to Constitutional interpretation. In City of Boerne v. Flores, 521 U.S. 507 (1997), the court found that RFRA, as applied to the states, exceeded Congress's power under Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment. But the ruling did not necessarily limit RFRA's effect on interpretation of federal statutes. Using a parliamentary procedure known as unanimous consent, both the House and the Senate re-enacted RFRA's provisions in 2000, in conjunction with adding a similar statutory test to the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act (RLUIPA).
Without addressing RFRA's constitutionality, the Supreme Court has held, in Gonzales v. UDV, 546 U.S. 418 (2006), that RFRA applies to other federal statutes. In UDV, the court applied the statutory Sherbert Test created by RFRA and found that the conduct in question—use of a Schedule I drug in a religious ritual—was protected under the First Amendment.
See also
 Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment
 Strict scrutiny
 Lemon Test
References
Further reading
External links
First Amendment Center 
Findlaw's page on Free Exercise exemptions
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:1963 in United States case law
Category:History of the Seventh-day Adventist Church
Category:1963 in religion
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Sheridan v. United States" ==> """
Sheridan v. United States, 487 U.S. 392 (1988), was a U.S. Supreme Court case concerning what constitutes a claim "arising out of" an assault or battery within the meaning of the Federal Tort Claims Act (FTCA). The Supreme Court held that the FTCA's intentional tort exception did not apply.
Background
Naval medical aide Carr became intoxicated after his shift, and three of his co-workers found him face down on a hospital floor. They attempted to bring him to the emergency room, but he broke away and showed that he had a gun. The three co-workers fled and did nothing more. The intoxicated serviceman then fired several single shots into a car on a public street near Bethesda Naval Hospital and injured plaintiffs and damaged their car.
Lower courts
While 28 U.S.C. § 1346(b) of the Federal Tort Claims Act gives individuals the right to sue the federal government, the government is generally not liable for intentional torts committed by its employees, as 28 U.S.C. § 2680(h) takes away that right for injuries arising out of assault or battery. However, the plaintiffs argued that the co-workers were the negligent party in allowing Carr to continue in his drunken stupor. The government would have been liable under Massachusetts law, and the government would have been liable if Carr were not a government employee. However, the District Court held that because Carr was a government employee, prior Fourth Circuit precedent was a bar to recovery. The Fourth Circuit upheld the decision of the trial court.
Opinion of the Court
In a majority opinion by Justice Stevens, the Court noted that the injury arose from two claims: negligence by Carr's co-workers and assault by Carr.
In United States v. Muniz, 374 U.S. 150 (1963), the Supreme Court held that the intentional tort exception did not apply when prison guards were negligent in preventing a prisoner from assault. This case could have been decided because the claim arose out of the negligence of the prisoner guards, and the assault was just the natural causal effect of the negligence, or because the Supreme Court held that if the only issue was whether the Government should be held liable for Carr's action, the intentional tort exception would preclude litigation under the FTCA.
However, the "Government voluntarily adopted regulations that prohibit the possession of firearms on the naval base and that require personnel to report the present of any such firearm, and by further voluntarily undertaking to provide care to a person who was visibly drunk and visibly armed, the Government assumed responsibility to 'perform its good Samaritan task in a careful manner.'" Indian Towing Co. v. United States, 350 U.S. 61, 65 (1955).
Carr's status as a federal employee, as well as his act being intentional as opposed to negligent, was irrelevant since the co-workers' negligence was at issue.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 487
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
External links
Category:United States tort case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1988 in United States case law
"""

From "Sheriff v. Gillie" ==> """
Sheriff v. Gillie, 578 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the use of the Ohio Attorney General's letterhead, as its direction, was permissible and not a false, deceptive, or misleading representation under the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act.SCOTUSblog coverageSheriff v. Gillie, No. 15–338, 578 U.S. ____ (2016).
Background
The Ohio Attorney General contracted out debt collection to private attorneys and instructed them to use the Ohio Attorney General's letterhead.
Opinion of the Court
Associate Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg authored a unanimous decision.
 References 
External links
 Nations Finance Debt Collection
 SCOTUS Blog Coverage
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:Debt collection
Category:Ohio Attorneys General
"""

From "Sherman v. United States" ==> """
Sherman v. United States, 356 U.S. 369 (1958), was a United States Supreme Court case on the issue of entrapment. Unanimously, the Court overturned the conviction of a recovering New York drug addict who had been repeatedly solicited for drug sales by a fellow former addict who was working with federal agents.
The case was a virtual replay of Sorrells v. United States, the 1932 case in which the justices had first recognized entrapment as a defense. As in that case, all agreed the defendant had been entrapped, but the majority and a separate concurrence were at odds over what the best grounding for the entrapment defense was.
Background of the case
In late August 1951, Kalchinian, a recovering drug addict, met Sherman at a doctor's office where they were both getting treatment for their addiction. They talked about drugs, and Kalchinian eventually asked Sherman if he could get him some as his own methadone program wasn't working. Sherman resisted, citing his own efforts to get clean.
On later chance encounters, Kalchinian continued to entreat Sherman, encountering similar resistance. Finally, in November, he gave in. Kalchinian informed agents of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics (a predecessor to today's Drug Enforcement Administration) whom he had been working with in hopes of lightening his sentence on a pending drug charge, that he had another seller for them. After three drug deals, Sherman was arrested.
Lower courts
Federal prosecutors put on Kalchinian and the government agents working with him. Sherman's defense built their case around entrapment and merely recalled Kalchinian. A conviction was overturned on appeal when it was found that the jury had been improperly instructed on entrapment. A retrial led to another conviction, which was sustained by the appellate court.
The Supreme Court granted certiorari, limited to the entrapment question.
Decision
Majority
As Charles Evans Hughes had in Sorrells, Warren spoke for the Court. "To determine whether entrapment has been established, a line must be drawn between the trap for the unwary innocent and the trap for the unwary criminal", he said. "We conclude from the evidence that entrapment was established as a matter of law ... We reach our conclusion from the undisputed testimony of the prosecution's witnesses." Kalchinian clearly induced Sherman, and "not only procured a source of narcotics but apparently also induced petitioner to return to the habit". 
He scoffed at prosecution arguments that the government was not responsible for Kalchinian's actions. While he was not being paid, he clearly had dealings with the agents in the form of the leniency he was hoping for. Warren noted that the agent in charge of Kalchinian admitted at trial that he didn't inquire about how Kalchinian was getting his sellers. "Law enforcement does not require methods such as this," he concluded.
Sherman's two prior drug convictions did not prove the "ready complaisance" the government claimed he demonstrated, since only one was for dealing and that was nine years old. Warren also found Sherman's efforts to seek treatment, the absence of any drugs in his apartment when it was searched and his failure to profit from the sales to be significant in establishing that he did not have a predisposition to break the law. "The Government's characterization of petitioner's hesitancy to Kalchinian's request as the natural wariness of the criminal cannot fill the evidentiary void," he added. 
He declined to reassess the alternative, objective test of entrapment proposed by Justice Owen Roberts in his Sorrells concurrence, that the focus should be on how the government acted rather than the defendant's state of mind. He believed that such a focus would unnecessarily burden prosecutors as they would not be able to raise predisposition in response to any defense attempt to examine police conduct; and that lower courts had ruled that juries should be allowed to consider entrapment, not judges as Roberts had proposed. "To dispose of this case on the ground suggested would entail both overruling a leading decision of this Court and brushing aside the possibility that we would be creating more problems than we would supposedly be solving," he said in conclusion.
Concurrence
Frankfurter's concurring opinion, in which he was joined by Justices William O. Douglas, John Marshall Harlan II and newly appointed William Brennan, argued nonetheless for Roberts' objective test of locating entrapment in the manner in which the government agents carried out their investigation. "(We fail) to give the doctrine of entrapment the solid foundation that the decisions of the lower courts and criticism of learned writers have clearly shown is needed," he said. Lower courts, he noted, had either ignored the Sorrells standard altogether and focused on narrow facts of the case, or failed to come up with a generalized rule, which was proof enough that it needed to be reassessed.
Congress had passed criminal laws, he asserted, not because it wanted to regulate the means by which the prohibited activities were curtailed but because it wanted to make the actions criminal. "The courts refuse to convict an entrapped defendant, not because his conduct falls outside the proscription of the statute, but because, even if his guilt be admitted, the methods employed on behalf of the Government to bring about conviction cannot be countenanced," he reminded his colleagues, foreshadowing the "outrageous government conduct" theory that Justice William Rehnquist would inadvertently create almost two decades later in United States v. Russell. That, he said, was exactly what the Court had done in this case, expressing its revulsion at the manipulative actions of Kalchinian, which he described as "particularly reprehensible", and the FBN's cavalier attitude toward his freelancing.
In addition, he made two other objections: that defendants might choose to forgo the defense despite the facts of the case out of fear that an inquiry into their predisposition to offend would allow the prosecution to bring up prior bad acts that might not otherwise be relevant, and that jury verdicts of entrapment were not as reliable in deriving precedent for future cases.
Subsequent jurisprudence
United States v. Russell, . Government agent supplying key ingredient for manufacture of controlled substance did not constitute entrapment.
Hampton v. United States, . Defendant's belief that he and government informant were selling a legal counterfeit drug and misrepresenting it as heroin did not overcome government showing that he was predisposed to sell heroin in any event.
Jacobson v. United States, . Previously legal actions do not of themselves prove predisposition to violate later law prohibiting them; predisposition inquiry to be limited to defendant's history prior to contact with government agents.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 356
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States entrapment case law
Category:1958 in United States case law
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Shinn v. Ramirez" ==> """
Shinn v. Ramirez, 596 U.S. ___ (2022), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court related to the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996. The court held that new evidence that was not in the state court's records, based on ineffective assistance of post-conviction counsel, could not be used in an appeal to a federal court.
 Background 
David Ramirez and Barry Jones were convicted of murders in Arizona and sentenced to death in 1989 and 1994, respectively. Ramirez appealed to federal court where his federal public defenders uncovered evidence of intellectual disability and extensive childhood abuse that hadn't been presented at his initial trial. Jones also appealed to federal court, where federal investigators found evidence suggesting he was innocent. In both cases, the new lawyers argued that the failure of the initial public defenders to present evidence that could have been mitigating constituted ineffective counsel. 
In Martinez v. Ryan (2012), the Supreme Court held that prisoners may use post-conviction counsel's ineffectiveness as a reason to overcome procedural default. The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit applied Martinez to rule for Ramirez and Jones on their habeas corpus petitions. The Court denied rehearing en banc over the dissent of Judge Daniel P. Collins and seven other judges. Arizona filed a petition for a writ of certiorari.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case on May 17, 2021. On May 23, 2022, the Supreme Court reversed the Ninth Circuit in a 6–3 opinion.
 Majority opinion 
The majority opinion was authored by Clarence Thomas, and joined by John Roberts, Samuel Alito, Neil Gorsuch, Brett Kavanaugh, and Amy Coney Barrett, the court's six conservative justices. Thomas stated that allowing claims, like the ones in this case, would cause delays in the future, and cited the brutality of the crimes that were committed. He also cited a dissent written by the late Justice Antonin Scalia in Martinez, and another dissenting opinion written by Roberts in Trevino v. Thaler (2013), a case that applied Martinez.
 Dissenting opinion 
The dissenting opinion was authored by Sonia Sotomayor, and joined by Elena Kagan and Stephen Breyer, the court's three liberal justices. She described the decision as "perverse" and "illogical". Sotomayor also attacked the majority opinion's citations of previous dissenting opinions to back up its reasoning. She also hinted that doing so could make the Supreme Court's decision making process appear illegitimate.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act case law
"""

From "Shoemaker v. United States" ==> """
Shoemaker v. United States, 147 U.S. 282 (1893), was a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States on the United States Constitution's Appointments Clause. The Court declared Congress may expand the duties of an existing office without rendering it necessary that the incumbent again be nominated, confirmed and appointed as long as the new duties are "germane" to those already held by the office.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 147
 Notes and references 
 External links 
Category:1893 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
"""

From "Shoop v. Twyford" ==> """
Shoop v. Twyford, 596 U.S. ___ (2022), was a United States Supreme Court case related to death row inmates' habeas corpus petitions.
 Background 
In the fall of 1992, Raymond A. Twyford, III (born October 15, 1962), and accomplice Daniel Eikelberry (born December 23, 1973), murdered 37-year-old Richard Franks in Jefferson County, Ohio. Franks was accused of sexually assaulting an 18-year-old girl and a 13-year-old girl. Both girls were the daughters of a woman Twyford lived with. In September 1992, Twyford and Eikelberry lured Franks to a remote spot under the premise of a hunting trip, where he was brutally murdered. Franks was shot multiple times in the head, and his hands were cut off to deter police from identifying the body. Police found a 1992 calendar diary in Franks' pocket and were able to identify him. A short time later, Eikelberry was arrested and confessed to the crime. Twyford was also captured shortly afterward. Both suspects supposedly showed no remorse for the crime. Twyford was convicted and sentenced to death soon thereafter. Eikelberry was sentenced to life in prison and is eligible for parole in 2024.
In 2019, Twyford sought a compelling order from Ohio to transport him to the Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center for neurological testing, which he asserted might help him challenge his death sentence. The district court granted the request, and the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit affirmed, over the dissent of Judge Alice Batchelder. The warden filed a petition for a writ of certiorari.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case on January 14, 2022. Oral arguments were heard on April 26, 2022, and the case was decided on June 21, 2022.
In a 5-4 ruling, the Supreme Court held that a transportation order that allows a prisoner to search for exonerating evidence is not guaranteed unless the prisoner shows that the desired evidence would be admissible in court in connection with a particular claim for relief. It reversed the decision by the lower court.
 Opinion of the Court 
Chief Justice John Roberts wrote for the majority of the court, stating that the power of the federal court to grant habeas corpus is largely restricted by the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996, which states that writ for habeas corpus is solely because the imprisonment has "violated the Constitution of the United States or any treaties of the United States." Therefore, the power of a habeas court to develop and consider new evidence is also restricted. The court contends that the All Writs Act is the "vehicle" to gather new evidence but also points towards Shinn v. Ramirez as the reason why prisoners should be denied habeas when new evidence found is not "admissible in connection with a particular claim for relief."
 Dissents 
 Justice Breyer's dissent 
In his dissent, which Justices Sotomayor and Kagan joined, Justice Stephen Breyer wrote that he would not consider the merits of this case due to his belief that the court of appeals lacked the "jurisdiction to hear the State's interlocutory appeal." He admitted that courts of appeals have the jurisdiction to review "final decisions of the district courts," but they do not tend to hear interlocutory appeals, an appeal in which a certain part of the ruling is disputed. At the same time, the general case is still ongoing. He stated that hearing "too many" interlocutory appeals would add delays to the judicial system.
Additionally, he wrote that the court's extension of the collateral order doctrine to include "transportation orders" would resolve the question between state sovereignty and the merit of the prisoner's claim for a few reasons. (1) Transportation orders do not seem to be "especially important," (2) the court "overstates" the impact of "transportation orders" on state sovereignty, (3) some interlocutory appeals are unwise to use of courts time.
 Justice Gorsuch's dissent 
In his solo, one-page dissent, Justice Neil Gorsuch wrote that he would have dismissed the case as improvidently granted. He stated that "jurisdictional defects" would prevent the court from answering the questions presented.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
"""

From "Shular v. United States" ==> """
Shular v. United States, 589 U.S. ___ (2020), is an opinion of the United States Supreme Court in which the Court held that, under the Armed Career Criminal Act of 1984, the definition of “serious drug offense” only requires that the state offense involve the conduct specified in the statute., slip op. at *2-3 (2020). Unlike other provisions of the ACCA, it does not require that state courts develop “generic” version of a crime, which describe the elements of the offense as they are commonly understood, and then compare the crime being charged to that generic version to determine whether the crime qualifies under the ACCA for purposes of penalty enhancement. The decision states that offenses defined under the ACCA are "unlikely names for generic offenses," and are therefore unambiguous. This renders the rule of lenity inapplicable.
 Background 
 Legal history 
The Armed Career Criminal Act (ACCA) is a federal sentencing law passed in 1984 and later amended in 1986. One section of the ACCA, §924(e)(2)(A)(ii), imposes a mandatory 15-year sentence on defendants convicted of firearms-related felonies if they have three or more prior convictions for "serious drug offenses" or "violent felonies".
The definition of what constituted a "serious drug offense" under the ACCA is quite broad. After it was amended in 1986 (Career Criminals Amendment Act of 1986), the definition of "serious drug offense" was expanded to include acts that are illegal under the federal Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as well as state-level offenses which involve the manufacturing, distribution, or possession with intent to distribute or manufacture controlled substances. As a result of the latter provision, the definition of "serious drug offenses" is significantly impacted by the diversity of state law.
Other definitions of crimes used in the Armed Career Criminal Act are analyzed using what is known as a "categorical approach". In this approach, a court that is sentencing a defendant under the ACCA must first develop a generic definition of a crime, then compare that generic definition of the crime to the specific provisions of the state law to determine whether or not that crime counts towards the three or more previous offenses for that defendant. The Supreme Court requires that the "categorical approach" be used for determining whether a defendant's previous state convictions count as "violent felonies" under the ACCA. However, there was a dispute as to whether the "categorical approach" must also be used for determining whether a previous conviction counted as a "serious drug offense".
 Case background 
In 2017, Jefferson County Sheriffs raided the home of Eddie Shular, a Florida man who was the target of a cocaine trafficking investigation by the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA). During the raid, officers located a .32 caliber revolver in Shular's master bedroom closet. Shular was indicted by a federal grand jury and, in September 2017, he pled guilty in federal court to felonious possession of a firearm. 
Under federal law, this offense would normally carry a sentence of up to 10 years in prison. However, because he had more than three convictions for serious drug offenses (specifically, a 2012 conviction on 5 counts of possessing cocaine and 1 count of possessing cocaine with the intent to distribute), he received a mandatory minimum sentence of 15 years in prison. Shular then appealed his sentence.
 In lower courts  
Because Shular was prosecuted in a Florida federal court, his appeal was initially heard by the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit, presided over by a three-judge panel, composed of Judges Stanley Marcus, Charles Wilson, and Frank M. Hull. In his appeal, Shular argued that the sentencing judge should not have counted his six prior cocaine-related convictions as prior "serious drug offenses", and accordingly should not have sentenced him to the mandatory minimum sentence of 15 years. Shular's argument was that Congress intended for "serious drug offenses" to include only drug offenses with a mens rea element (e.g. that the statute requires that the government prove that the defendant knew that he was selling a controlled substance). Shular noted that the Florida statute did not require the government to prove he knew that he was selling a controlled substance (cocaine) which meant that his convictions under that statute were not valid under the ACCA. In other words, he argued that the court should apply the "categorical approach"—comparing the elements of Florida's drug law to a generic federal drug law (one with a mens rea requirement) in order to determine whether any convictions under that Florida law should count towards the '3 strikes' of the ACCA.
Shular acknowledged that his suggested approach contradicted the Eleventh Circuit's precedent in United States v. Smith (2014), and called on the court to overturn their precedent. In a per curiam opinion released in September 2018, the Eleventh Circuit upheld Shuler's sentence. In their opinion, the court noted that the Eleventh Circuit adheres to a strong "prior panel precedent" rule, which means that a prior Eleventh Circuit panel's opinion is binding on all future panels unless it is overturned by the United States Supreme Court or an en banc panel consisting of the entire Eleventh Circuit.
Shular appealed the Eleventh Circuit's opinion to the Supreme Court, which granted his writ of certiorari agreeing to hear the case in June 2019. Oral arguments were held on January 21, 2020. Richard Summa, an Assistant Federal Defender from the Northern District of Florida, argued the case on behalf of Shular. Jonathan Bond, an Assistant US Solicitor General, argued the case on behalf of the United States Government.
 Supreme Court opinion 
 Majority opinion 
On February 26, 2020, the Supreme Court released an opinion affirming the decision by the Eleventh Circuit and ruling against Shular. Writing for a unanimous court, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg noted that, unlike in the other provisions referenced by Shular, that involve the categorical approach, the provision in question relating to "serious drug offenses" used the term 'involving'—which should be interpreted to mean that "serious drug offenses" includes any crime that 'involves' the enumerated acts (distribution, manufacturing, and possession of drugs). The opinion also noted that the rule of lenity, which would ordinarily require the court to interpret ambiguous phrases in a law in the manner most favorable to the defendant, was not applicable here since the terms being used were not genuinely ambiguous.
 Concurrence 
Justice Brett Kavanaugh wrote a concurring opinion, which noted that he joined the majority opinion in full.  He further elaborated about how the rule of lenity did not apply to Shular. Kavanaugh describes the process for when the rule of lenity should be used: 
1. Courts must first attempt traditional methods of statutory interpretation and, if that fails
2. they may only resort to the rule of lenity when the terms being used are so grievously ambiguous that the court can only guess at what the legislature intended
 Effect 
The Supreme Court's ruling resolved a circuit split on the use of the categorical approach to analyzing state "serious drug offenses" under the Armed Career Criminal Act.
 References 
External links
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:Armed Career Criminal Act case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:Jefferson County, Florida
"""

From "Shurtleff v. City of Boston" ==> """
Shurtleff v. City of Boston, 596 U.S. ___ (2022), was a United States Supreme Court case related to the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. The case concerned the City of Boston's program that allowed groups to have their flags flown outside Boston City Hall. In a unanimous 9–0 decision, the Court ruled that the city violated a Christian group's free speech rights when it denied their request to raise a Christian flag over City Hall.
 Background 
Under an application process, Boston, Massachusetts allowed groups to have their flags raised over one of the three flagpoles outside Boston City Hall. Flags that the city had approved ranged from those of other nations, to those celebrating the observance of Juneteenth.
A Christian group, Camp Constitution, and its director Hal Shurtleff applied to have the city fly a Christian flag over City Hall on Constitution Day in 2017. The group's mission is "to enhance the understanding of the country’s Judeo-Christian moral heritage". The city denied their application, the first denial of about 284 applications, on concerns that it would violate the Establishment Clause as government speech by signaling that the city was endorsing a particular religion. This was the first request that the city ever received to raise a religious flag during its program. Shurtleff then sued the city for violating his free speech rights.
After the city prevailed in both the district court and the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, Shurtleff appealed to the Supreme Court. In the meantime, the city discontinued accepting flag raising applications.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case on September 30, 2021. On May 2, 2022, the Court unanimously ruled that the City of Boston violated the First Amendment by denying Shurtleff's application to fly the flag.
The majority decision was written by Justice Stephen Breyer. He concluded that "the city's lack of meaningful involvement in the selection of flags or the crafting of their messages leads us to classify the flag raisings as private, not government, speech".
Justice Brett Kavanaugh wrote a one-paragraph concurring opinion to emphasize that a government does not violate the Establishment Clause when it treats religious persons or organizations equally with secular ones, but a government does violate the Free Speech Clause when it excludes religious persons or organizations.
Justice Samuel Alito wrote another concurring opinion, disagreeing with Breyer's analysis and that the simplest test in these type of cases is "whether the government is actually expressing its own views or the real speaker is a private party."
Justice Neil Gorsuch also filed a concurring opinion, writing that the city relied erroneously on the 1971 ruling in Lemon v. Kurtzman and the subsequent "Lemon test", which had been used to evaluate such government actions within the scope of the Establishment Clause but had been falling out of favor by the Court in the years prior. The Court would later officially overturn Lemon about eight weeks later on June 27, 2022, in its ruling in Kennedy v. Bremerton School District, with Gorsuch writing the majority opinion.
 Reactions 
After the ruling, a spokesperson for Boston mayor Michelle Wu stated that they will review the court's decision. The Satanic Temple nevertheless submitted a request to fly their flag for "Satanic Appreciation Week" from July 23–29.
The Biden administration and the American Civil Liberties Union sided with the Christian group. The administration said that "The city cannot generally open its flagpole to flags from private civic and social groups while excluding otherwise similar groups with religious views".
 References 
 External Links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
"""

From "Shurtleff v. United States" ==> """
Shurtleff v. United States, 189 U.S. 311 (1903), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court concerning the President's removal power under the Appointments Clause. 
 References 
 External links 
Category:1903 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
"""

From "Shuttlesworth v. City of Birmingham" ==> """
Shuttlesworth v. Birmingham, 394 U.S. 147 (1969), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Supreme Court struck down a Birmingham, Alabama ordinance that prohibited citizens from holding parades and processions on city streets without first obtaining a permit.
Background
The Petitioner was Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth, an African American minister who helped lead 52 African Americans in an orderly civil rights march in Birmingham, Alabama, in 1963.  He was arrested and convicted for violating section 1159 of the city's General Code, an ordinance which proscribes participating in any parade or procession on city streets or public ways without first obtaining a permit from the City Commission. Section 1159 permits the Commission to refuse a parade permit if its members believe "the public welfare, peace, safety, health, decency, good order, morals or convenience require that it be refused." Petitioner had previously been given to understand by a member of the Commission that under no circumstances would petitioner and his group be allowed to demonstrate in Birmingham. The Alabama Court of Appeals reversed the conviction on the grounds, inter alia, that 1159, as written, unconstitutionally imposed an "invidious prior restraint" without ascertainable standards for the granting of permits, and that the ordinance had been discriminatorily enforced. However, the Alabama Supreme Court in 1967 narrowly construed 1159 as an objective, even-handed traffic regulation which did not allow the Commission unlimited discretion in granting or withholding permits, and upheld petitioner's conviction.  The case was taken to the U.S. Supreme Court, where Shuttlesworth was represented by the prominent civil rights attorney James Nabrit III.
Opinion of the Court
Writing for the court, Justice Potter Stewart held that (1) even though the actual construction of § 1159 of the Birmingham General City Code was unconstitutional, the judicial construction of the ordinance prohibited only standing or loitering on public property that obstructed free passage, but it was unclear from the record, whether the literal or judicial construction was applied; and (2) the literal construction of § 1159 of the Birmingham General City Code was unconstitutional, and the statutory application revealed that it applied to the enforcement of an officer's order in directing vehicular traffic. Even though Justice Stewart's opinion for the Court mentioned that "the Supreme Court of Alabama performed a remarkable job of plastic surgery upon the face of the ordinance", the Court reversed Shuttlesworth's conviction because the circumstances indicated that the parade permit was denied not to control traffic, but to censor ideas.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 394
 Brown v. Board of Education
Birmingham campaign
External links
Category:African-American history in Birmingham, Alabama
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:African-American history of Alabama
Category:1969 in United States case law
Category:History of Birmingham, Alabama
Category:Civil rights movement case law
"""

From "Sibbach v. Wilson & Co." ==> """
Sibbach v. Wilson & Co., 312 U.S. 1 (1941), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court in which the Court held that under American law important and substantial procedures are not substantive, rather they are still considered procedural, and federal law applies.
This was a post-Erie decision, and thus the decision whether to apply the law of the state of jurisdiction or uniform federal rules depended on whether the rule in question was procedural or substantive in nature.
See also
Erie doctrine
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 312
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:Conflict of laws case law
Category:Diversity jurisdiction case law
Category:1941 in United States case law
"""

From "Sicurella v. United States" ==> """
Sicurella v. United States, 348 U.S. 385 (1955), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that willingness to fight in "theocratic" wars does not disqualify a Jehovah's Witness who would otherwise be eligible for exemption as a conscientious objector.
 Background 
Sicurella, a member of Jehovah's Witnesses, filed a petition for conscientious objector status in regards to the Selective Service of the United States Armed Forces in 1950. Sicurella had previously been classified as a minister, but was reclassified for general service in 1950, leading to his petition. His request was subsequently denied by the Department of Justice on the grounds that he did not meet the legal requirement for a conscious objector to object to participation in war in any form. Sicurella had indicated on his petition that he was willing to fight in a hypothetical theocratic war if commanded to by Jehovah and Jesus Christ. The Department of Justice acknowledged his claim was sincere, but determined that because he was willing to fight in defense of his ministry and Kingdom interests that he wasn't opposed to war in all forms. After they denied him Sicurella filed an appeal and the case made its way to the Supreme Court of the United States on the urging of T. Oscar Smith, the head of the Conscientious Objector Section at the Department of Justice, who had refused to grant the status to Jehovah's Witnesses who agreed with their religion's doctrine about war.
 Decision 
Justice Tom C. Clark wrote the opinion of the court, which was decided by a 6–2 vote on March 14, 1955. The court sided with Sicurella and determined that the Department of Justice could not assume that Congress had intended to include hypothetical theocratic wars in its requirements for conscientious objector status. In the court opinion, Justice Clark wrote that Congress clearly intended for the requirement to only reflect "real shooting wars". He further points out that Sicurella made it clear that the weapons of his potential war would be spiritual, not carnal, and that Congress could not possibly be assumed to have included the climactic battles of Armageddon from various religious philosophies in their creation of the law. Therefore, the denial of his claim was subsequently overturned by the court and he was granted conscientious objector status.
Two dissenting opinions were written, one by Justice Stanley F. Reed and one by Justice Sherman Minton.
Reed stated in his dissenting opinion that he would require Sicurella to serve because his willingness to use force in defense of "Kingdom interests" is inconsistent with his claimed opposition to war.
Minton stated in his dissenting opinion that the court only had the power to decide issues of local board decisions if they are "so wanton, arbitrary and capricious as to destroy the integrity of the Board." Minton states that by the court's own opinion the decision by the board and the Department of Justice was made in good faith and therefore the Supreme Court should not have jurisdiction over this issue. Minton also states that he disagrees with the assertion that a religious war is not relevant to the conscientious objector issue, saying that it is still choosing some wars to participate in over others. Minton also points out Sicurella's willingness to use carnal weapons in defense of Kingdom interests as evidence that the two types of war can not be rightly separated in this case.
 Impacts 
The decision is still in effect and actively mentioned as an example of a conscientious objector issue by the United States Selective Service to this day. The case has also been brought up by leaders in other faiths, such as the Mormon faith, in discussions about the issue of conscientious objector status in their faiths. The case also played a role in the decision of the Supreme Court case Gillette v. United States, which covers similar issues around religion and what classifies as a conscientious objector.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 348
References
External links
Category:1955 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:American conscientious objectors
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:United States military case law
Category:1955 in religion
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
"""

From "Siegel v. Fitzgerald" ==> """
Siegel v. Fitzgerald, 596 U.S. ___ (2022), was a United States Supreme Court case related to the United States bankruptcy courts.
 Background 
Congress created the United States Trustee Program in the 1980s to transfer administrative functions of the bankruptcy courts to the executive branch. When it did so, Alabama and North Carolina were provided exemptions, remaining under the bankruptcy administrator program instead. Chapter 11 debtors in Trustee Program courts pay quarterly fees throughout the duration of their case, while debtors in administrator states were exempt until 2001, when the Judicial Conference of the United States issued a standing order making the fees the same rates in both systems. In 2017, the Trustee Fund faced a shortfall in funds, so Congress passed the Bankruptcy Judgeship Act of 2017, increasing fees dramatically in Trustee Program districts. The Judicial Conference extended the hike to administrator program districts, but only for new cases. Circuit City filed for bankruptcy in 2008, in a Trustee Program district, and saw its fees dramatically increase due to the hike. It challenged the increase as violating the uniformity requirement of the United States Constitution's Bankruptcy Clause. The bankruptcy court agreed, but the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit reversed, over the dissent of Judge A. Marvin Quattlebaum Jr.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case on January 10, 2022. Oral arguments were held on April 18, 2022. On June 6, 2022, the Supreme Court issued a unanimous opinion reversing the Fourth Circuit as to the constitutionality of the fee increase, while remanding for consideration of what the remedy should be.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States bankruptcy case law
"""

From "Sierra Club v. Morton" ==> """
Sierra Club v. Morton, 405 U.S. 727 (1972), is a Supreme Court of the United States case on the issue of standing under the Administrative Procedure Act. The Court rejected a lawsuit by the Sierra Club seeking to block the development of a ski resort at Mineral King valley in the Sierra Nevada Mountains because the club had not alleged any injury.
The case prompted a famous dissent by Justice William O. Douglas suggesting that in response to ecological concerns, environmental objects (such as a valley, an alpine meadow, a river, or a lake) should be granted legal personhood by the public.
Background
Mineral King is a seven mile by one mile subalpine glacial valley in Sequoia National Forest then abutting Sequoia National Park in Tulare County, California and only accessible by a dirt county road. In 1965 the United States Forest Service began circulating a prospectus calling for bids for recreational developments at Mineral King.Arthur B. Ferguson Jr. and William P. Bryson, Mineral King: A Case Study in Forest Service Decision Making, 2 Ecology L.Q. 493 (1972). In 1969 the Forest Service accepted a bid by The Walt Disney Company proposing a $35 million ski resort accommodating 1.7 million annual visitors and at any one time 20,000 skiers. By comparison, Disneyland had cost $17 million. The resort would require construction of a new twenty mile highway and 66,000 volt power line through Sequoia National Park, then a nine-story parking structure and a cog-assisted railroad to ultimately take visitors into the valley.Sierra Club v. Morton, 405 U.S. 727, 92 S. Ct. 1361, 31 L. Ed. 2d 636 (1972). Walt Disney began personally buying private property around Mineral King through Retlaw Enterprises and, after contributing heavily in the California gubernatorial election, 1966, received a personal promise from Ronald Reagan that the state would fund the highway.
Skeptical economists doubted the project would yield a positive net present value.Cicchetti, Charles J., Anthony C. Fisher, and V. Kerry Smith. 1976. "An Econometric Evaluation of a Generalized Consumer Surplus Measure: The Mineral King Controversy". Econometrica 44 (6). [Wiley, Econometric Society]: 1259–76. doi:10.2307/1914259. Disney's master plan attracted national media attention from Harper's MagazineSierra Club v. Morton, 405 U.S. at 744 (Douglas, J., dissenting) citing Peter Browning, Mickey Mouse in the Mountains, Harper's, March 1972, p. 65. as well as consistent, critical coverage by The New York Times.Sierra Club v. Morton, 405 U.S. at 743 (Douglas, J., dissenting) citing Arnold Hano, Protectionists vs. recreationists —The Battle of Mineral King, N. Y. Times Mag., Aug. 17, 1969, p. 25
Michael McCloskey had just ousted David Brower as executive director of the Sierra Club and, emboldened by the Second Circuit's decision in Scenic Hudson Preservation Conference v. Federal Power Commission, he sought a more direct, and litigious, approach to environmentalism by setting up the Sierra Club Legal Defense Fund, later renamed Earthjustice. The Sierra Club then sued the United States Secretary of the Interior in San Francisco federal court to block development of Disney's famous ski resort. Asserting itself as private attorney general, the Sierra Club argued that Disney's resort would cause "irreparable harm to the public interest".Sierra Club v. Hickel, 433 F.2d 24 (9th Cir. 1970). The Sierra Club did not allege it suffered a unique, private injury from Disney's ski resort because it believed the court would then weigh the balance of hardships in Disney's favor. After two days of hearings, on July 23, 1969, District Judge William Thomas Sweigert issued a preliminary injunction blocking Disney's ski resort.Sierra Club v. Morton, 495 U.S. at 740 n.15 (1972).
The Secretary appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. On September 16, 1970, Judge Ozell Miller Trask, joined by Judge John Kilkenny, vacated judgment and remanded, finding that the Club did not have standing to sue because it had made no allegation that it would be affected by Disney's ski resort. Discussing the merits, Judge Trask felt it was within the Secretary's discretion "to make available a vast area of incomparable beauty to more people rather than to have it remain inaccessible except to a rugged few." Judge Frederick George Hamley concurred, noting that although he thought the Sierra Club had standing to sue, he agreed on the merits that Judge Sweigert's injunction had been an abuse of discretion.
The Sierra Club's petition for certiorari was granted and the case was argued before the U.S. Supreme Court on November 17, 1971, with U.S. Solicitor General Erwin Griswold personally appearing. Tulare County filed amici briefs in the Court of Appeals and the Supreme Court supporting the Secretary. Lewis F. Powell, Jr. and Associate Attorney General William Rehnquist, who both joined the Court on January 7, 1972, did not participate in the case.
Opinion of the Court
On April 19, 1972 the Supreme Court affirmed 4-3. Writing for the Court, Justice Potter Stewart, joined by Justices Byron White, Thurgood Marshall, and Chief Justice Warren E. Burger, agreed with the Ninth Circuit that the Sierra Club had not alleged any legal interest in the case. Because the Constitution's Case or Controversy Clause prohibits advisory opinions, the Court reasons that the legal wrongs protected by the Administrative Procedure Act must at minimum meet the prevailing constitutional requirements of standing.Sierra Club v. Morton, 405 U.S. at 732 n. 3. The Sierra Club's legal interest in the case, according to the Court, seemed to be relying on a "zone of interests" test that Justice Douglas had announced in two cases decided on March 3, 1970.Sierra Club v. Morton, 405 U.S. at 733. Declining to clarify the meaning of "zone of interests", the Court reasoned that broadening the categories of injury is different "from abandoning the requirement" that plaintiffs themselves actually be injured.Sierra Club v. Morton, 405 U.S. at 738. The Sierra Club had no standing to sue because it did not allege it was itself in any way injured by Disney's ski resort.
In a footnote, the Court helpfully notes that the Wilderness Society's amici brief included assertions that the Sierra Club makes regular camping trips to Mineral King and that Rule 15 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, "of course", allows the Sierra Club to amend its complaint.Sierra Club v. Morton, 405 U.S. at 735 n. 8. Justice Stewart closes by noting that although Alexis de Tocqueville had observed "Scarcely any political question arises in the United States that is not resolved sooner or later, into a judicial question", that Tocqueville further commented that "by intimately uniting the trial of the law with the trial of an individual, legislation is protected from wanton assaults and from the daily aggressions of party spirit."Sierra Club v. Morton, 405 U.S. at 740 n. 16 citing Alexis de Tocqueville, 1 Democracy in America 102.
 Justice Douglas's dissent 
thumb|Justice "Wild Bill" Douglas
Sierra Club v. Morton is, perhaps, best known for the dissenting opinion by William O. Douglas who asserted that natural resources ought to have standing to sue for their own protection. An excerpt from his dissent:
Justice Douglas's dissent included his concern that regulatory agencies become too favorable with their regulated industries (regulatory capture):
Yet the pressures on agencies for favorable action one way or the other are enormous. The suggestion that Congress can stop action which is undesirable is true in theory; yet even Congress is too remote to give meaningful direction and its machinery is too ponderous to use very often. The federal agencies of which I speak are not venal or corrupt. But they are notoriously under the control of powerful interests who manipulate them through advisory committees, or friendly working relations, or who have that natural affinity with the agency which in time develops between the regulator and the regulated. As early as 1894, Attorney General Olney predicted that regulatory agencies might become "industry-minded", as illustrated by his forecast concerning the Interstate Commerce Commission:
The Commission ... is, or can be made, of great use to the railroads. It satisfies the popular clamor for a government supervision of railroads, at the same time that that supervision is almost entirely nominal. Further, the older such a commission gets to be, the more inclined it will be found to take the business and railroad view of things.
— M. Josephson, The Politicos 526 (1938).
Years later a court of appeals observed, "the recurring question which has plagued public regulation of industry [is] whether the regulatory agency is unduly oriented toward the interests of the industry it is designed to regulate, rather than the public interest it is designed to protect." 
— Moss v. CAB, 139 U.S. App. D.C. 150, 152, 430 F. 2d 891, 893.
Subsequent developments
400px|thumb|Mineral King in 2004
On June 23, 1972 the Sierra Club amended its complaint to allege that club outings in the valley would be harmed by a massive ski resort, added several natural persons as plaintiffs, and added a new claim for relief under the National Environmental Policy Act.Thomas Lundmark, Anne Mester, R. A. Cordes, and Barry S. Sandals, Mineral King Goes Downhill, 5 Ecology L.Q. 555(1976). On September 12, Judge Sweigert then allowed the case to proceed to discovery. In August 1972 Governor Reagan withdrew his support of the project, now arguing the new highway would be too expensive.
The Forest Service received 2,150 comments in response to its June 1974 preliminary draft Environmental Impact Statement. On February 26, 1976, the Forest Service released its final EIS for a resort accommodating 8,000 skiers. The Sierra Club stopped pursuing its lawsuit and in 1977 Judge Sweigert threw out the case for lack of prosecution.
Although the Sierra Club lost the case, as a practical matter they won the war. To assert standing in a natural resource manner, environmental groups simply need to find among their membership a single person with a particularized interest (e.g., one who hikes, hunts, fishes, or camps in or near the affected area). Mineral King was ultimately never developed and was absorbed into Sequoia National Park.
During the 95th United States Congress, Congressman John Hans Krebs attached a measure adding Mineral King to Sequoia National Park to a large omnibus "Park Barrel Bill", which President Jimmy Carter then signed into law in 1978. Thirty years later during the 111th United States Congress, Senator Barbara Boxer developed a bill designating Mineral King as the John Krebs Wilderness, which President Barack Obama then signed into law in the Omnibus Public Land Management Act of 2009.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 405
 Scenic Hudson Preservation Conference v. Federal Power Commission
References
Further reading
External links
Politics and Government Archival Collections in USC Libraries Special Collections: Mineral King Development
California State University, Fresno: Special Collections Research Center Guide to the Mineral King Collection, 1947–1995
Category:Sierra Club litigation
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States environmental case law
Category:United States standing case law
Category:1972 in the environment
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:Rights of nature
"""

From "Silver v. New York Stock Exchange" ==> """
Silver v. New York Stock Exchange, 373 U.S. 341 (1963), was a case of the United States Supreme Court which was decided May 20, 1963.. It held that the duty of self-regulation imposed upon the New York Stock Exchange by the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 did not exempt it from the antitrust laws nor justify it in denying petitioners the direct-wire connections without the notice and hearing which they requested. Therefore, the Exchange's action in this case violated 1 of the Sherman Antitrust Act, and the NYSE is liable to petitioners under 4 and 16 of the Clayton Act.
Facts
Petitioners, two Texas over-the-counter broker-dealers in securities, who were not members of the New York Stock Exchange, arranged with members of the Exchange in New York City for direct-wire telephone connections which were essential to the conduct of their businesses. The members applied to the Exchange, as required by its rules promulgated under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, for approval of the connections. Temporary approval was granted and the connections were established; but, without prior notice to petitioners, the applications were denied later, and the connections were discontinued, as required by rules of the Exchange. Allegedly as a result, one of the petitioners was forced out of business and the other's business was greatly diminished. Notwithstanding repeated requests, officials of the Exchange refused to grant petitioners a hearing or even to inform them of the reasons for denial of the applications. Petitioners sued the Exchange and its members in a Federal District Court for treble damages and injunctive relief, claiming that their collective refusal to continue the direct-wire connections violated the Sherman Act.
Judgment
See also
US antitrust law
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States securities case law
Category:1963 in United States case law
Category:New York Stock Exchange
"""

From "Silverman v. United States" ==> """
Silverman v. United States, 365 U.S. 505 (1961), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court unanimously held that a federal officer may not, without warrant, physically place themselves into the space of a person's office or home to secretly observe or listen and relate at the man's subsequent criminal trial what was seen or heard.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1961 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Silverthorne Lumber Co. v. United States" ==> """
Silverthorne Lumber Co. v. United States, 251 U.S. 385 (1920), was a U.S. Supreme Court Case in which Silverthorne attempted to evade paying taxes. Federal agents illegally seized tax books from Silverthorne and created copies of the records. The issue in this case is whether or not derivatives of illegal evidence are permissible in court. The ruling, delivered by Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., was that to permit derivatives would encourage police to circumvent the Fourth Amendment, so the illegal copied evidence was held tainted and inadmissible.. This precedent later became known as the "fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine,". and is an extension of the exclusionary rule.
Chief Justice White and Associate Justice Pitney dissented without a written opinion.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 251
Wong Sun v. United States, 
Further reading
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1920 in United States case law
Category:Forest products companies of the United States
"""

From "Simmons v. Himmelreich" ==> """
Simmons v. Himmelreich, 578 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding inmates suing under the Federal Tort Claims Act (FTCA).SCOTUSblog coverageSimmons v. Himmelreich, No. 15–109, 578 U.S. ____ (2016).
 Opinion of the Court 
Associate Justice Sonia Sotomayor authored the unanimous decision holding that Himmelreich's second lawsuit can proceed, even after the first suit was dismissed under an exception to the Federal Tort Claims Act.
 References 
External links
 SCOTUSblog coverage
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
