"""

From "Ethics" ==> """
thumb|upright=1.5|Drawing of the trolley problem original premises and its five variants. The trolley problem is an ethical dilemma that shows the difference between deontological and consequentialist ethical systems.
Ethics or moral philosophy is a branch of philosophy that "involves systematizing, defending, and recommending concepts of right and wrong behavior".Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy  The field of ethics, along with aesthetics, concerns matters of value; these fields comprise the branch of philosophy called axiology.Random House Unabridged Dictionary: Entry on Axiology. 
Ethics seeks to resolve questions of human morality by defining concepts such as good and evil, right and wrong, virtue and vice, justice and crime. As a field of intellectual inquiry, moral philosophy is related to the fields of moral psychology, descriptive ethics, and value theory.
Three major areas of study within ethics recognized today are:
 Meta-ethics, concerning the theoretical meaning and reference of moral propositions, and how their truth values (if any) can be determined;
 Normative ethics, concerning the practical means of determining a moral course of action;
 Applied ethics, concerning what a person is obligated (or permitted) to do in a specific situation or a particular domain of action.
Definition 
The English word ethics is derived from the Ancient Greek word ēthikós (), meaning "relating to one's character", which itself comes from the root word êthos () meaning "character, moral nature". This word was transferred into Latin as ethica and then into French as éthique, from which it was transferred into English.
Rushworth Kidder states that "standard definitions of ethics have typically included such phrases as 'the science of the ideal human character' or 'the science of moral duty'. Richard William Paul and Linda Elder define ethics as "a set of concepts and principles that guide us in determining what behavior helps or harms sentient creatures". The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy states that the word "ethics" is "commonly used interchangeably with 'morality' ... and sometimes it is used more narrowly to mean the moral principles of a particular tradition, group or individual."John Deigh in Robert Audi (ed), The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy, 1995. Paul and Elder state that most people confuse ethics with behaving in accordance with social conventions, religious beliefs, the law, and do not treat ethics as a stand-alone concept.
The word ethics in English refers to several things. It can refer to philosophical ethics or moral philosophy—a project that attempts to use reason to answer various kinds of ethical questions. As the English moral philosopher Bernard Williams writes, attempting to explain moral philosophy: "What makes an inquiry a philosophical one is reflective generality and a style of argument that claims to be rationally persuasive." Williams describes the content of this area of inquiry as addressing the very broad question, "how one should live". Ethics can also refer to a common human ability to think about ethical problems that is not particular to philosophy. As bioethicist Larry Churchill has written: "Ethics, understood as the capacity to think critically about moral values and direct our actions in terms of such values, is a generic human capacity."
Meta-ethics
Meta-ethics is the branch of philosophical ethics that asks how we understand, know about, and what we mean when we talk about what is right and what is wrong. An ethical question pertaining to a particular practical situation—such as, "Should I eat this particular piece of chocolate cake?"—cannot be a meta-ethical question (rather, this is an applied ethical question). A meta-ethical question is abstract and relates to a wide range of more specific practical questions. For example, "Is it ever possible to have a secure knowledge of what is right and wrong?" is a meta-ethical question.
Meta-ethics has always accompanied philosophical ethics. For example, Aristotle implies that less precise knowledge is possible in ethics than in other spheres of inquiry, and he regards ethical knowledge as depending upon habit and acculturation in a way that makes it distinctive from other kinds of knowledge. Meta-ethics is also important in G.E. Moore's Principia Ethica from 1903. In it he first wrote about what he called the naturalistic fallacy. Moore was seen to reject naturalism in ethics, in his open-question argument. This made thinkers look again at second order questions about ethics. Earlier, the Scottish philosopher David Hume had put forward a similar view on the difference between facts and values.
Studies of how we know in ethics divide into cognitivism and non-cognitivism; these, respectively, take descriptive and non-descriptive approaches to moral goodness or value. Non-cognitivism is the view that when we judge something as morally right or wrong, this is neither true nor false. We may, for example, be only expressing our emotional feelings about these things. Cognitivism can then be seen as the claim that when we talk about right and wrong, we are talking about matters of fact.
The ontology of ethics is about value-bearing things or properties, that is, the kind of things or stuff referred to by ethical propositions. Non-descriptivists and non-cognitivists believe that ethics does not need a specific ontology since ethical propositions do not refer. This is known as an anti-realist position. Realists, on the other hand, must explain what kind of entities, properties or states are relevant for ethics, how they have value, and why they guide and motivate our actions.
Moral skepticism
Moral skepticism (or moral scepticism) is a class of metaethical theories in which all members entail that no one has any moral knowledge. Many moral skeptics also make the stronger, modal claim that moral knowledge is impossible. Moral skepticism is particularly against moral realism which holds the view that there are knowable and objective moral truths.
Some proponents of moral skepticism include Pyrrho, Aenesidemus, Sextus Empiricus, David Hume, Max Stirner, Friedrich Nietzsche, and J.L. Mackie.
Moral skepticism is divided into three sub-classes:
 Moral error theory (or moral nihilism).
 Epistemological moral skepticism.
 Non-cognitivism.
All of these three theories share the same conclusions, which are as follows:
(a) we are never justified in believing that moral claims (claims of the form "state of affairs x is good," "action y is morally obligatory," etc.) are true and, even more so
(b) we never know that any moral claim is true.
However, each method arrives at (a) and (b) by different routes.
Moral error theory holds that we do not know that any moral claim is true because
(i) all moral claims are false,
(ii) we have reason to believe that all moral claims are false, and
(iii) since we are not justified in believing any claim we have reason to deny, we are not justified in believing any moral claims.
Epistemological moral skepticism is a subclass of theory, the members of which include Pyrrhonian moral skepticism and dogmatic moral skepticism. All members of epistemological moral skepticism share two things: first, they acknowledge that we are unjustified in believing any moral claim, and second, they are agnostic on whether (i) is true (i.e. on whether all moral claims are false).
Pyrrhonian moral skepticism holds that the reason we are unjustified in believing any moral claim is that it is irrational for us to believe either that any moral claim is true or that any moral claim is false. Thus, in addition to being agnostic on whether (i) is true, Pyrrhonian moral skepticism denies (ii).
Dogmatic moral skepticism, on the other hand, affirms (ii) and cites (ii)'s truth as the reason we are unjustified in believing any moral claim.
Noncognitivism holds that we can never know that any moral claim is true because moral claims are incapable of being true or false (they are not truth-apt). Instead, moral claims are imperatives (e.g. "Don't steal babies!"), expressions of emotion (e.g. "stealing babies: Boo!"), or expressions of "pro-attitudes" ("I do not believe that babies should be stolen.")
Normative ethics
Normative ethics is the study of ethical action. It is the branch of ethics that investigates the set of questions that arise when considering how one ought to act, morally speaking. Normative ethics is distinct from meta-ethics because normative ethics examines standards for the rightness and wrongness of actions, while meta-ethics studies the meaning of moral language and the metaphysics of moral facts. Normative ethics is also distinct from descriptive ethics, as the latter is an empirical investigation of people's moral beliefs. To put it another way, descriptive ethics would be concerned with determining what proportion of people believe that killing is always wrong, while normative ethics is concerned with whether it is correct to hold such a belief. Hence, normative ethics is sometimes called prescriptive rather than descriptive. However, on certain versions of the meta-ethical view called moral realism, moral facts are both descriptive and prescriptive at the same time.
Traditionally, normative ethics (also known as moral theory) was the study of what makes actions right and wrong. These theories offered an overarching moral principle one could appeal to in resolving difficult moral decisions.
At the turn of the 20th century, moral theories became more complex and were no longer concerned solely with rightness and wrongness, but were interested in many different kinds of moral status. During the middle of the century, the study of normative ethics declined as meta-ethics grew in prominence. This focus on meta-ethics was in part caused by an intense linguistic focus in analytic philosophy and by the popularity of logical positivism.
Virtue ethics
thumb|upright|Socrates
Virtue ethics describes the character of a moral agent as a driving force for ethical behavior, and it is used to describe the ethics of early Greek philosophers such as Socrates and Aristotle, and ancient Indian philosophers such as Valluvar. Socrates (469–399 BC) was one of the first Greek philosophers to encourage both scholars and the common citizen to turn their attention from the outside world to the condition of humankind. In this view, knowledge bearing on human life was placed highest, while all other knowledge was secondary. Self-knowledge was considered necessary for success and inherently an essential good. A self-aware person will act completely within his capabilities to his pinnacle, while an ignorant person will flounder and encounter difficulty. To Socrates, a person must become aware of every fact (and its context) relevant to his existence, if he wishes to attain self-knowledge. He posited that people will naturally do what is good if they know what is right. Evil or bad actions are the results of ignorance. If a criminal was truly aware of the intellectual and spiritual consequences of his or her actions, he or she would neither commit nor even consider committing those actions. Any person who knows what is truly right will automatically do it, according to Socrates. While he correlated knowledge with virtue, he similarly equated virtue with joy. The truly wise man will know what is right, do what is good, and therefore be happy.
Aristotle (384–323 BC) posited an ethical system that may be termed "virtuous." In Aristotle's view, when a person acts in accordance with virtue this person will do good and be content. Unhappiness and frustration are caused by doing wrong, leading to failed goals and a poor life. Therefore, it is imperative for people to act in accordance with virtue, which is only attainable by the practice of the virtues in order to be content and complete. Happiness was held to be the ultimate goal. All other things, such as civic life or wealth, were only made worthwhile and of benefit when employed in the practice of the virtues. The practice of the virtues is the surest path to happiness. Aristotle asserted that the soul of man had three natures: body (physical/metabolism), animal (emotional/appetite), and rational (mental/conceptual). Physical nature can be assuaged through exercise and care; emotional nature through indulgence of instinct and urges; and mental nature through human reason and developed potential. Rational development was considered the most important, as essential to philosophical self-awareness, and as uniquely human. Moderation was encouraged, with the extremes seen as degraded and immoral. For example, courage is the moderate virtue between the extremes of cowardice and recklessness. Man should not simply live, but live well with conduct governed by virtue. This is regarded as difficult, as virtue denotes doing the right thing, in the right way, at the right time, for the right reason.
Valluvar (before 5th century CE) keeps virtue, or aṟam (dharma) as he calls it, as the cornerstone throughout the writing of the Kural literature. While religious scriptures generally consider aṟam as divine in nature, Valluvar describes it as a way of life rather than any spiritual observance, a way of harmonious living that leads to universal happiness. Contrary to what other contemporary works say, Valluvar holds that aṟam is common for all, irrespective of whether the person is a bearer of palanquin or the rider in it. Valluvar considered justice as a facet of aṟam. While ancient Greek philosophers such as Plato, Aristotle, and their descendants opined that justice cannot be defined and that it was a divine mystery, Valluvar positively suggested that a divine origin is not required to define the concept of justice. In the words of V. R. Nedunchezhiyan, justice according to Valluvar "dwells in the minds of those who have knowledge of the standard of right and wrong; so too deceit dwells in the minds which breed fraud."
Stoicism
thumb|upright|Epictetus
The Stoic philosopher Epictetus posited that the greatest good was contentment and serenity. Peace of mind, or apatheia, was of the highest value; self-mastery over one's desires and emotions leads to spiritual peace. The "unconquerable will" is central to this philosophy. The individual's will should be independent and inviolate. Allowing a person to disturb the mental equilibrium is, in essence, offering yourself in slavery. If a person is free to anger you at will, you have no control over your internal world, and therefore no freedom. Freedom from material attachments is also necessary. If a thing breaks, the person should not be upset, but realize it was a thing that could break. Similarly, if someone should die, those close to them should hold to their serenity because the loved one was made of flesh and blood destined to death. Stoic philosophy says to accept things that cannot be changed, resigning oneself to the existence and enduring in a rational fashion. Death is not feared. People do not "lose" their life, but instead "return", for they are returning to God (who initially gave what the person is as a person). Epictetus said difficult problems in life should not be avoided, but rather embraced. They are spiritual exercises needed for the health of the spirit, just as physical exercise is required for the health of the body. He also stated that sex and sexual desire are to be avoided as the greatest threat to the integrity and equilibrium of a man's mind. Abstinence is highly desirable. Epictetus said remaining abstinent in the face of temptation was a victory for which a man could be proud.
Contemporary virtue ethics
Modern virtue ethics was popularized during the late 20th century in large part due to a revival of Aristotelianism, and as a response to G.E.M. Anscombe's "Modern Moral Philosophy". Anscombe argues that consequentialist and deontological ethics are only feasible as universal theories if the two schools ground themselves in divine law. As a deeply devoted Christian herself, Anscombe proposed that either those who do not give ethical credence to notions of divine law take up virtue ethics, which does not necessitate universal laws as agents themselves are investigated for virtue or vice and held up to "universal standards", or that those who wish to be utilitarian or consequentialist ground their theories in religious conviction. Alasdair MacIntyre, who wrote the book After Virtue, was a key contributor and proponent of modern virtue ethics, although some claim that MacIntyre supports a relativistic account of virtue based on cultural norms, not objective standards. Martha Nussbaum, a contemporary virtue ethicist, objects to MacIntyre's relativism, among that of others, and responds to relativist objections to form an objective account in her work "Non-Relative Virtues: An Aristotelian Approach". However, Nussbaum's accusation of relativism appears to be a misreading. In Whose Justice, Whose Rationality?, MacIntyre's ambition of taking a rational path beyond relativism was quite clear when he stated "rival claims made by different traditions […] are to be evaluated […] without relativism" (p. 354) because indeed "rational debate between and rational choice among rival traditions is possible" (p. 352). Complete Conduct Principles for the 21st CenturyJohn Newton, Ph.D., Complete Conduct Principles for the 21st Century (2000). . blended the Eastern virtue ethics and the Western virtue ethics, with some modifications to suit the 21st Century, and formed a part of contemporary virtue ethics.
Mortimer J. Adler described Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics as a "unique book in the Western tradition of moral philosophy, the only ethics that is sound, practical, and undogmatic."
One major trend in contemporary virtue ethics is the Modern Stoicism movement.
Intuitive ethics
Ethical intuitionism (also called moral intuitionism) is a family of views in moral epistemology (and, on some definitions, metaphysics). At minimum, ethical intuitionism is the thesis that our intuitive awareness of value, or intuitive knowledge of evaluative facts, forms the foundation of our ethical knowledge.
The view is at its core a foundationalism about moral knowledge: it is the view that some moral truths can be known non-inferentially (i.e., known without one needing to infer them from other truths one believes). Such an epistemological view implies that there are moral beliefs with propositional contents; so it implies cognitivism. As such, ethical intuitionism is to be contrasted with coherentist approaches to moral epistemology, such as those that depend on reflective equilibrium.Shafer-Landau & Cuneo (2012), p. 385
Throughout the philosophical literature, the term "ethical intuitionism" is frequently used with significant variation in its sense. This article's focus on foundationalism reflects the core commitments of contemporary self-identified ethical intuitionists.Stratton-Lake (2014) http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/intuitionism-ethics/ 
Sufficiently broadly defined, ethical intuitionism can be taken to encompass cognitivist forms of moral sense theory.Stratton-Lake (2013), p. 337 It is usually furthermore taken as essential to ethical intuitionism that there be self-evident or a priori moral knowledge; this counts against considering moral sense theory to be a species of intuitionism.
Ethical intuitionism was first clearly shown in use by the philosopher Francis Hutcheson. Later ethical intuitionists of influence and note include Henry Sidgwick, G.E. Moore, Harold Arthur Prichard, C.S. Lewis and, most influentially, Robert Audi.
Objections to ethical intuitionism include whether or not there are objective moral values (an assumption which the ethical system is based upon) the question of why many disagree over ethics if they are absolute, and whether Occam's razor cancels such a theory out entirely.
Hedonism
Hedonism posits that the principal ethic is maximizing pleasure and minimizing pain. There are several schools of Hedonist thought ranging from those advocating the indulgence of even momentary desires to those teaching a pursuit of spiritual bliss. In their consideration of consequences, they range from those advocating self-gratification regardless of the pain and expense to others, to those stating that the most ethical pursuit maximizes pleasure and happiness for the most people.
Cyrenaic hedonism
Founded by Aristippus of Cyrene, Cyrenaics supported immediate gratification or pleasure. "Eat, drink and be merry, for tomorrow we die." Even fleeting desires should be indulged, for fear the opportunity should be forever lost. There was little to no concern with the future, the present dominating in the pursuit of immediate pleasure. Cyrenaic hedonism encouraged the pursuit of enjoyment and indulgence without hesitation, believing pleasure to be the only good.
Epicureanism
Epicurean ethics is a hedonist form of virtue ethics. Epicurus "presented a sustained argument that pleasure, correctly understood, will coincide with virtue."Ancient Ethical Theory , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. He rejected the extremism of the Cyrenaics, believing some pleasures and indulgences to be detrimental to human beings. Epicureans observed that indiscriminate indulgence sometimes resulted in negative consequences. Some experiences were therefore rejected out of hand, and some unpleasant experiences endured in the present to ensure a better life in the future. To Epicurus, the summum bonum, or greatest good, was prudence, exercised through moderation and caution. Excessive indulgence can be destructive to pleasure and can even lead to pain. For example, eating one food too often makes a person lose a taste for it. Eating too much food at once leads to discomfort and ill-health. Pain and fear were to be avoided. Living was essentially good, barring pain and illness. Death was not to be feared. Fear was considered the source of most unhappiness. Conquering the fear of death would naturally lead to a happier life. Epicurus reasoned if there were an afterlife and immortality, the fear of death was irrational. If there was no life after death, then the person would not be alive to suffer, fear, or worry; he would be non-existent in death. It is irrational to fret over circumstances that do not exist, such as one's state of death in the absence of an afterlife.
State consequentialism
State consequentialism, also known as Mohist consequentialism, is an ethical theory that evaluates the moral worth of an action based on how much it contributes to the basic goods of a state. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy describes Mohist consequentialism, dating back to the 5th century BC, as "a remarkably sophisticated version based on a plurality of intrinsic goods taken as constitutive of human welfare".Fraser, Chris, "Mohism ", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Edward N. Zalta. Unlike utilitarianism, which views pleasure as a moral good, "the basic goods in Mohist consequentialist thinking are … order, material wealth, and increase in population". During Mozi's era, war and famines were common, and population growth was seen as a moral necessity for a harmonious society. The "material wealth" of Mohist consequentialism refers to basic needs like shelter and clothing, and the "order" of Mohist consequentialism refers to Mozi's stance against warfare and violence, which he viewed as pointless and a threat to social stability.
Stanford sinologist David Shepherd Nivison, in The Cambridge History of Ancient China, writes that the moral goods of Mohism "are interrelated: more basic wealth, then more reproduction; more people, then more production and wealth … if people have plenty, they would be good, filial, kind, and so on unproblematically." The Mohists believed that morality is based on "promoting the benefit of all under heaven and eliminating harm to all under heaven". In contrast to Bentham's views, state consequentialism is not utilitarian because it is not hedonistic or individualistic. The importance of outcomes that are good for the community outweighs the importance of individual pleasure and pain.
Consequentialism
Consequentialism refers to moral theories that hold the consequences of a particular action form the basis for any valid moral judgment about that action (or create a structure for judgment, see rule consequentialism). Thus, from a consequentialist standpoint, morally right action is one that produces a good outcome, or consequence. This view is often expressed as the aphorism "The ends justify the means".
The term "consequentialism" was coined by G.E.M. Anscombe in her essay "Modern Moral Philosophy" in 1958, to describe what she saw as the central error of certain moral theories, such as those propounded by Mill and Sidgwick. Since then, the term has become common in English-language ethical theory.
The defining feature of consequentialist moral theories is the weight given to the consequences in evaluating the rightness and wrongness of actions. In consequentialist theories, the consequences of an action or rule generally outweigh other considerations. Apart from this basic outline, there is little else that can be unequivocally said about consequentialism as such. However, there are some questions that many consequentialist theories address:
 What sort of consequences count as good consequences?
 Who is the primary beneficiary of moral action?
 How are the consequences judged and who judges them?
One way to divide various consequentialisms is by the many types of consequences that are taken to matter most, that is, which consequences count as good states of affairs. According to utilitarianism, a good action is one that results in an increase and positive effect, and the best action is one that results in that effect for the greatest number. Closely related is eudaimonic consequentialism, according to which a full, flourishing life, which may or may not be the same as enjoying a great deal of pleasure, is the ultimate aim. Similarly, one might adopt an aesthetic consequentialism, in which the ultimate aim is to produce beauty. However, one might fix on non-psychological goods as the relevant effect. Thus, one might pursue an increase in material equality or political liberty instead of something like the more ephemeral "pleasure". Other theories adopt a package of several goods, all to be promoted equally. Whether a particular consequentialist theory focuses on a single good or many, conflicts and tensions between different good states of affairs are to be expected and must be adjudicated.
Utilitarianism
thumb|upright|Jeremy Bentham
thumb|upright|John Stuart Mill
Utilitarianism is an ethical theory that argues the proper course of action is one that maximizes a positive effect, such as "happiness", "welfare", or the ability to live according to personal preferences. Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill are influential proponents of this school of thought. In A Fragment on Government Bentham says 'it is the greatest happiness of the greatest number that is the measure of right and wrong' and describes this as a fundamental axiom. In An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation he talks of 'the principle of utility' but later prefers "the greatest happiness principle".
Utilitarianism is the paradigmatic example of a consequentialist moral theory. This form of utilitarianism holds that the morally correct action is the one that produces the best outcome for all people affected by the action. John Stuart Mill, in his exposition of utilitarianism, proposed a hierarchy of pleasures, meaning that the pursuit of certain kinds of pleasure is more highly valued than the pursuit of other pleasures. Other noteworthy proponents of utilitarianism are neuroscientist Sam Harris, author of The Moral Landscape, and moral philosopher Peter Singer, author of, amongst other works, Practical Ethics.
The major division within utilitarianism is between act utilitarianism and rule utilitarianism. In act utilitarianism, the principle of utility applies directly to each alternative act in a situation of choice. The right act is the one that brings about the best results (or the least bad results). In rule utilitarianism, the principle of utility determines the validity of rules of conduct (moral principles). A rule like promise-keeping is established by looking at the consequences of a world in which people break promises at will and a world in which promises are binding. Right and wrong are the following or breaking of rules that are sanctioned by their utilitarian value. A proposed "middle ground" between these two types is Two-level utilitarianism, where rules are applied in ordinary circumstances, but with an allowance to choose actions outside of such rules when unusual situations call for it.
Deontology
Deontological ethics or deontology (from Greek , deon, "obligation, duty"; and , -logia) is an approach to ethics that determines goodness or rightness from examining acts, or the rules and duties that the person doing the act strove to fulfill. This is in contrast to consequentialism, in which rightness is based on the consequences of an act, and not the act by itself. Under deontology, an act may be considered right even if it produces a bad consequence,Olson, Robert G. 1967. 'Deontological Ethics'. In Paul Edwards (ed.) The Encyclopedia of Philosophy. London: Collier Macmillan: 343. if it follows the rule or moral law. According to the deontological view, people have a duty to act in ways that are deemed inherently good ("truth-telling" for example), or follow an objectively obligatory rule (as in rule utilitarianism).
Kantianism
thumb|upright|Immanuel Kant|right
Immanuel Kant's theory of ethics is considered deontological for several different reasons.Orend, Brian. 2000. War and International Justice: A Kantian Perspective. West Waterloo, Ontario: Wilfrid Laurier University Press: 19.Kelly, Eugene. 2006. The Basics of Western Philosophy. Greenwood Press: 160. First, Kant argues that to act in the morally right way, people must act from duty (Pflicht). Preface and Introduction to Metaphysische Anfangsgründe der Tugendlehre , 1797. Abbott's deontology translates Kant's . Second, Kant argued that it was not the consequences of actions that make them right or wrong but the motives of the person who carries out the action.
Kant's argument that to act in the morally right way one must act purely from duty begins with an argument that the highest good must be both good in itself and good without qualification.Kant, Immanuel. 1785. 'First Section: Transition from the Common Rational Knowledge of Morals to the Philosophical', Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals. Something is "good in itself" when it is intrinsically good, and "good without qualification", when the addition of that thing never makes a situation ethically worse. Kant then argues that those things that are usually thought to be good, such as intelligence, perseverance and pleasure, fail to be either intrinsically good or good without qualification. Pleasure, for example, appears not to be good without qualification, because when people take pleasure in watching someone suffer, this seems to make the situation ethically worse. He concludes that there is only one thing that is truly good:
Kant then argues that the consequences of an act of willing cannot be used to determine that the person has a good will; good consequences could arise by accident from an action that was motivated by a desire to cause harm to an innocent person, and bad consequences could arise from an action that was well-motivated. Instead, he claims, a person has goodwill when he 'acts out of respect for the moral law'. People 'act out of respect for the moral law' when they act in some way because they have a duty to do so. So, the only thing that is truly good in itself is goodwill, and goodwill is only good when the willer chooses to do something because it is that person's duty, i.e. out of "respect" for the law. He defines respect as "the concept of a worth which thwarts my self-love".
Kant's three significant formulations of the categorical imperative are:
 Act only according to that maxim by which you can also will that it would become a universal law.
 Act in such a way that you always treat humanity, whether in your own person or in the person of any other, never simply as a means, but always at the same time as an end.
 Every rational being must so act as if he were through his maxim always a legislating member in a universal kingdom of ends.
Kant argued that the only absolutely good thing is a good will, and so the single determining factor of whether an action is morally right is the will, or motive of the person doing it. If they are acting on a bad maxim, e.g. "I will lie", then their action is wrong, even if some good consequences come of it.
In his essay, On a Supposed Right to Lie Because of Philanthropic Concerns, arguing against the position of 
Benjamin Constant, Des réactions politiques, Kant states that "Hence a lie defined merely as an intentionally untruthful declaration to another man does not require the additional condition that it must do harm to another, as jurists require in their definition (mendacium est falsiloquium in praeiudicium alterius). For a lie always harms another; if not some human being, then it nevertheless does harm to humanity in general, inasmuch as it vitiates the very source of right [Rechtsquelle] ... All practical principles of right must contain rigorous truth ... This is because such exceptions would destroy the universality on account of which alone they bear the name of principles.""Über ein vermeintes Recht aus Menschenliebe zu lügen", Berlinische Blätter 1 (1797), 301–314; edited in: Werke in zwölf Bänden, vol. 8, Frankfurt am Main (1977), zeno.org/nid/20009192123 .
Divine command theory
Although not all deontologists are religious, some belief in the 'divine command theory', which is actually a cluster of related theories which essentially state that an action is right if God has decreed that it is right.Wierenga, Edward. 1983. "A Defensible Divine Command Theory". Noûs, Vol. 17, No. 3: 387–407. According to Ralph Cudworth, an English philosopher, William of Ockham, René Descartes, and eighteenth-century Calvinists all accepted various versions of this moral theory, as they all held that moral obligations arise from God's commands.Cudworth, Ralph. 1731. A Treatise Concerning Eternal and Immutable Morality. Reprinted in 1996. Sarah Hutton (ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. The Divine Command Theory is a form of deontology because, according to it, the rightness of any action depends upon that action being performed because it is a duty, not because of any good consequences arising from that action. If God commands people not to work on Sabbath, then people act rightly if they do not work on Sabbath because God has commanded that they do not do so. If they do not work on Sabbath because they are lazy, then their action is not truly speaking "right", even though the actual physical action performed is the same. If God commands not to covet a neighbor's goods, this theory holds that it would be immoral to do so, even if coveting provides the beneficial outcome of a drive to succeed or do well.
One thing that clearly distinguishes Kantian deontologism from divine command deontology is that Kantianism maintains that man, as a rational being, makes the moral law universal, whereas divine command maintains that God makes the moral law universal.
Discourse ethics
thumb|Photograph of Jurgen Habermas, whose theory of discourse ethics was influenced by Kantian ethics
German philosopher Jürgen Habermas has proposed a theory of discourse ethics that he states is a descendant of Kantian ethics.Payrow Shabani 2003, p. 53 He proposes that action should be based on communication between those involved, in which their interests and intentions are discussed so they can be understood by all. Rejecting any form of coercion or manipulation, Habermas believes that agreement between the parties is crucial for a moral decision to be reached.Collin 2007, p. 78 Like Kantian ethics, discourse ethics is a cognitive ethical theory, in that it supposes that truth and falsity can be attributed to ethical propositions. It also formulates a rule by which ethical actions can be determined and proposes that ethical actions should be universalizable, in a similar way to Kant's ethics.Payrow Shabani 2003, p. 54
Habermas argues that his ethical theory is an improvement on Kant's ethics. He rejects the dualistic framework of Kant's ethics. Kant distinguished between the phenomena world, which can be sensed and experienced by humans, and the noumena, or spiritual world, which is inaccessible to humans. This dichotomy was necessary for Kant because it could explain the autonomy of a human agent: although a human is bound in the phenomenal world, their actions are free in the noumenal world. For Habermas, morality arises from discourse, which is made necessary by their rationality and needs, rather than their freedom.Payrow Shabani 2003, pp. 55–56
Pragmatic ethics
Associated with the pragmatists Charles Sanders Peirce, William James, and especially John Dewey, pragmatic ethics holds that moral correctness evolves similarly to scientific knowledge: socially over the course of many lifetimes. Thus, we should prioritize social reform over attempts to account for consequences, individual virtue or duty (although these may be worthwhile attempts, if social reform is provided for).
Ethics of care
Care ethics contrasts with more well-known ethical models, such as consequentialist theories (e.g. utilitarianism) and deontological theories (e.g., Kantian ethics) in that it seeks to incorporate traditionally feminized virtues and values that—proponents of care ethics contend—are absent in such traditional models of ethics. These values include the importance of empathetic relationships and compassion.
Care-focused feminism is a branch of feminist thought, informed primarily by ethics of care as developed by Carol Gilligan and Nel Noddings. This body of theory is critical of how caring is socially assigned to women, and consequently devalued. They write, "Care-focused feminists regard women's capacity for care as a human strength," that should be taught to and expected of men as well as women. Noddings proposes that ethical caring has the potential to be a more concrete evaluative model of moral dilemma than an ethic of justice.Noddings, Nel: Caring: A Feminine Approach to Ethics and Moral Education, pp. 3–4. University of California Press, Berkeley, 1984. Noddings’ care-focused feminism requires practical application of relational ethics, predicated on an ethic of care.Noddings, Nel: Women and Evil, p. 222. University of California Press, Berkeley, 1989.
Feminist matrixial ethics
The 'metafeminist' theory of the matrixial gaze and the matrixialEttinger, Bracha L., "Matrix and Metramorphosis." In:  Differences. Vol. 4, nº 3, 1992.Ettinger, Bracha L., Proto-ethica Matricial, Gedisa, 2019. time-space, coined and developed Bracha L. Ettinger since 1985,Bracha L. Ettinger, The Matrixial Gaze. Fine Art, Leeds University, 1995.Bracha L. Ettinger, "Trans-Subjective Transferential Borderspace." In: Mazin, V., Tourkina, O., and Seppala, M., eds. Doctor and Patient. Memory and Amnesia. Ylojarvi: Pori Art Museum Publications, 1997. Reprinted: Brian Massumi, ed. A Shock to Thought. Routledge, 2002Bracha L. Ettinger, "Wit(h)nessing Trauma and the Gaze." In: Vandenbroeck, P. et al eds. The Fascinating Face of Flanders. Through Art and Society (English, Portuguese, Flemish). Stad Antwerpen, 1998Bracha L. Ettinger, Matrixial Subjectivity, Aesthetics, Ethics. Vol 1: 1990-2000. Ed. by Griselda Pollock. Pelgrave Macmillan 2020 articulates a revolutionary philosophical approach that, in "daring to approach", to use Griselda Pollock's description of Ettinger's ethical turn,Pollock, Griselda. "Aesthetic Wit(h)nessing in the Era of Trauma." In: EurAmerica vol 40 n. 4, December 2010 <http://www.ea.sinica.edu.tw/eu_file/12929220264.pdf >Pollock, Griselda. Generations and Geographies. Routledge, 1996. "the prenatal with the pre-maternal encounter", violence toward women at war, and the Shoah, has philosophically established the rights of each female subject over her own reproductive body, and offered a language to relate to human experiences which escape the phallic domain.Ettinger, Bracha L., "Beyond the Death-drive, Beyond the Life-drive—Being-toward-Birthing with Being-toward-Birth. Copoiesis and the Matrixial Eros—Metafeminist Notes." in: Aberrant Nuptials. Edited by P. de Assis & P. Giudici. Leuven Univ. Press. 2019. The matrixial sphere is a psychic and symbolic dimension that the 'phallic' language and regulations cannot control. In Ettinger's model, the relations between self and other are of neither assimilation nor rejection but 'coemergence'. In her conversation with Emmanuel Levinas, 1991, Ettinger prooses that the source of human Ethics is feminine-maternal and feminine-pre-maternal matrixial encounter-event. Sexuality and maternality coexist and are not in contradiction (the contradiction established by Sigmund Freud and Jacques Lacan), and the feminine is not an absolute alterity (the alterity established by Jacques Lacan and Emmanuel Levinas). With the 'originary response-ability', 'wit(h)nessing', 'borderlinking', 'communicaring', 'com-passion', 'seduction into life'"Communicaring". In: PostGender: Sexuality and Performativeivity in Japanese Culture. Ed. Ayelet Zohar. Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2010Mandeville, Kat, Seduction into Life. NY: Antropos, 2016. and other processes invested by affects that occur in the Ettingerian matrixial time-space, the feminine is presented as the source of humanized Ethics in all genders. Compassion and Seduction into life occurs earlier than the primary seduction which passes through enigmatic signals from the maternal sexuality according to Jean Laplanche, since it is active in 'coemergence' in 'withnessing' for any born subject, earlier to its birth. Ettinger suggests to Emanuel Levinas in their conversations in 1991, that the feminine understood via the matrixial perspective is the heart and the source of Ethics.Emmanuel Levinas and Bracha L. Ettinger, Time is the Breath of the Spirit. Oxford: Museum of Modern Art, 1993.Emmanuel Levinas and Bracha L. Ettinger, Que dirait Eurydice?"/"What Would Eurydice Say? Paris: BLE Atelier, 1997. Reprinted in Athena: Philosophical Studies. Vol. 2, 2006. http://lkti.lt/athena/pdf/2/100-145.pdf  At the beginning of life, an originary 'fascinance' felt by the infantBracha L. Ettinger, "Fascinance. The Woman-to-woman (Girl-to-m/Other) Matrixial Feminine Difference." In: Pollock, Griselda, ed. Psychoanalysis and the Image. Oxford: Blackwell, 2006. is related to the passage from response-ability to responsibility, from com-passion to compassion, and from wit(h)nessing to witnessing operated and transmitted by the m/Other. The 'differentiation in jointness' that is at the heart of the matrixial borderspace has deep implications in the relational fieldBracha L. Ettinger, "Diotima and the Matrixial Transference: Psychoanalytical Encounter-Event as Pregnancy in Beauty." In: der Merwe, V., Chris N., Viljoen, H., eds. Across the Threshold. Peter Lang, 2007. and for the ethics of care.Birgit M. Kaiser, Kathrin Thiele, "If You Do Well, Carry! The Difference of the Humane: An Interview with Bracha L. Ettinger". philoSOPHIA, Volume 8, Number 1, Winter 2018, pp. 101-125 (Article). https://doi.org/10.1353/phi.2018.0005 The matrixial theory that proposes new ways to rethink sexual difference through the fluidity of boundaries informs aesthetics and ethics of compassion, carrying and non-abandonment in 'subjectivity as encounter-event'.Smith, Marielle, "Subjectivity as Encounter: Feminine Ethics in the Work of Bracha Lichtenberg-Ettinger and Anne Enright", Hypatia
Vol. 28, No. 3 (SUMMER 2013)Angie Voela and Cigdem Esin, "Movement, Embrace: Adriana Cavarero with Bracha Lichtenberg Ettinger (and the Death Drive)", Hypatia 36 (1):101-119 (2021) It has become significant in Psychoanalysis and in transgender studies.Cavanagh, Sheila, "Bracha L. Ettinger, Jacques Lacan and Tiresias: The Other Sexual Difference". The Site for Contemporary Psychoanalysis, n.18 2018. http://www.the-site.org.uk/sitegeist/spring-2018/bracha-l-ettinger-jacques-lacan-and-tiresias-the-other-sexual-difference/3/ 
Role ethics
Role ethics is an ethical theory based on family roles. Unlike virtue ethics, role ethics is not individualistic. Morality is derived from a person's relationship with their community. Confucian ethics is an example of role ethics though this is not straightforwardly uncontested.Sim, May, 2015, "Why Confucius' Ethics is a Virtue Ethics", in Besser-Jones and Slote (2015), pp. 63–76 Confucian roles center around the concept of filial piety or xiao, a respect for family members. According to Roger T. Ames and Henry Rosemont, "Confucian normativity is defined by living one's family roles to maximum effect." Morality is determined through a person's fulfillment of a role, such as that of a parent or a child. Confucian roles are not rational, and originate through the xin, or human emotions.
Anarchist ethics
Anarchist ethics is an ethical theory based on the studies of anarchist thinkers. The biggest contributor to anarchist ethics is Peter Kropotkin.
Starting from the premise that the goal of ethical philosophy should be to help humans adapt and thrive in evolutionary terms, Kropotkin's ethical framework uses biology and anthropology as a basis – in order to scientifically establish what will best enable a given social order to thrive biologically and socially – and advocates certain behavioural practices to enhance humanity's capacity for freedom and well-being, namely practices which emphasise solidarity, equality, and justice.
Kropotkin argues that ethics itself is evolutionary, and is inherited as a sort of a social instinct through cultural history, and by so, he rejects any religious and transcendental explanation of morality. The origin of ethical feeling in both animals and humans can be found, he claims, in the natural fact of "sociality" (mutualistic symbiosis), which humans can then combine with the instinct for justice (i.e. equality) and then with the practice of reason to construct a non-supernatural and anarchistic system of ethics. Kropotkin suggests that the principle of equality at the core of anarchism is the same as the Golden rule: This principle of treating others as one wishes to be treated oneself, what is it but the very same principle as equality, the fundamental principle of anarchism? And how can any one manage to believe himself an anarchist unless he practices it? We do not wish to be ruled. And by this very fact, do we not declare that we ourselves wish to rule nobody? We do not wish to be deceived, we wish always to be told nothing but the truth. And by this very fact, do we not declare that we ourselves do not wish to deceive anybody, that we promise to always tell the truth, nothing but the truth, the whole truth? We do not wish to have the fruits of our labor stolen from us. And by that very fact, do we not declare that we respect the fruits of others' labor? By what right indeed can we demand that we should be treated in one fashion, reserving it to ourselves to treat others in a fashion entirely different? Our sense of equality revolts at such an idea.
Postmodern ethics
Antihumanists such as Louis Althusser, Michel Foucault and structuralists such as Roland Barthes challenged the possibilities of individual agency and the coherence of the notion of the 'individual' itself. This was on the basis that personal identity was, in the most part, a social construction. As critical theory developed in the later 20th century, post-structuralism sought to problematize human relationships to knowledge and 'objective' reality. Jacques Derrida argued that access to meaning and the 'real' was always deferred, and sought to demonstrate via recourse to the linguistic realm that "there is no outside-text/non-text" ("il n'y a pas de hors-texte" is often mistranslated as "there is nothing outside the text"); at the same time, Jean Baudrillard theorised that signs and symbols or simulacra mask reality (and eventually the absence of reality itself), particularly in the consumer world.
Post-structuralism and postmodernism argue that ethics must study the complex and relational conditions of actions. A simple alignment of ideas of right and particular acts is not possible. There will always be an ethical remainder that cannot be taken into account or often even recognized. Such theorists find narrative (or, following Nietzsche and Foucault, genealogy) to be a helpful tool for understanding ethics because narrative is always about particular lived experiences in all their complexity rather than the assignment of an idea or norm to separate and individual actions.
Zygmunt Bauman says postmodernity is best described as modernity without illusion, the illusion being the belief that humanity can be repaired by some ethic principle. Postmodernity can be seen in this light as accepting the messy nature of humanity as unchangeable. In this postmodern world, the means to act collectively and globally to solve large-scale problems have been all but discredited, dismantled or lost. Problems can be handled only locally and each on its own. All problem-handling means building a mini-order at the expense of order elsewhere, and at the cost of rising global disorder as well as depleting the shrinking supplies of resources which make ordering possible. He considers Emmanuel Levinas's ethics as postmodern. Unlike the modern ethical philosophy which leaves the Other on the outside of the self as an ambivalent presence, Levinas's philosophy readmits her as a neighbor and as a crucial character in the process through which the moral self comes into its own.
David Couzens Hoy states that Emmanuel Levinas's writings on the face of the Other and Derrida's meditations on the relevance of death to ethics are signs of the "ethical turn" in Continental philosophy that occurred in the 1980s and 1990s. Hoy describes post-critique ethics as the "obligations that present themselves as necessarily to be fulfilled but are neither forced on one or are enforceable".
Hoy's post-critique model uses the term ethical resistance. Examples of this would be an individual's resistance to consumerism in a retreat to a simpler but perhaps harder lifestyle, or an individual's resistance to a terminal illness. Hoy describes Levinas's account as "not the attempt to use power against itself, or to mobilize sectors of the population to exert their political power; the ethical resistance is instead the resistance of the powerless".
Hoy concludes that
Applied ethics
Applied ethics is a discipline of philosophy that attempts to apply ethical theory to real-life situations. The discipline has many specialized fields, such as engineering ethics, bioethics, geoethics, public service ethics and business ethics.
Specific questions
Applied ethics is used in some aspects of determining public policy, as well as by individuals facing difficult decisions. The sort of questions addressed by applied ethics include: "Is getting an abortion immoral?"; "Is euthanasia immoral?"; "Is affirmative action right or wrong?"; "What are human rights, and how do we determine them?"; "Do animals have rights as well?"; and "Do individuals have the right of self-determination?"
A more specific question could be: "If someone else can make better out of his/her life than I can, is it then moral to sacrifice myself for them if needed?" Without these questions, there is no clear fulcrum on which to balance law, politics, and the practice of arbitration—in fact, no common assumptions of all participants—so the ability to formulate the questions are prior to rights balancing. But not all questions studied in applied ethics concern public policy. For example, making ethical judgments regarding questions such as, "Is lying always wrong?" and, "If not, when is it permissible?" is prior to any etiquette.
People, in general, are more comfortable with dichotomies (two opposites). However, in ethics, the issues are most often multifaceted and the best-proposed actions address many different areas concurrently. In ethical decisions, the answer is almost never a "yes or no" or a "right or wrong" statement. Many buttons are pushed so that the overall condition is improved and not to the benefit of any particular faction.
And it has not only been shown that people consider the character of the moral agent (i.e. a principle implied in virtue ethics), the deed of the action (i.e. a principle implied in deontology), and the consequences of the action (i.e. a principle implied in utilitarianism) when formulating moral judgments, but moreover that the effect of each of these three components depends on the value of each component.
Particular fields of application
Bioethics
Bioethics is the study of controversial ethics brought about by advances in biology and medicine. Bioethicists are concerned with the ethical questions that arise in the relationships among life sciences, biotechnology, medicine, politics, law, and philosophy. It also includes the study of the more commonplace questions of values ("the ethics of the ordinary") that arise in primary care and other branches of medicine.
Bioethics also needs to address emerging biotechnologies that affect basic biology and future humans. These developments include cloning, gene therapy, human genetic engineering, astroethics and life in space, and manipulation of basic biology through altered DNA, RNA and proteins, e.g. "three parent baby, where baby is born from genetically modified embryos, would have DNA from a mother, a father and from a female donor. Correspondingly, new bioethics also need to address life at its core. For example, biotic ethics value organic gene/protein life itself and seek to propagate it. With such life-centered principles, ethics may secure a cosmological future for life.
Business ethics
Business ethics (also corporate ethics) is a form of applied ethics or professional ethics that examines ethical principles and moral or ethical problems that arise in a business environment, including fields like medical ethics. Business ethics represents the practices that any individual or group exhibits within an organization that can negatively or positively affect the businesses core values. It applies to all aspects of business conduct and is relevant to the conduct of individuals and entire organizations.
Business ethics has both normative and descriptive dimensions. As a corporate practice and a career specialization, the field is primarily normative. Academics attempting to understand business behavior employ descriptive methods. The range and quantity of business ethical issues reflect the interaction of profit-maximizing behavior with non-economic concerns. Interest in business ethics accelerated dramatically during the 1980s and 1990s, both within major corporations and within academia. For example, today most major corporations promote their commitment to non-economic values under headings such as ethics codes and social responsibility charters. Adam Smith said, "People of the same trade seldom meet together, even for merriment and diversion, but the conversation ends in a conspiracy against the public, or in some contrivance to raise prices."Smith, A (1776/1952). An Inquiry Into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press, p. 55. Governments use laws and regulations to point business behavior in what they perceive to be beneficial directions. Ethics implicitly regulates areas and details of behavior that lie beyond governmental control.Berle, A.A., & Means, G.C. (1932). The Modern Corporation and Private Property. New Jersey: Transaction Publishers. In this book, Berle and Means observe, "Corporations have ceased to be merely legal devices through which the private business transactions of individuals may be carried on. Though still much used for this purpose, the corporate form has acquired a much larger significance. The corporation has, in fact, become both a method of property tenure and a means of organizing economic life. Grown to tremendous proportions, there may be said to have evolved a 'corporate system'—as there once was a feudal system—which has attracted to itself a combination of attributes and powers, and has attained a degree of prominence entitling it to be dealt with as a major social institution. ... We are examining this institution probably before it has attained its zenith. Spectacular as its rise has been, every indication seems to be that the system will move forward to proportions which stagger imagination today ... They [management] have placed the community in a position to demand that the modern corporation serve not only the owners ... but all society." p. 1. The emergence of large corporations with limited relationships and sensitivity to the communities in which they operate accelerated the development of formal ethics regimes. Business ethics also relates to unethical activities of interorganizational relationships, such as strategic alliances, buyer-supplier relationships, or joint ventures. Such unethical practices include, for instance, opportunistic behaviors, contract violations, and deceitful practices.
Machine ethics
In Moral Machines: Teaching Robots Right from Wrong, Wendell Wallach and Colin Allen conclude that issues in machine ethics will likely drive advancement in understanding of human ethics by forcing us to address gaps in modern normative theory and by providing a platform for experimental investigation. The effort to actually program a machine or artificial agent to behave as though instilled with a sense of ethics requires new specificity in our normative theories, especially regarding aspects customarily considered common-sense. For example, machines, unlike humans, can support a wide selection of learning algorithms, and controversy has arisen over the relative ethical merits of these options. This may reopen classic debates of normative ethics framed in new (highly technical) terms.
Military ethics
Military ethics are concerned with questions regarding the application of force and the ethos of the soldier and are often understood as applied professional ethics. Just war theory is generally seen to set the background terms of military ethics. However individual countries and traditions have different fields of attention.
Military ethics involves multiple subareas, including the following among others:
 what, if any, should be the laws of war.
 justification for the initiation of military force.
 decisions about who may be targeted in warfare.
 decisions on choice of weaponry, and what collateral effects such weaponry may have.
 standards for handling military prisoners.
 methods of dealing with violations of the laws of war.
Political ethics
Political ethics (also known as political morality or public ethics) is the practice of making moral judgements about political action and political agents.Thompson, Dennis F. "Political Ethics". International Encyclopedia of Ethics, ed. Hugh LaFollette (Blackwell Publishing, 2012).
Public sector ethics
Public sector ethics is a set of principles that guide public officials in their service to their constituents, including their decision-making on behalf of their constituents. Fundamental to the concept of public sector ethics is the notion that decisions and actions are based on what best serves the public's interests, as opposed to the official's personal interests (including financial interests) or self-serving political interests.See, for example, work of Institute for Local Government, at www.ca-ilg.org/trust .
Publication ethics
Publication ethics is the set of principles that guide the writing and publishing process for all professional publications. To follow these principles, authors must verify that the publication does not contain plagiarism or publication bias. As a way to avoid misconduct in research these principles can also apply to experiments that are referenced or analyzed in publications by ensuring the data is recorded honestly and accurately.
Plagiarism is the failure to give credit to another author's work or ideas, when it is used in the publication. It is the obligation of the editor of the journal to ensure the article does not contain any plagiarism before it is published. If a publication that has already been published is proven to contain plagiarism, the editor of the journal can retract the article. Another critical publication ethics issue pertains to citation plagiarism when researchers copy and paste citation entries from other published works without reading the original source.
Publication bias occurs when the publication is one-sided or "prejudiced against results". In best practice, an author should try to include information from all parties involved, or affected by the topic. If an author is prejudiced against certain results, than it can "lead to erroneous conclusions being drawn".
Misconduct in research can occur when an experimenter falsifies results. Falsely recorded information occurs when the researcher "fakes" information or data, which was not used when conducting the actual experiment. By faking the data, the researcher can alter the results from the experiment to better fit the hypothesis they originally predicted. When conducting medical research, it is important to honor the healthcare rights of a patient by protecting their anonymity in the publication.
Respect for autonomy is the principle that decision-making should allow individuals to be autonomous; they should be able to make decisions that apply to their own lives. This means that individuals should have control of their lives.
Justice is the principle that decision-makers must focus on actions that are fair to those affected. Ethical decisions need to be consistent with the ethical theory. There are cases where the management has made decisions that seem to be unfair to the employees, shareholders, and other stakeholders (Solomon, 1992, pp49). Such decisions are unethical.
Relational ethics
Relational ethics are related to an ethics of care. They are used in qualitative research, especially ethnography and autoethnography. Researchers who employ relational ethics value and respect the connection between themselves and the people they study, and "...between researchers and the communities in which they live and work." (Ellis, 2007, p. 4). Relational ethics also help researchers understand difficult issues such as conducting research on intimate others that have died and developing friendships with their participants.Ellis, C. (1986). Fisher folk. Two communities on Chesapeake Bay. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky.Ellis, C. (1995).Final negotiations: A story of love, loss, and chronic illness. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. Relational ethics in close personal relationships form a central concept of contextual therapy.
Ethics of nanotechnologies
Ethics of nanotechnology is the study of the ethical issues emerging from advances in nanotechnology.
Ethics of quantification
Ethics of quantification is the study of the ethical issues associated to different forms of visible or invisible forms of quantification.
Animal ethics
Animal ethics is a term used in academia to describe human-animal relationships and how animals ought to be treated. The subject matter includes animal rights, animal welfare, animal law, speciesism, animal cognition, wildlife conservation, the moral status of nonhuman animals, the concept of nonhuman personhood, human exceptionalism, the history of animal use, and theories of justice.
Ethics of technology
Ethics of technology is a sub-field of ethics addressing the ethical questions specific to the Technology Age. Some prominent works of philosopher Hans Jonas are devoted to ethics of technology. The subject has also been explored, following the work of Mario Bunge, under the term technoethics.
Moral psychology
Moral psychology is a field of study that began as an issue in philosophy and that is now properly considered part of the discipline of psychology. Some use the term "moral psychology" relatively narrowly to refer to the study of moral development.See, for example, Lapsley (2006) and "moral psychology" (2007). However, others tend to use the term more broadly to include any topics at the intersection of ethics and psychology (and philosophy of mind).See, for example, Doris & Stich (2008) and Wallace (2007). Wallace writes: "Moral psychology is the study of morality in its psychological dimensions" (p. 86). Such topics are ones that involve the mind and are relevant to moral issues. Some of the main topics of the field are moral responsibility, moral development, moral character (especially as related to virtue ethics), altruism, psychological egoism, moral luck, and moral disagreement.See Doris & Stich (2008), §1.
Evolutionary ethics
Evolutionary ethics concerns approaches to ethics (morality) based on the role of evolution in shaping human psychology and behavior. Such approaches may be based in scientific fields such as evolutionary psychology or sociobiology, with a focus on understanding and explaining observed ethical preferences and choices.
Descriptive ethics
Descriptive ethics is on the less philosophical end of the spectrum since it seeks to gather particular information about how people live and draw general conclusions based on observed patterns. Abstract and theoretical questions that are more clearly philosophical—such as, "Is ethical knowledge possible?"—are not central to descriptive ethics. Descriptive ethics offers a value-free approach to ethics, which defines it as a social science rather than a humanity. Its examination of ethics does not start with a preconceived theory but rather investigates observations of actual choices made by moral agents in practice. Some philosophers rely on descriptive ethics and choices made and unchallenged by a society or culture to derive categories, which typically vary by context. This can lead to situational ethics and situated ethics. These philosophers often view aesthetics, etiquette, and arbitration as more fundamental, percolating "bottom up" to imply the existence of, rather than explicitly prescribe, theories of value or of conduct. The study of descriptive ethics may include examinations of the following:
 Ethical codes applied by various groups. Some consider aesthetics itself the basis of ethics—and a personal moral core developed through art and storytelling as very influential in one's later ethical choices.
 Informal theories of etiquette that tend to be less rigorous and more situational. Some consider etiquette a simple negative ethics, i.e., where can one evade an uncomfortable truth without doing wrong? One notable advocate of this view is Judith Martin ("Miss Manners"). According to this view, ethics is more a summary of common sense social decisions.
 Practices in arbitration and law, e.g., the claim that ethics itself is a matter of balancing "right versus right", i.e., putting priorities on two things that are both right, but that must be traded off carefully in each situation.
 Observed choices made by ordinary people, without expert aid or advice, who vote, buy, and decide what is worth valuing. This is a major concern within disciplines such as political science and economics.Hary Gunarto, Ethical Issues in Cyberspace and IT Society, Symposium on Whither The Age of Uncertainty, APU Univ., paper ,  Jan. 2003
See also
 Morality
 Integrity
 Applied ethics
 Axiological ethics
 Contemporary ethics
 Corporate social responsibility
 Declaration of Geneva
 Declaration of Helsinki
 Deductive reasoning
 Dharma
 Effective altruism
 Environmental ethics
 Ethical movement
 Ethicist
 Ethics in religion
 Ethics paper
 Feminist ethics
 Internalism and externalism
 Humanism
 Index of ethics articles—alphabetical list of ethics-related articles
 Longtermism
 Neuroethics
 Outline of ethics—list of ethics-related articles, arranged by sub-topic
 Practical philosophy
 Science of morality
 Secular ethics
 Sexual ethics
 Theory of justification
 Trail ethics
Notes
References
Further reading
Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics
 Azurmendi, J. 1998: "The violence and the search for new values" in Euskal Herria krisian, (Elkar, 1999), pp. 11–116. 
 Blackburn, S. (2001). Being good: A short introduction to ethics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cools, Guy & Gielen, Pascal. The Ethics of Art. Valiz: Amsterdam, 2014.Jadranka Skorin-Kapov, The Intertwining of Aesthetics and Ethics: Exceeding of Expectations, Ecstasy, Sublimity. Lexington Books, 2016. De Finance, Joseph, An Ethical Inquiry, Rome, Editrice Pontificia Università Gregoriana, 1991.
 De La Torre, Miguel A., "Doing Christian Ethics from the Margins", Orbis Books, 2004.
 Derrida, J. 1995, The Gift of Death, translated by David Wills, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
D'Urance, Michel, Jalons pour une éthique rebelle, Aléthéia, Paris, 2005.
Fagothey, Austin, Right and Reason, Tan Books & Publishers, Rockford, Illinois, 2000.
Ehrlich, Paul R. (May 2016), Conference on population, environment, ethics: where we stand now (video, 93 min), University of Lausanne
Encyclopedia of Ethics. Lawrence C. Becker and Charlotte B. Becker, editors. Second edition in three volumes. New York: Routledge, 2002. A scholarly encyclopedia with over 500 signed, peer-reviewed articles, mostly on topics and figures of, or of special interest in, Western philosophy.
John Paul II, Encyclical Letter Veritatis Splendor, August 6, 1993.
Lafollette, Hugh [ed.]: Ethics in Practice: An Anthology. Wiley Blackwell, 4th edition, Oxford 2014. 
London Philosophy Study Guide  offers many suggestions on what to read, depending on the student's familiarity with the subject: Ethics 
Levinas, E. 1969, Totality and infinity, an essay on exteriority, translated by Alphonso Lingis, Duquesne University Press, Pittsburgh.
Nagel, Thomas, "Types of Intuition: Thomas Nagel on human rights and moral knowledge", London Review of Books, vol. 43, no. 11 (3 June 2021), pp. 3, 5–6, 8. Deontology, consequentialism, utilitarianism.
Newton, John Ph.D. Complete Conduct Principles for the 21st Century, 2000. ., Butchvarov, Panayot. Skepticism in Ethics (1989).
 Solomon, R.C., Morality and the Good Life: An Introduction to Ethics Through Classical Sources, New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1984.
Vendemiati, Aldo, In the First Person, An Outline of General Ethics, Rome, Urbaniana University Press, 2004.
 An entire issue of Pacific Island Studies devoted to studying "Constructing Moral Communities" in Pacific islands, 2002, vol. 25: Link
External links
 An Introduction to Ethics  by Paul Newall, aimed at beginners.
 Ethics, 2d ed., 1973. by William Frankena
 Ethics Bites , Open University podcast series podcast exploring ethical dilemmas in everyday life.
 National Reference Center for Bioethics Literature  World's largest library for ethical issues in medicine and biomedical research
 Ethics  entry in Encyclopædia Britannica by Peter Singer
 The Philosophy of Ethics on Philosophy Archive
 Kirby Laing Institute for Christian Ethics Resources, events, and research on a range of ethical subjects from a Christian perspective.
 Basic principle of ethics summary talk
 International Association for Geoethics (IAGETH)
 International Association for Promoting Geoethics (IAPG)
 Markkula Center for Applied Ethics at Santa Clara University Resources for analyzing real-world ethical issues and tools to address them.
Category:Main topic articles
"""

From "Value (ethics and social sciences)" ==> """
In ethics and social sciences, value denotes the degree of importance of some thing or action, with the aim of determining which actions are best to do or what way is best to live (normative ethics in ethics), or to describe the significance of different actions. Value systems are prospective and prescriptive beliefs; they affect the ethical behavior of a person or are the basis of their intentional activities. Often primary values are strong and secondary values are suitable for changes. What makes an action valuable may in turn depend on the ethical values of the objects it increases, decreases, or alters. An object with "ethic value" may be termed an "ethic or philosophic good" (noun sense).
Values can be defined as broad preferences concerning appropriate courses of actions or outcomes. As such, values reflect a person's sense of right and wrong or what "ought" to be. "Equal rights for all", "Excellence deserves admiration",  and "People should be treated with respect and dignity" are representatives of values. Values tend to influence attitudes and behavior and these types include ethical/moral values, doctrinal/ideological (religious, political) values, social values, and aesthetic values. It is debated whether some values that are not clearly physiologically determined, such as altruism, are intrinsic, and whether some, such as acquisitiveness, should be classified as vices or virtues.
Fields of study
Ethical issues that value may be regarded as a study under ethics, which, in turn, may be grouped as philosophy. Similarly, ethical value may be regarded as a subgroup of a broader field of philosophic value sometimes referred to as axiology. Ethical value denotes something's degree of importance, with the aim of determining what action or life is best to do, or at least attempt to describe the value of different actions.
The study of ethical value is also included in value theory. In addition, values have been studied in various disciplines: anthropology, behavioral economics, business ethics, corporate governance, moral philosophy, political sciences, social psychology, sociology and theology.
 Similar concepts
Ethical value is sometimes used synonymously with goodness. However, goodness has many other meanings and may be regarded as more ambiguous.
Types of value
 Personal versus cultural 
Personal values exist in relation to cultural values, either in agreement with or divergence from prevailing norms. A culture is a social system that shares a set of common values, in which such values permit social expectations and collective understandings of the good, beautiful and constructive. Without normative personal values, there would be no cultural reference against which to measure the virtue of individual values and so cultural identity would disintegrate.
Relative or absolute
Relative values differ between people, and on a larger scale, between people of different cultures. On the other hand, there are theories of the existence of absolute values,On Wittgenstein's Claim That Ethical Value Judgments Are Nonsense by Arto Tukiainen. Minerva – An Internet Journal of Philosophy 15 (2011): 102–11.  which can also be termed noumenal values (and not to be confused with mathematical absolute value). An absolute value can be described as philosophically absolute and independent of individual and cultural views, as well as independent of whether it is known or apprehended or not. Ludwig Wittgenstein was pessimistic towards the idea that an elucidation would ever happen regarding the absolute values of actions or objects; "we can speak as much as we want about "life" and "its meaning," and believe that what we say is important. But these are no more than expressions and can never be facts, resulting from a tendency of the mind and not the heart or the will".
Intrinsic or extrinsic
Philosophic value may be split into instrumental value and intrinsic values. An instrumental value is worth having as a means towards getting something else that is good (e.g., a radio is instrumentally good in order to hear music). An intrinsically valuable thing is worth for itself, not as a means to something else. It is giving value intrinsic and extrinsic properties.
An ethic good with instrumental value may be termed an ethic mean, and an ethic good with intrinsic value may be termed an end-in-itself. An object may be both a mean and end-in-itself.
Summation
Intrinsic and instrumental goods are not mutually exclusive categories.Inherent and Instrumental Values in Ethics by Stanley Riukas Some objects are both good in themselves, and also good for getting other objects that are good. "Understanding science" may be such a good, being both worthwhile in and of itself, and as a means of achieving other goods. In these cases, the sum of instrumental (specifically the all instrumental value) and intrinsic value of an object may be used when putting that object in value systems, which is a set of consistent values and measures.
 Universal values 
S. H. Schwartz, along with a number of psychology colleagues, has carried out empirical research investigating whether there are universal values, and what those values are. Schwartz defined 'values' as "conceptions of the desirable that influence the way people select action and evaluate events".Schwartz & Bilsky 1987, p. 550 He hypothesised that universal values would relate to three different types of human need: biological needs, social co-ordination needs, and needs related to the welfare and survival of groupsSchwartz 1994 
Intensity
The intensity of philosophic value is the degree it is generated or carried out, and may be regarded as the prevalence of the good, the object having the value.
It should not be confused with the amount of value per object, although the latter may vary too, e.g. because of instrumental value conditionality. For example, taking a fictional life-stance of accepting waffle-eating as being the end-in-itself, the intensity may be the speed that waffles are eaten, and is zero when no waffles are eaten, e.g. if no waffles are present. Still, each waffle that had been present would still have value, no matter if it was being eaten or not, independent on intensity.
Instrumental value conditionality in this case could be exampled by every waffle not present, making them less valued by being far away rather than easily accessible.
In many life stances it is the product of value and intensity that is ultimately desirable, i.e. not only to generate value, but to generate it in large degree. Maximizing life-stances have the highest possible intensity as an imperative.
Positive and negative value
There may be a distinction between positive and negative philosophic or ethic value. While positive ethic value generally correlates with something that is pursued or maximized,  negative ethic value correlates with something that is avoided or minimized. Value may have an upper limit. David Manheim and Anders Sandberg argue that modern physics implies an upper limit, even if that limit may be extremely large. Negative value may be both intrinsic negative value and/or instrumental negative value.
Protected value
A protected value (also sacred value) is one that an individual is unwilling to trade off no matter what the benefits of doing so may be. For example, some people may be unwilling to kill another person, even if it means saving many other individuals. Protected values tend to be "intrinsically good", and most people can in fact imagine a scenario when trading off their most precious values would be necessary. If such trade-offs happen between two competing protected values such as killing a person and defending your family they are called tragic trade-offs.
Protected values have been found to be play a role in protracted conflicts (e.g., the Israeli-Palestinian conflict) because they can hinder businesslike (''utilitarian'') negotiations. A series of experimental studies directed by Scott Atran and Ángel Gómez among combatants on the ISIS front line in Iraq and with ordinary  citizens in Western Europe  suggest that commitment to sacred values motivate the most "devoted actors" to make the costliest sacrifices, including willingness to fight and die, as well as a readiness to forsake close kin and comrades for those values if necessary. From the perspective of utilitarianism, protected values are biases when they prevent utility from being maximized across individuals.
According to Jonathan Baron and Mark Spranca, protected values arise from norms as described in theories of deontological ethics (the latter often being referred to in context with Immanuel Kant). The protectedness implies that people are concerned with their participation in transactions rather than just the consequences of it.
 Economic versus philosophic value 
Philosophical value is distinguished from economic value, since it is independent from some other desired condition or commodity. The economic value of an object may rise when the exchangeable desired condition or commodity, e.g. money, become high in supply, and vice versa when supply of money becomes low.
Nevertheless, economic value may be regarded as a result of philosophical value. In the subjective theory of value, the personal philosophic value a person puts in possessing something is reflected in what economic value this person puts on it. The limit where a person considers to purchase something may be regarded as the point where the personal philosophic value of possessing something exceeds the personal philosophic value of what is given up in exchange for it, e.g. money. In this light, everything can be said to have a "personal economic value" in contrast to its "societal economic value."
 Personal values 
Personal values provide an internal reference for what is good, beneficial, important, useful, beautiful, desirable and constructive. Values are one of the factors that generate behavior (besides needs, interests and habits) and influence the choices made by an individual.
Values may help common human problems for survival by comparative rankings of value, the results of which provide answers to questions of why people do what they do and in what order they choose to do them. Moral, religious, and personal values, when held rigidly, may also give rise to conflicts that result from a clash between differing world views.Maiese, Michelle. "Causes of Disputes and Conflicts." Beyond Intractability. Ed. Guy Burgess and Heidi Burgess. Conflict Research Consortium, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado. October 2003. Downloaded 13 February 2016.
Over time the public expression of personal values that groups of people find important in their day-to-day lives, lay the foundations of law, custom and tradition. Recent research has thereby stressed the implicit nature of value communication. Consumer behavior research proposes there are six internal values and three external values. They are known as List of Values (LOV) in management studies. They are self respect, warm relationships, sense of accomplishment, self-fulfillment, fun and enjoyment, excitement, sense of belonging, being well respected, and security. From a functional aspect these values are categorized into three and they are interpersonal relationship area, personal factors, and non-personal factors. From an ethnocentric perspective, it could be assumed that a same set of values will not reflect equally between two groups of people from two countries. Though the core values are related, the processing of values can differ based on the cultural identity of an individual.
 Individual differences 
Schwartz proposed a theory of individual values based on surveys data. His model groups values in terms of growth versus protection, and personal versus social focus. Values are then associated with openness to change (which Schwartz views as related to personal growth), self-enhancement (which Schwartz views as mostly to do with self-protection), conservation (which Schwartz views as mostly related to social-protection), and self-transendence (which Schwartz views as a form of social growth). Within this Schwartz places 10 universal values: self-direction, stimulation and hedonism (related to openness growth), achievement and power (related to self enhancement), security, conformity and tradition (related to conservation), and humility, benevolence and universalism (relate to self-transcendence).
Personality traits using the big 5 measure correlate with Schwartz's value construct. Openness and extraversion correlates with the values related to openness-to-change (openness especially with self-direction, extraversion especially with stimulation);  agreeableness correlates with self-transcendence values (especially benevolence); extraversion is correlated with self-enhancement and negatively with traditional values. Conscienciousness correlates with achievement, conformity and security. 
Men are found to value achievement, self-direction, hedonism, and stimulation more than women, while women value benevolence, universality and tradition higher.
The order of Schwartz's traits are substantially stability amongst adults over time. Migrants values change when they move to a new country, but the order of preferences is still quite stable. Motherhood causes women to shift their values towards stability and away from openness-to-change but not fathers.thumb|Correlations between Moral foundations and Schwartz's basic values with values taken from 
 Moral foundations theory 
Moral foundation theory identifies five forms of moral foundation harm/care, fairness/reciprocity, in-group/loyalty, authority/respect, and purity/sancity. Harm and fairness are often called individualizing foundations, while the other three factors are termed binding foundations. The moral foundations were found to be correlated with the theory of basic human values. The strong correlations are between conservatives values and binding foundations.
Development and transmission
Values are generally received through cultural means, especially diffusion and transmission or socialization from parents to children.  Parents in different cultures have different values. For example, parents in a hunter–gatherer society or surviving through subsistence agriculture value practical survival skills from a young age. Many such cultures begin teaching babies to use sharp tools, including knives, before their first birthdays. Italian parents value social and emotional abilities and having an even temperament. Spanish parents want their children to be sociable. Swedish parents value security and happiness. Dutch parents value independence, long attention spans, and predictable schedules. American parents are unusual for strongly valuing intellectual ability, especially in a narrow "book learning" sense. The Kipsigis people of Kenya value children who are not only smart, but who employ that intelligence in a responsible and helpful way, which they call ng'om. Luos of Kenya value education and pride which they call "nyadhi".
Factors that influence the development of cultural values are summarized below.
The Inglehart–Welzel cultural map of the world is a two-dimensional cultural map showing the cultural values of the countries of the world along two dimensions: The traditional versus secular-rational values reflect the transition from a religious understanding of the world to a dominance of science and bureaucracy. The second dimension named survival values versus self-expression values represents the transition from industrial society to post-industrial society.
Cultures can be distinguished as tight and loose in relation to how much they adhere to social norms and tolerates deviance. Tight cultures are more restrictive, with stricter disciplinary measures for norm violations while loose cultures have weaker social norms and a higher tolerance for deviant behavior. A history of threats, such as natural disasters, high population density, or vulnerability to infectious diseases, is associated with greater tightness. It has been suggested that tightness allows cultures to coordinate more effectively to survive threats.
Studies in evolutionary psychology have led to similar findings. The so-called regality theory finds that war and other perceived collective dangers have a profound influence on both the psychology of individuals and on the social structure and cultural values. A dangerous environment leads to a hierarchical, authoritarian, and warlike culture, while a safe and peaceful environment fosters an egalitarian and tolerant culture.
 Cultural values 
thumb|upright=1.5|The 2017 version of the Inglehart–Welzel cultural map of the world, constructed by sociopolitical scientists Ronald Inglehart and Christian Welzel based on the World Values Survey
Individual cultures emphasize values which their members broadly share. Values of a society can often be identified by examining the level of honor and respect received by various groups and ideas. 
Values clarification differs from cognitive moral education:
 Value clarification consists of "helping people clarify what their lives are for and what is worth working for. It encourages students to define their own values and to understand others' values."Santrock, J.W. (2007). A Topical Approach to Life-Span Development. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill
 Cognitive moral education builds on the belief that students should learn to value things like democracy and justice as their moral reasoning develops. 
Values relate to the norms of a culture, but they are more global and intellectual than norms.  Norms provide rules for behavior in specific situations, while values identify what should be judged as good or evil. While norms are standards, patterns, rules and guides of expected behavior, values are abstract concepts of what is important and worthwhile. Flying the national flag on a holiday is a norm, but it reflects the value of patriotism.  Wearing dark clothing and appearing solemn are normative behaviors to manifest respect at a funeral. Different cultures represent values differently and to different levels of emphasis. "Over the last three decades, traditional-age college students have shown an increased interest in personal well-being and a decreased interest in the welfare of others." Values seemed to have changed, affecting the beliefs, and attitudes of the students.
Members take part in a culture even if each member's personal values do not entirely agree with some of the normative values sanctioned in that culture. This reflects an individual's ability to synthesize and extract aspects valuable to them from the multiple subcultures they belong to.
If a group member expresses a value that seriously conflicts with the group's norms, the group's authority may carry out various ways of encouraging conformity or stigmatizing the non-conforming behavior of that member. For example, imprisonment can result from conflict with social norms that the state has established as law.
Furthermore, cultural values can be expressed at a global level through institutions participating in the global economy. For example, values important to global governance can include leadership, legitimacy, and efficiency. Within our current global governance architecture, leadership is expressed through the G20, legitimacy through the United Nations, and efficiency through member-driven international organizations.Lamy, Pascal, WTO Director-General, Speech to the European University Institute in Florence on 19 February 2011 (http://www.wto.org/english/news_e/sppl_e/sppl187_e.htm) The expertise provided by international organizations and civil society depends on the incorporation of flexibility in the rules, to preserve the expression of identity in a globalized world.
Nonetheless, in warlike economic competition, differing views may contradict each other, particularly in the field of culture. Thus audiences in Europe may regard a movie as an artistic creation and grant it benefits from special treatment, while audiences in the United States may see it as mere entertainment, whatever its artistic merits. EU policies based on the notion of "cultural exception" can become juxtaposed with the policy of "cultural specificity" on the liberal Anglo-Saxon side. Indeed, international law traditionally treats films as property and the content of television programs as a service. Consequently, cultural interventionist policies can find themselves opposed to the Anglo-Saxon liberal position, causing failures in international negotiations.Hacker, Violaine (2011a), "Building Medias Industry while promoting a community of values in the globalization: from quixotic choices to pragmatic boon for EU Citizens", Politické Védy-Journal of Political Science, Slovakia, pp. 64–74.
Value system
A value system is a set of consistent values used for the purpose of ethical or ideological integrity.
Consistency
As a member of a society, group or community, an individual can hold both a personal value system and a communal value system at the same time. In this case, the two value systems (one personal and one communal) are externally consistent provided they bear no contradictions or situational exceptions between them.
A value system in its own right is internally consistent when
 its values do not contradict each other and
 its exceptions are or could be
 abstract enough to be used in all situations and
 consistently applied.
Conversely, a value system by itself is internally inconsistent if:
 its values contradict each other and
 its exceptions are
 highly situational and
 inconsistently applied.
Value exceptions
Abstract exceptions serve to reinforce the ranking of values. Their definitions are generalized enough to be relevant to any and all situations. Situational exceptions, on the other hand, are ad hoc and pertain only to specific situations. The presence of a type of exception determines one of two more kinds of value systems:
 An idealized value system is a listing of values that lacks exceptions. It is, therefore, absolute and can be codified as a strict set of proscriptions on behavior. Those who hold to their idealized value system and claim no exceptions (other than the default) are called absolutists.
 A realized value system contains exceptions to resolve contradictions between values in practical circumstances. This type is what people tend to use in daily life.
The difference between these two types of systems can be seen when people state that they hold one value system yet in practice deviate from it, thus holding a different value system. For example, a religion lists an absolute set of values while the practice of that religion may include exceptions.
Implicit exceptions bring about a third type of value system called a formal value system. Whether idealized or realized, this type contains an implicit exception associated with each value: "as long as no higher-priority value is violated". For instance, a person might feel that lying is wrong. Since preserving a life is probably more highly valued than adhering to the principle that lying is wrong, lying to save someone's life is acceptable. Perhaps too simplistic in practice, such a hierarchical structure may warrant explicit exceptions.
Conflict
Although sharing a set of common values, like hockey is better than baseball or ice cream is better than fruit, two different parties might not rank those values equally. Also, two parties might disagree as to certain actions are right or wrong, both in theory and in practice, and find themselves in an ideological or physical conflict. Ethonomics, the discipline of rigorously examining and comparing value systems, enables us to understand politics and motivations more fully in order to resolve conflicts.
An example conflict would be a value system based on individualism pitted against a value system based on collectivism. A rational value system organized to resolve the conflict between two such value systems might take the form below. Note that added exceptions can become recursive and often convoluted.
 Individuals may act freely unless their actions harm others or interfere with others' freedom or with functions of society that individuals need, provided those functions do not themselves interfere with these proscribed individual rights and were agreed to by a majority of the individuals.
 A society (or more specifically the system of order that enables the workings of a society) exists for the purpose of benefiting the lives of the individuals who are members of that society. The functions of a society in providing such benefits would be those agreed to by the majority of individuals in the society.
 A society may require contributions from its members in order for them to benefit from the services provided by the society. The failure of individuals to make such required contributions could be considered a reason to deny those benefits to them, although a society could elect to consider hardship situations in determining how much should be contributed.
 A society may restrict behavior of individuals who are members of the society only for the purpose of performing its designated functions agreed to by the majority of individuals in the society, only insofar as they violate the aforementioned values. This means that a society may abrogate the rights of any of its members who fails to uphold the aforementioned values.
See also
Attitude (psychology)
Axiological ethics
Axiology
Clyde Kluckhohn and his value orientation theory
Hofstede's Framework for Assessing Culture
Instrumental and intrinsic value
Intercultural communication
Meaning of life
Paideia
Rokeach Value Survey
Spiral Dynamics
The Right and the Good
Value judgment
World Values Survey
References
Further reading
  see https://www.researchgate.net/publication/290349218_The_political_algebra_of_global_value_change_General_models_and_implications_for_the_Muslim_world
External links
Category:Concepts in ethics
Category:Concepts in metaphysics
Category:Codes of conduct
Category:Moral psychology
Category:Motivation
Category:Social philosophy
Category:Social psychology
Category:Social systems
"""

From "Golden Rule" ==> """
alt="Golden Rule Sign" that hung above the door of the employee's entrance to the Acme Sucker Rod Factory in Toledo, Ohio, 1913. The business was owned by Toledo Mayor Samuel M. Jones.|thumb|"Golden Rule Sign" that hung above the door of the employees' entrance to the Acme Sucker Rod Factory in Toledo, Ohio, 1913.
The Golden Rule is the principle of treating others as one wants to be treated. Various expressions of this rule can be found in the tenets of most religions and creeds through the ages. It can be considered an ethic of reciprocity in some religions, although different religions treat it differently.
The maxim may appear as a positive or negative injunction governing conduct:
 Treat others as you would like others to treat you (positive or directive form)
 Do not treat others in ways that you would not like to be treated (negative or prohibitive form)
 What you wish upon others, you wish upon yourself (empathetic or responsive form)
The idea dates at least to the early Confucian times (551–479 BCE), according to Rushworth Kidder, who identifies the concept appearing prominently in Buddhism, Christianity, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, Taoism, Zoroastrianism, and "the rest of the world's major religions".W.A. Spooner, "The Golden Rule," in James Hastings, ed. Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics, Vol. 6 (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1914) pp. 310–12, quoted in Rushworth M. Kidder, How Good People Make Tough Choices: Resolving the Dilemmas of Ethical Living, Harper, New York, 2003. . p. 159 As part of the 1993 "Declaration Toward a Global Ethic", 143 leaders of the world's major faiths endorsed the Golden Rule. According to Greg M. Epstein, it is "a concept that essentially no religion misses entirely", but belief in God is not necessary to endorse it. Simon Blackburn also states that the Golden Rule can be "found in some form in almost every ethical tradition".
Etymology
The term "Golden Rule", or "Golden law", began to be used widely in the early 17th century in Britain by Anglican theologians and preachers;Thomas Jackson: First Sermon upon Matthew 7,12 (1615; Werke Band 3, S. 612); Benjamin Camfield: The Comprehensive Rule of Righteousness (1671); George Boraston: The Royal Law, or the Golden Rule of Justice and Charity (1683); John Goodman: The Golden Rule, or, the Royal Law of Equity explained (1688; ); dazu Olivier du Roy: The Golden Rule as the Law of Nature. In: Jacob Neusner, Bruce Chilton (Hrsg.): The Golden Rule – The Ethics of Reprocity in World Religions. London/New York 2008, S. 94. the earliest known usage is that of Anglicans Charles Gibbon and Thomas Jackson in 1604.
Ancient history
Ancient Egypt
Possibly the earliest affirmation of the maxim of reciprocity, reflecting the ancient Egyptian goddess Ma'at, appears in the story of "The Eloquent Peasant", which dates to the Middle Kingdom (): "Now this is the command: Do to the doer to make him do."Eloquent Peasant PDF  "Now this is the command: do to the doer to make him do""The Culture of Ancient Egypt", John Albert Wilson, p. 121, University of Chicago Press, 1956,  "Now this is the command: Do to the doer to cause that he do" This proverb embodies the do ut des principle.Eloquent Peasant PDF  "The peasant quotes a proverb that embodies the do ut des principle" A Late Period () papyrus contains an early negative affirmation of the Golden Rule: "That which you hate to be done to you, do not do to another.""A Late Period Hieratic Wisdom Text: P. Brooklyn 47.218.135" , Richard Jasnow, p. 95, University of Chicago Press, 1992, .
Ancient India
Sanskrit tradition
In Mahābhārata, the ancient epic of India, there is a discourse in which sage Brihaspati tells the king Yudhishthira the following about dharma, a philosophical understanding of values and actions that lend good order to life:
The Mahābhārata is usually dated to the period between 400 BCE and 400 CE.Cush, D., Robinson, C., York, M. (eds.) (2008) "Mahābhārata" in Encyclopedia of Hinduism. Abingdon: Routledge, p 469van Buitenen, J.A.B. (1973) The Mahābhārata, Book 1: The Book of the Beginning. Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press, p xxv
Tamil tradition
In Chapter 32 in the Book of Virtue of the Tirukkuṛaḷ (), Valluvar says:
Furthermore, in verse 312, Valluvar says that it is the determination or code of the spotless (virtuous) not to do evil, even in return, to those who have cherished enmity and done them evil. According to him, the proper punishment to those who have done evil is to put them to shame by showing them kindness, in return and to forget both the evil and the good done on both sides (verse 314).
Ancient Greece
The Golden Rule in its prohibitive (negative) form was a common principle in ancient Greek philosophy. Examples of the general concept include:
 "Avoid doing what you would blame others for doing." – ThalesDiogenes Laërtius, "The Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers", I:36 ( – )
 "What you do not want to happen to you, do not do it yourself either." – Sextus the Pythagorean. The oldest extant reference to Sextus is by Origen in the third century of the common era.The Sentences of Sextus Article
 "Ideally, no one should touch my property or tamper with it, unless I have given him some sort of permission, and, if I am sensible I shall treat the property of others with the same respect." – PlatoPlato, Laws, Book XI (Complete Works of Plato, 1997 edited Cooper ISBN 978-0-87220-349-5) ( – )
 "Do not do to others that which angers you when they do it to you." – IsocratesIsocrates, Nicocles or the Cyprians, Isoc 3.61 (original text in Greek); cf. Isoc. 1.14, Isoc. 2.24, 38, Isoc. 4.81. (436–338 BCE)
 "It is impossible to live a pleasant life without living wisely and well and justly, and it is impossible to live wisely and well and justly without living pleasantly." – Epicurus (341–270 BC) where "justly" refers to "an agreement made in reciprocal association ... against the infliction or suffering of harm.""Principal Doctrines 5 and 33", Principal Doctrines by Epicurus, Translated by Robert Drew Hicks, The Internet Classics Archive, MIT.
Ancient Persia
The Pahlavi Texts of Zoroastrianism ( – 1000 CE) were an early source for the Golden Rule: "That nature alone is good which refrains from doing to another whatsoever is not good for itself." Dadisten-I-dinik, 94,5, and "Whatever is disagreeable to yourself do not do unto others." Shayast-na-Shayast 13:29
Ancient Rome
Seneca the Younger ( – 65 CE), a practitioner of Stoicism ( – 200 CE) expressed a hierarchical variation of the Golden Rule in his Letter 47, an essay regarding the treatment of slaves: "Treat your inferior as you would wish your superior to treat you."
Religious context
thumb|upright=1.3|The golden rule, as described in numerous world religions
According to Simon Blackburn, the Golden Rule "can be found in some form in almost every ethical tradition". A multi-faith poster showing the Golden Rule in sacred writings from 13 faith traditions (designed by Paul McKenna of Scarboro Missions, 2000) has been on permanent display at the Headquarters of the United Nations since 4 January 2002. Creating the poster "took five years of research that included consultations with experts in each of the 13 faith groups." (See also the section on Global Ethic.)
Abrahamic religions
Judaism
A rule of reciprocal altruism was stated positively in a well-known Torah verse (Hebrew: ):
Rashi commented what constitutes revenge and grudge, using the example of two men. One man would not lend the other his ax, then the next day, the same man asks the other for his ax. If the second man should say, "“I will not lend it to you, just as you did not lend to me," it constitutes revenge; if "Here it is for you; I am not like you, who did not lend me," it constitutes a grudge. Rashi concludes his commentary by quoting Rabbi Akiva on love of neighbor: "This is a fundamental [all-inclusive] principle of the Torah."Chabad: Leviticus 19:18
Hillel the Elder ( – 10 CE),Jewish Encyclopedia: Hillel: "His activity of forty years is perhaps historical; and since it began, according to a trustworthy tradition (Shab. 15a), one hundred years before the destruction of Jerusalem, it must have covered the period 30 BCE–10 CE" used this verse as a most important message of the Torah for his teachings. Once, he was challenged by a gentile who asked to be converted under the condition that the Torah be explained to him while he stood on one foot. Hillel accepted him as a candidate for conversion to Judaism but, drawing on Leviticus 19:18, briefed the man:
Hillel recognized brotherly love as the fundamental principle of Jewish ethics. Rabbi Akiva agreed, while Simeon ben Azzai suggested that the principle of love must have its foundation in Genesis chapter 1, which teaches that all men are the offspring of Adam, who was made in the image of God. (Sifra, Ḳedoshim, iv.; Yer. Ned. ix. 41c; Genesis Rabba 24 According to Jewish rabbinic literature, the first man Adam represents the unity of mankind. This is echoed in the modern preamble of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. And it is also taught, that Adam is last in order according to the evolutionary character of God's creation:Why was only a single specimen of man created first? To teach us that he who destroys a single soul destroys a whole world and that he who saves a single soul saves a whole world; furthermore, so no race or class may claim a nobler ancestry, saying, 'Our father was born first'; and, finally, to give testimony to the greatness of the Lord, who caused the wonderful diversity of mankind to emanate from one type. And why was Adam created last of all beings? To teach him humility; for if he be overbearing, let him remember that the little fly preceded him in the order of creation.
The Jewish Publication Society's edition of Leviticus states:Thou shalt not hate thy brother, in thy heart; thou shalt surely rebuke thy neighbour, and not bear sin because of him. 18 Thou shalt not take vengeance, nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself: I am the .This Torah verse represents one of several versions of the Golden Rule, which itself appears in various forms, positive and negative. It is the earliest written version of that concept in a positive form.Plaut, The Torah – A Modern Commentary; Union of American Hebrew Congregations, New York 1981; p. 892.
At the turn of the era, the Jewish rabbis were discussing the scope of the meaning of Leviticus 19:18 and 19:34 extensively:
Commentators interpret that this applies to foreigners (= Samaritans), proselytes (= 'strangers who reside with you')Rabbi Akiva, bQuid 75b and Jews.Rabbi Gamaliel, yKet 3, 1; 27a 
On the verse, "Love your fellow as yourself", the classic commentator Rashi quotes from Torat Kohanim, an early Midrashic text regarding the famous dictum of Rabbi Akiva: "Love your fellow as yourself – Rabbi Akiva says this is a great principle of the Torah."Kedoshim 19:18, Toras Kohanim, ibid. See also Talmud Yerushalmi, Nedarim 9:4; Bereishis Rabbah 24:7.
Israel's postal service quoted from the previous Leviticus verse when it commemorated the Universal Declaration of Human Rights on a 1958 postage stamp.
Christianity
thumb|right|The Sermon on the Mount by Carl Bloch (1877) portrays Jesus teaching during the Sermon on the Mount
The "Golden Rule" was proclaimed by Jesus of Nazareth; see also  during his Sermon on the Mount and described by him as the second great commandment. The common English phrasing is "Do unto others as you would have them do unto you". A similar form of the phrase appeared in a Catholic catechism around 1567 (certainly in the reprint of 1583). Various applications of the Golden Rule are stated positively numerous times in the Old Testament: "Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." Or, in Leviticus 19:34: "But treat them just as you treat your own citizens. Love foreigners as you love yourselves, because you were foreigners one time in Egypt. I am the Lord your God.".
The Old Testament Deuterocanonical books of Tobit and Sirach, accepted as part of the Scriptural canon by Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodoxy, and the Non-Chalcedonian Churches, express a negative form of the golden rule:
Two passages in the New Testament quote Jesus of Nazareth espousing the positive form of the Golden rule:
A similar passage, a parallel to the Great Commandment, is Luke 10:25.
The passage in the book of Luke then continues with Jesus answering the question, "Who is my neighbor?", by telling the parable of the Good Samaritan, which John Wesley interprets as meaning that "your neighbor" is anyone in need.
Jesus' teaching goes beyond the negative formulation of not doing what one would not like done to themselves, to the positive formulation of actively doing good to another that, if the situations were reversed, one would desire that the other would do for them. This formulation, as indicated in the parable of the Good Samaritan, emphasizes the needs for positive action that brings benefit to another, not simply restraining oneself from negative activities that hurt another.Moore: Judaism in the First Centuries of the Christian Era; Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1927–1930; Vol. 2, p. 87, Vol. 3, p. 180. 
In one passage of the New Testament, Paul the Apostle refers to the golden rule, restating Jesus' second commandment:
St. Paul also comments on the golden rule in the book of Romans:
Islam
The Arabian peninsula was known to not practice the golden rule prior to the advent of Islam. According to Th. Emil Homerin: "Pre-Islamic Arabs regarded the survival of the tribe, as most essential and to be ensured by the ancient rite of blood vengeance." Homerin goes on to say:
From the hadith, the collected oral and written accounts of Muhammad and his teachings during his lifetime:
Ali ibn Abi Talib (4th Caliph in Sunni Islam, and first Imam in Shia Islam) says:
Baháʼí Faith
The writings of the Baháʼí Faith encourage everyone to treat others as they would treat themselves and even prefer others over oneself:
Indian religions
Hinduism
Also,
Buddhism
Buddha (Siddhartha Gautama, –543 BCE) made the negative formulation of the golden rule one of the cornerstones of his ethics in the 6th century BCE. It occurs in many places and in many forms throughout the Tripitaka.
Jainism
The Golden Rule is paramount in the Jainist philosophy and can be seen in the doctrines of ahimsa and karma. As part of the prohibition of causing any living beings to suffer, Jainism forbids inflicting upon others what is harmful to oneself.
The following line from the Acaranga Sutra sums up the philosophy of Jainism:
Sikhism
Chinese religions
Confucianism
The same idea is also presented in V.12 and VI.30 of the Analects (), which can be found in the online Chinese Text Project. The phraseology differs from the Christian version of the Golden Rule. It does not presume to do anything unto others, but merely to avoid doing what would be harmful. It does not preclude doing good deeds and taking moral positions.
Taoism
Mohism
Mozi regarded the golden rule as a corollary to the cardinal virtue of impartiality, and encouraged egalitarianism and selflessness in relationships.
Iranian religions
Zoroastrianism
New religious movements
Wicca
 Scientology 
Traditional African religions
 Yoruba 
Odinani
Secular context
Global ethic
The "Declaration Toward a Global Ethic"Towards a Global Ethic – Urban Dharma – Buddhism in America (This link includes a list of 143 signatories and their respective religions.) from the Parliament of the World’s Religions (1993) proclaimed the Golden Rule ("We must treat others as we wish others to treat us") as the common principle for many religions.Towards a Global Ethic  (An Initial Declaration) ReligiousTolerance.org. – Under the subtitle, "We Declare," see third paragraph. The first line reads, "We must treat others as we wish others to treat us." The Initial Declaration was signed by 143 leaders from all of the world's major faiths, including Baháʼí Faith, Brahmanism, Brahma Kumaris, Buddhism, Christianity, Hinduism, Indigenous, Interfaith, Islam, Jainism, Judaism, Native American, Neo-Pagan, Sikhism, Taoism, Theosophist, Unitarian Universalist and Zoroastrian. In the folklore of several cultures the Golden Rule is depicted by the allegory of the long spoons.
Humanism
In the view of Greg M. Epstein, a Humanist chaplain at Harvard University, " 'do unto others' ... is a concept that essentially no religion misses entirely. But not a single one of these versions of the golden rule requires a God". Italics in original. Various sources identify the Golden Rule as a humanist principle:
Existentialism
Classical Utilitarianism
John Stuart Mill in his book, Utilitarianism (originally published in 1861), wrote, "In the golden rule of Jesus of Nazareth, we read the complete spirit of the ethics of utility. 'To do as you would be done by,' and 'to love your neighbour as yourself,' constitute the ideal perfection of utilitarian morality."
Other contexts
Human rights
According to Marc H. Bornstein, and William E. Paden, the Golden Rule is arguably the most essential basis for the modern concept of human rights, in which each individual has a right to just treatment, and a reciprocal responsibility to ensure justice for others.Defined another way, it "refers to the balance in an interactive system such that each party has both rights and duties, and the subordinate norm of complementarity states that one's rights are the other's obligation." See also: 
However, Leo Damrosch argued that the notion that the Golden Rule pertains to "rights" per se is a contemporary interpretation and has nothing to do with its origin. The development of human "rights" is a modern political ideal that began as a philosophical concept promulgated through the philosophy of Jean Jacques Rousseau in 18th century France, among others. His writings influenced Thomas Jefferson, who then incorporated Rousseau's reference to "inalienable rights" into the United States Declaration of Independence in 1776. Damrosch argued that to confuse the Golden Rule with human rights is to apply contemporary thinking to ancient concepts.
Science and economics
There has been research published arguing that some 'sense' of fair play and the Golden Rule may be stated and rooted in terms of neuroscientific and neuroethical principles.Pfaff, Donald W., "The Neuroscience of Fair Play: Why We (Usually) Follow the Golden Rule", Dana Press, The Dana Foundation, New York, 2007. 
The Golden Rule can also be explained from the perspectives of psychology, philosophy, sociology, human evolution, and economics. Psychologically, it involves a person empathizing with others. Philosophically, it involves a person perceiving their neighbor also as "I" or "self". Sociologically, "love your neighbor as yourself" is applicable between individuals, between groups, and also between individuals and groups. In evolution, "reciprocal altruism" is seen as a distinctive advance in the capacity of human groups to survive and reproduce, as their exceptional brains demanded exceptionally long childhoods and ongoing provision and protection even beyond that of the immediate family. In economics, Richard Swift, referring to ideas from David Graeber, suggests that "without some kind of reciprocity society would no longer be able to exist."
Study of other primates provides evidence that the Golden Rule exists in other non-human species.
Criticism
Philosophers, such as Immanuel Kant and Friedrich Nietzsche, have objected to the rule on a variety of grounds. The most serious among these is its application. How does one know how others want to be treated? The obvious way is to ask them, but this cannot be done if one assumes they have not reached a particular and relevant understanding. One religion that officially rejects the Golden Rule is the Neo-Nazi religion of the "Creativity Movement" founded by Ben Klassen. Followers of the religion believe that the Golden Rule doesn't make sense and is a "completely unworkable principle.".
Differences in values or interests
George Bernard Shaw wrote, "Do not do unto others as you would that they should do unto you. Their tastes may not be the same." This suggests that if your values are not shared with others, the way you want to be treated will not be the way they want to be treated. Hence, the Golden Rule of "do unto others" is "dangerous in the wrong hands",Source: p. 76 of How to Make Good Decisions and Be Right All the Time, Iain King, 2008, Continuum, . according to philosopher Iain King, because "some fanatics have no aversion to death: the Golden Rule might inspire them to kill others in suicide missions."Source: p. 76 of How to Make Good Decisions and Be Right All the Time, Iain King, 2008, Continuum, .
Differences in situations
Immanuel Kant famously criticized the golden rule for not being sensitive to differences of situation, noting that a prisoner duly convicted of a crime could appeal to the golden rule while asking the judge to release him, pointing out that the judge would not want anyone else to send him to prison, so he should not do so to others.Kant, Immanuel Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals, footnote 12. Cambridge University Press (28 April 1998).  On the other hand, in a critique of the consistency of Kant's writings, several authors have noted the "similarity" between the Golden Rule and Kant's Categorical Imperative, introduced in Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals (See discussion at this link).
Responses to criticisms
Walter Terence Stace, in The Concept of Morals (1937), wrote:
Marcus George Singer observed that there are two importantly different ways of looking at the golden rule: as requiring (1) that you perform specific actions that you want others to do to you or (2) that you guide your behavior in the same general ways that you want others to.M. G. Singer, The Ideal of a Rational Morality, p. 270 Counter-examples to the golden rule typically are more forceful against the first than the second.
In his book on the golden rule, Jeffrey Wattles makes the similar observation that such objections typically arise while applying the golden rule in certain general ways (namely, ignoring differences in taste, in situation, and so forth). But if we apply the golden rule to our own method of using it, asking in effect if we would want other people to apply the golden rule in such ways, the answer would typically be no, since it is quite predictable that others' ignoring of such factors will lead to behavior which we object to. It follows that we should not do so ourselves—according to the golden rule. In this way, the golden rule may be self-correcting.Wattles, p. 6 An article by Jouni Reinikainen develops this suggestion in greater detail.Jouni Reinikainen, "The Golden Rule and the Requirement of Universalizability." Journal of Value Inquiry. 39(2): 155–168, 2005.
It is possible, then, that the golden rule can itself guide us in identifying which differences of situation are morally relevant. We would often want other people to ignore any prejudice against our race or nationality when deciding how to act towards us, but would also want them to not ignore our differing preferences in food, desire for aggressiveness, and so on. This principle of "doing unto others, wherever possible, as they would be done by..." has sometimes been termed the platinum rule.Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies, Vol. 2 (1966 [1945]), p. 386. Dubbed "the platinum rule" in business books such as Charles J. Jacobus, Thomas E. Gillett, Georgia Real Estate: An Introduction to the Profession, Cengage Learning, 2007, p. 409 and Jeremy Comfort, Peter Franklin, The Mindful International Manager: How to Work Effectively Across Cultures, Kogan Page, p. 65.
Popular references
Charles Kingsley's The Water Babies (1863) includes a character named Mrs Do-As-You-Would-Be-Done-By (and another, Mrs Be-Done-By-As-You-Did).
See also
 Empathy
 General welfare clause
 Norm of reciprocity, social norm of in-kind responses to the behavior of others
 Reciprocity (cultural anthropology), way of defining people's informal exchange of goods and labour
 Reciprocity (evolution), mechanisms for the evolution of cooperation
 Reciprocity (international relations), principle that favours, benefits, or penalties that are granted by one state to the citizens or legal entities of another, should be returned in kind
 Reciprocity (social and political philosophy), concept of reciprocity as in-kind positive or negative responses for the actions of others; relation to justice; related ideas such as gratitude, mutuality, and the Golden Rule
 Reciprocity (social psychology), in-kind positive or negative responses of individuals towards the actions of others
 Serial reciprocity, where the benefactor of a gift or service will in turn provide benefits to a third party
 Ubuntu (philosophy), an ethical philosophy originating from Southern Africa, which has been summarised as 'A person is a person through other people'
References
External links
 The Golden Rule Movie A teaching resource.
 Golden Rule Day  An annual global event every April 5.
 Golden Rule Project - learning tools, etc. (based in Salt Lake City, Utah, USA)
 Monmouth Center for World Religions and Ethical Thought. The Golden Rule
 Scarboro Mission. The Golden Rule Educational, participatory, and interactive resources including videos, exercises, multi-disciplinary commentaries, The Golden Rule Poster, and interfaith dialogues on the Golden Rule.
 St Columbans Mission Society – Interfaith Relations. The Golden Rule The Golden Rule Poster, etc.
Category:Codes of conduct
Category:Ethical principles
Category:Interpersonal relationships
Category:Life skills
Category:Philosophy of law
Category:Positive Mitzvoth
Category:Religious practices
Category:Sermon on the Mount
"""

From "14 Penn Plaza LLC v. Pyett" ==> """
14 Penn Plaza LLC v. Pyett, 556 U.S. 247 (2009), is a United States labor law case decided by the United States Supreme Court on the rights of unionized workers to sue their employer for age discrimination. In this 2009 decision, the Court decided that whenever a union contract "clearly and unmistakably" requires that all age discrimination claims under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 be decided through arbitration, then employees subject to that contract cannot have those claims heard in court..
Pyett's lawyers, in addition to arguing that a union could not legally bargain away an employee's right to pursue an ADEA claim in court, also argued that "the facts… [show that the union] Local32BJ… has not done so in this case."14 Penn Plaza v. Pyett No. 07-581, Brief for Respondents, Page 2, available at: http://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/publishing/preview/publiced_preview_briefs_pdfs_07_08_07_581_Respondent.authcheckdam.PDF However, because these arguments had not been raised in the lower courts, the Supreme Court chose not to consider them and decided that the Collective Bargaining Agreement in this case did mandate that the employees' ADEA claims had to be resolved through arbitration.14 Penn Plaza, 556 U.S. at 273-74.
Prior to the Supreme Court's decision in 14 Penn Plaza v. Pyett, employees who were covered under union contracts, often referred to as bargaining unit members, had been able to raise any claims of civil rights violations by their employer in court. This had been the case regardless of the language which was stated in their union contract, a document often referred to as a collective bargaining agreement, or CBA.
Facts
Steven Pyett, Thomas O' Connell and Michael Phillips worked for Temco Service Industries, Inc., a maintenance service and cleaning contractor in New York City. Pyett and O'Connell were night watchmen and Phillips held a similar position as a night-starter at an office building owned by Pennsylvania Building Company and 14 Penn Plaza, LLC.
The men were members of the Service Employees International Union (SEIU) Local 32BJ. Their positions at Temco were covered under a collective bargaining agreement that their union Local 32BJ had signed with the Realty Advisory Board on Labor Relations (RAB). The RAB represented both Temco and 14 Penn Plaza in labor matters.14 Penn Plaza LLC v Pyett,(07-581), FACTS -https://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/cert/07-581
In August 2003, after receiving consent from the SEIU Local 32BJ, 14 Penn Plaza hired the unionized firm Spartan Security to provide licensed security guard services. Newly contracted security guards were assigned to the building where Pyett, O' Connell and Phillips worked, and Temco reassigned the men to other positions in the same building as night porters and light duty cleaners.
"As the only building employees over the age of 50,"Pyett, 498 F.3d at 90. Pyett, O' Connell and Phillips believed that their job reassignments to less desirable and less lucrative positions were the result of age discrimination and requested that their union file a grievance over the matter.
The workers' age discrimination claims progressed through four stages spanning five years on its way to the Supreme Court. Here is a summary of that path.
 Grievance and arbitration 
The union filed grievances alleging that Pyett, O' Connell and Phillips' job reassignments had violated the collective bargaining agreement by:
discriminating against Pyett, O' Connell and Phillips on account of their age,
neglecting seniority rights by not promoting either Pyett or O'Connell to an assistant mechanic position, and
negatively affecting each of the three worker's wages by rotating overtime inequitably.14 Penn Plaza, 556 U.S. at 253.
Arbitrator Earl Pfeffer held his initial hearing on the Pyett, O' Connell and Phillips grievances on February 2, 2004. A few weeks later, in a letter dated February 23, 2004, the union withdrew the charge of age discrimination from the grievances.Pyett v. Pennsylvania Building Co., 04 Civ. 7536 (NRB) US District Court For the Southern District of New York  Having previously agreed to the hiring of the licensed security guards, the union believed it could not "legitimately object to [the workers'] reassignments as discriminatory."
After several hearings, the arbitrator rendered his opinion on August 10, 2005, denying the other grievance claims.14 Penn Plaza v. Pyett, No. 07-581,(4/1/09), page 3, available at https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/08pdf/07-581.pdf
 Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
On May 26, 2004, Pyett, O' Connell and Phillips each filed age discrimination charges with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. After reviewing the evidence, the EEOC dismissed each of the men's complaints. Per the agency's practice when its investigation does not substantiate a charge that has been made,"The Charge Handling Process," U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, available at: http://www.eeoc.gov/employees/process.cfm the EEOC issued each man a letter of Dismissal and Notice of Rights. The letters notified the men of their right to file a lawsuit in court.
 District court 
On August 21, 2004, Pyett, O' Connell and Phillips sued SEIU Local 32BJ. Their lawsuit claimed that the union had breached its duty of fair representation when it withdrew their age discrimination grievance charges. The workers later dropped their lawsuit against the union after the arbitrator rendered his decision on their remaining grievances in August 2005.
Then, on September 23, 2004, the men filed a lawsuit against Pennsylvania Building Company,14 Penn Plaza, LLC and Temco in District Court. The lawsuit charged that their job reassignments were in violation of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act.
The companies filed a motion to dismiss the charges as well as a motion to compel arbitration under sections 3 and 4 of the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA) [9 U. S. C. §§3]. On May 31, 2006, District Judge Naomi Reice Buchwald denied both motions. In denying the motion to compel arbitration, Judge Buchwald cited a phrase that would later be used by the Supreme Court in their decision to reverse the Court of Appeals ruling. She cited that it was "binding… precedent that even a clear and unmistakable union-negotiated waiver of a right to litigate certain… claims in a judicial forum is unenforceable."Pyett v. Pennsylvania Building Co., 04 Civ. 7536 (NRB) US District Court For the Southern District of New York, emphasis added
 U.S. Court of Appeals 
On June 1, 2006, Pennsylvania Building Company,14 Penn Plaza, LLC and Temco appealed to the US Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit under section 16 of the Federal Arbitration Act. Their appeal again sought to compel the plaintiffs to resolve their claims of age discrimination through arbitration.
On August 1, 2007, Appeals Court Judge José Cabranes upheld the District Court's decision to deny the companies' motion to compel arbitration. In his decision he wrote that "mandatory arbitration clauses in collective bargaining agreements are unenforceable to the extent that they waive the rights of covered workers to a judicial forum for federal statutory causes of action."
The judge continued that "the District Court recognized… the distinction our Court has drawn between arbitration clauses in individual contracts… and arbitration clauses in [collective bargaining agreement]s."  The former, he wrote, was "governed by a line of Supreme Court cases represented by Gilmer v. Interstate/Johnson Lane Corp.."Pyett, 498 F.3d at 92..  The later was governed "by a line of Supreme Court cases represented by Alexander v. Gardner-Denver Co.".
Judgment
A sharply divided Supreme Court delivered a 5–4 decision in favor of 14 Penn Plaza and overturning the Second Circuit judge's decision. In doing so, the Court ruled that some collective bargaining agreements do require employees to pursue legal action under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 through arbitration rather than in court. The Court also ruled that the CBA in this case did require ADEA claims to be arbitrated.
Justice Clarence Thomas authored the Court's opinion. He was joined in the majority by Chief Justice John Roberts, and Justices Antonin Scalia, Anthony Kennedy, and Samuel Alito.
In its decision, the Court flipped the Second Circuit's reasoning by rejecting the Gardner-Denver line of precedent and embracing that of its 1991 decision in Gilmer.  In doing so, the Court eliminated the widely held legal distinction between mandatory arbitration agreements, like the one that had been upheld in Gilmer, and collective bargaining agreements, like the ones at issue in both Gardner-Denver and 14 Penn Plaza. This distinction, Justice Souter pointed out in his dissent, had consistently been observed by each of the U.S. Appeals Courts except the Fourth Circuit.14 Penn Plaza v. Pyett, No. 07-581 slip opinion (U.S. April 1, 2009), Souter, J., dissenting, Page 5, available at https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/08pdf/07-581.pdf
One major difference between the two types of agreements is that the former is signed directly by the individual effected by it, while the latter is signed by a union representative. Another difference is that the implementation of mandatory arbitration agreements is governed by a 1925 law called the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA). Union contracts, on the other hand, are governed by a different law passed in 1935 called the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA)NLRA 29 U.S.C. §§ 151-169, available at: http://www.nlrb.gov/national-labor-relations-act  and enforced by an "independent federal agency""Who Are We," National Labor Relations Board, http://www.nlrb.gov/who-we-are  called the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB).
Justice Thomas, writing for the majority, now concluded that "nothing in the law suggests a distinction" between the two types of agreements.14 Penn Plaza, 556 U.S. at 258.
The 14 Penn Plaza majority opinion discerned that Gardner-Denver was decided correctly "on the narrow ground… that the collective bargaining agreement did not cover statutory claims."  However, the majority strongly disputed Gardner-Denver and its descendant cases',Cases decided upon Gardner-Denver include: ; and .  "broad dicta" ("Judicial dictum is an opinion by a court on a question that is not essential to its decision even though it may be directly involved.") as based on a "misconceived view of arbitration that this Court has since abandoned."14 Penn Plaza, 556 U.S. at 265. The majority identified three such "misconceptions."14 Penn Plaza, 556 U.S. at 268.
The first misconception it identified was that to "submit statutory discrimination claims to arbitration was tantamount to a waiver of those rights." Rather, they concluded, "it waives only the right to seek relief from a court."  
The second misconception was that arbitrators "competence… to decide legal issue[s]," as well the "informality" and "fact finding process" of arbitration make it an unsuitable venue to decide people's legal rights.14 Penn Plaza, 556 U.S. at 269. Justice Thomas added that "the informality of arbitration is one of the chief reasons that parties select" it, and that arbitration's "more streamlined" procedures did not render them "inadequate."
The third misconception that the Court's opinion sought to refute was regarding the real or potential conflict of interest between a union as a whole and the individual members that make up its bargaining unit. Nothing in the text of the ADEA, the majority wrote, would justify "singling out an arbitration provision for disfavored treatment" "simply because of an alleged conflict of interest between a union and its members."  It added "In any event, Congress has accounted for this conflict of interest" by allowing bargaining unit members to take legal action against their union with the National Labor Relations Board and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.14 Penn Plaza, 556 U.S. at 271.
Lastly, the 14 Penn Plaza majority turned its attention to "respondents… series of arguments contending that the particular CBA at issue does not clearly and unmistakably require them to arbitrate their ADEA claims."  These arguments centered around the collective bargaining agreement's provision that they gave the union, rather than individual bargaining unit members, complete control over whether, and for how long, to pursue a grievance. Therefore, "[a]bsent any [individual employee's] arbitration right, there is no… support [for] a motion to compel arbitration."14 Penn Plaza v. Pyett, No. 07-581, Brief for the Respondents, Page 2, available at: http://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/publishing/preview/publiced_preview_briefs_pdfs_07_08_07_581_Respondent.authcheckdam.PDF
While the Court notes that it could still consider these arguments even though council for Pyett, O'Connell and Phillips had not raised them in the lower courts, it chose not to, citing a precedent set in Heckler v. Campbell..<ref>'14 Penn Plaza v. Pyett, No. 07-581, slip opinion (U.S. April 1, 2009), Opinion of the Court, Page 24, available at https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/08pdf/07-581.pdf</ref>  In that decision, the Court stated that it would address arguments that had not been raised in the lower courts "only in exceptional cases."  The 14 Penn Plaza majority followed with "This is not an "exceptional case," and added that this issue "was not fully briefed to this or any court."  Consequently, the Court "hesitat[ed] to invalidate arbitration agreements on the basis of speculation."14 Penn Plaza, 556 U.S. at 274.
The Court concluded that the CBA at issue in this case "clearly and unmistakably requires respondents to arbitrate the age-discrimination claims at issue in this appeal."14 Penn Plaza v. Pyett, No. 07-581, slip opinion (U.S. April 1, 2009), Syllabus, Page 2, available at https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/08pdf/07-581.pdf
 Souter's dissent 
Justice David Souter authored one of two dissenting opinions. He was joined by Justices John Paul Stevens, Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen Breyer.
In Justice Souter's dissent, he disputes what he refers to as the majority's "bald assertion that "[n]othing in the law suggests a distinction between the status of arbitration agreements signed by an individual employee and those agreed to by a union representative." The "applicability of the Gardner-Denver rule" to this case, he writes, is "unquestionable" and that "[o]nce we have construed a statute, stability is the rule and… [t]here is no argument for abandoning precedent here."14 Penn Plaza, 556 U.S. at 281 (Souter, J. dissenting).
The dissenting justices claim that the majority "misreads the case" of Gardner-Denver by concluding that its outcome hinged solely upon the scope, or specific language, of the collective bargaining agreement. "One need only read Gardner-Denver itself to know that it was not at all so narrowly reasoned."14 Penn Plaza, 556 U.S. at 282 (Souter, J. dissenting).
Quoting from the text of the ADEA, Justice Souter notes that "'Any person aggrieved' under the Act 'may bring a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction for legal or equitable relief' 29 U.S.C. §6269(c)."14 Penn Plaza, 556 U.S. at 278 (Souter, J. dissenting).
The minority contends that "Congress itself has unsurprisingly understood Gardner-Denver the way we have repeatedly explained it and has operated on the assumption that a CBA cannot waive employees' rights to a judicial forum to enforce antidiscrimination statutes."  They continue, "Congress has had [over] 30 years in which it could have corrected our decision … if it disagreed with it, and has not chosen to do so."14 Penn Plaza, 556 U.S. at 285 (Souter, J. dissenting).
Finally, Justice Souter speculates that the majority opinion may have a limited effect because it "explicitly" leaves unanswered the question of whether or not "a CBA's waiver of judicial forum is enforceable when the union controls access to and presentation of employees' claims in arbitration."
 Stevens' dissent 
In addition to signing onto Justice Souter's dissent, Justice John Paul Stevens authored an additional dissent. Justice Stevens criticized the majority for what he considered its "subversion of precedent."  He expressed his opposition not only to the Court's "policy favoring arbitration" in the 14 Penn Plaza and Gilmer decisions, but also in a series of decisions from 1981 to 2001.See ; ; Gilmer, 500 U.S. at 36; and . In these cases, he wrote, "my colleagues were making policy choices not made by Congress."14 Penn Plaza, 556 U.S. at 275 (Stevens, J. dissenting).
Writing about Gardner-Denver, he concluded with "[i]n the absence of an intervening amendment" from Congress, we are "bound by that decision."14 Penn Plaza, 556 U.S. at 277 (Stevens, J. dissenting).
Significance
The Supreme Court has since reversed several additional lower court rulings involving mandatory arbitration. 14 Penn Plaza has been heavily criticized in academic literature,See E McGaughey, 'Fascism-Lite in America (or the social idea of Donald Trump)' (2018) British Journal of American Legal Studies  (arguing that like the Lochner era made social rights void, a new Concepcion era put rights up "for sale") and M Finkin, 'Workplace Justice: Does Private Judging Matter?' (2014) Zeitschrift für Vergleichende Rechtswissenschaft 2/2014  and calls for its reversal through an Arbitration Fairness Act have been made.
 Stolt-Nielsen v. Animalfeeds International Corp. 
On April 27, 2010, the Supreme Court reversed a United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit decision regarding class action arbitration in Stolt-Nielsen v. Animalfeeds International Corp. Stolt-Nielsen v. Animalfeeds International Corp., No. 08-1198, slip op. (U.S. April 27, 2010) Both parties had agreed that their arbitration agreement was silent on the issue of class actions. A panel of arbitrators decided that the customer could pursue class arbitration. Their decision was ultimately reversed by the Supreme Court.
 AT&T Mobility v. Concepcion 
On April 27, 2011, the Supreme Court reversed a United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit decision in AT & T Mobility v. Concepcion..  Customers brought a class action suit against their cell phone company for false advertising and fraud. The Ninth Circuit court determined that the contract's arbitration clause, which precluded class arbitration, was unconscionable under California's Discover Bank rule. The rule allowed for a class action suit "where a party with superior bargaining power was alleged to have cheated large numbers of consumers out of individually small sums of money."Concepcion, 563 U.S. at 340.  The Supreme Court overruled this decision, holding that section 2 of the Federal Arbitration Act preempted the California rule.
 Marmet Health Care Center v. Brown 
On February 21, 2012, the Supreme Court overruled a Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia decision involving a state lawsuit brought by three families of nursing home patients in Marmet Health Care Center v. Brown''. The state supreme court of appeals had allowed the family members of three nursing home patients who had died to sue the nursing homes for negligence. In doing so, it upheld a West Virginia state law prohibiting pre-dispute agreements that mandate arbitration of personal-injury or wrongful-death claims against nursing homes. The U.S. Supreme Court decided that the state rule violated the Federal Arbitration Act and vacated the state court's judgment..
 Arbitration Fairness Act of 2011 
The Arbitration Fairness Act of 2011 was introduced in May 2011 by Senators Richard Blumenthal (D-CT), Al Franken (D-MN) and 11 Senate co-sponsors. A companion bill was introduced in the House of Representatives H.R. 1873 by Representative Henry "Hank" Johnson [D-GA]  The bill, first introduced to Congress in 2007,"Sens. Franken, Blumenthal, Rep. Hank Johnson Announce Legislation Giving Consumers More Power in the Courts against Corporations," Press Release from Wednesday, April 27, 2011, http://blumenthal.senate.gov/newsroom/press/release/sens-franken-blumenthal-rep-hank-johnson-announce-legislation-giving-consumers-more-power-in-the-courts-against-corporations leaves arbitration provisions in collective bargaining agreements between employers and labor unions unaffected "except that no such arbitration provision shall have the effect of waiving the right of an employee to seek judicial enforcement of a [federal or state law, or federal or state Constitutional] right or related public policy.Arbitration Fairness Act, Section 402 (b) (2)
The bill would also bar the enforcement of mandatory arbitration clauses between corporations and consumers or non-union employees.Arbitration Fairness Act, Section 402 (a)
The bill's "findings" section states that:Arbitration Fairness Act, Section 2*Most consumers and employees have little or no meaningful choice whether to submit their claims to arbitration.
Mandatory arbitration undermines the development of public law because there is inadequate transparency and inadequate judicial review of arbitrators' decisions.
Arbitration can be an acceptable alternative when consent to the arbitration is truly voluntary, and occurs after the dispute arises.
The House Judiciary Committee referred the bill to the Subcommittee on Courts, Commercial and Administrative Law on June 1, 2011. The Senate Judiciary Committee held hearings on the Arbitration Fairness Act on October 13, 2011.
 Community support for the bill 
A wide coalition of organizations including social justice, public interest, labor, consumer protection, civil rights, housing and homeowner,  health care advocacy, legal advocacy and other community groups are supporting the passage of the Arbitration Fairness Act of 2011 S.987 and H.R.1873.Bill Summary & Status 112th Congress (2011-2012), S.987 and H.R.1873. Searchable by bill numbers at The Library of Congress web site at http://thomas.loc.gov/ 
In a letter to the House Judiciary Committee dated May 17, 2011, 48 organizations,The complete list of organizations that signed onto the May 17, 2011 to the House Judiciary Committee in support of the Arbitration Fairness Act were:  Alliance for Justice; American Association for Justice;  American Association of University Women (AAUW); American Civil Liberties Union; American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO); American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME); Americans for Financial Reform; Arizona PIRG; Center for Responsible Lending; Citizen Works; ConnectiCOSH; Consumer Action; Consumers for Auto Reliability and Safety; Consumer Federation of America; Consumer Watchdog; Consumers Union; Empire Justice Center; Essential Information; Homeowners Against Deficient Dwellings; Home Owners for Better Building; Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights; Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights; Legal Services of New Jersey; Maryland Consumer Rights Coalition (MCRC); MASSPIRG; MYF Legal Services, Inc.; NAACP; National Association of Consumer Advocates; National Community Reinvestment Coalition; National Consumer Law Center (On behalf of its low income clients); The National Consumer Voice for Quality Long-Term Care (formerly NCCNHR); National Consumers League; National Council of La Raza; National Fair Housing Alliance; National Employment Law Project; National Employment Lawyers Association; National Women's Health Network; National Women's Law Center; Neighborhood Economic Development Advocacy Project; New Jersey Citizen Action; Public Citizen; Public Justice Center; The Rural Advancement Foundation International (RAFI-USA); Sargent Shriver National Center on Poverty Law; Service Employees International Union (SEIU); USAction; Union Plus; U.S. Public Interest Research Group (U.S. PIRG) including the American Civil Liberties Union, Consumer Action, the AFL–CIO and the NAACP, urged the committee to end the "predatory practice of forcing non-union employees and consumers to sign away their rights to legal protections and access to the courts." The practice, they write, allows corporations to "shield themselves from accountability for wrongdoing."Letter in Support of the Arbitration Fairness Act, H.R. 1020; Fair Arbitration Now blog maintained by Public Citizen http://www.fairarbitrationnow.org/content/letter-support-arbitration-fairness-act-hr-1020
The letter also questions the impartiality of "arbitrators who rely on major corporations for repeat business" as well as the relative lack of oversight and "limit[ed] … procedural protections and remedies otherwise available to individuals in a court of law."
The coalition of groups also oppose the "exorbitant filing fees, continuous fees for procedures such as motions and written findings, and "loser pays" rules in arbitration [which] are prohibitive to many individuals."
See also
US labor law
US contract law
Magna Carta 1215 clause 40, "To no one will we sell, to no one will we refuse or delay, right or justice."
Notes
References
Ewan McGaughey, 'Fascism-Lite in America (or the social idea of Donald Trump)' (2018) British Journal of American Legal Studies 
External links
The Arbitration Fairness Act text
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:Ageism case law
Category:United States arbitration case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Service Employees International Union litigation
Category:United States trade union case law
"""

From "44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Rhode Island" ==> """
44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Rhode Island, 517 U.S. 484 (1996), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a complete ban on the advertising of alcohol prices was unconstitutional under the First Amendment, and that the Twenty-first Amendment, empowering the states to regulate alcohol, did not lessen other constitutional restraints of state power.
 Background 
In 1956, the Rhode Island Legislature passed two regulations restricting the content of alcohol advertisements.  The first prevented both in and out-of-state manufacturers, wholesalers, and shippers from “advertising in any manner whatsoever” the price of any alcoholic beverage offered for sale in Rhode Island. The second prevented Rhode Island news media from “mak[ing] reference to the price of any alcoholic beverages” under any circumstances..
In 1985, a liquormart brought a suit against the liquor control commissioner, arguing, among other things, that the first regulation, which prevented the liquormart from advertising its prices, was unconstitutional.  The Rhode Island Supreme Court, however, held that the regulation did not violate the First Amendment, the Commerce Clause, the Equal Protection Clause, or the Sherman Anti-Trust Act.S & S Liquor Mart, Inc. v. Pastore, 497 A.2d 729 (1985).
In the same year, the Rhode Island Liquor Stores Association filed a suit that attempted to enjoin a local Rhode Island newspaper, The Call, from advertising prices of liquor outside of the state.  In that case, the Rhode Island Supreme Court held that the second regulation was constitutional, and enjoined the newspaper from advertising out-of-state liquor prices.Rhode Island Liquor Stores Ass'n v. Evening Call Pub. Co., 497 A.2d 331 (1985).
In 44 Liquormart, the company 44 Liquormart Inc. owned liquor stores in Rhode Island. The other petitioner, Peoples Super Liquor Stores, Inc., operated several liquor stores in Massachusetts, which Rhode Islanders used.  The complaint original began, because 44 Liquormart attempted to run an advertisement, which the Supreme Court of the United States described as:
Because the advertisement implied that 44 Liquormart had low prices, the Rhode Island Liquor Control Administrator fined the store $400.00.  After being assessed the fine, the petitioners brought the suit, alleging that the regulation was unconstitutional.  The District Court found the regulation banning advertisements unconstitutional, because the state did not prove that the law directly advanced its interest in reducing alcohol consumption, and because the law's reach was unnecessarily extensive.
The First Circuit Court of Appeals reversed the lower court, ruling that an increase in alcohol advertisements would lead to an increase in alcohol sales and  that the Twenty-first Amendment gave Rhode Island's ban a presumption of validity.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Stevens, writing for the plurality, reversed the First Circuit Court of Appeals.  He stated first that it was a mistake to assume that commercial speech was not entitled to protection under the First Amendment.44 Liquormart, Inc., 517 U.S. at 496.  Relying heavily on the Court's decisions in Bigelow v. Virginia and Virginia Bd. of Pharmacy v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council, Inc., Stevens concluded that the Court's "early cases uniformly struck down several broadly based bans on truthful, nonmisleading commercial speech, each of which served ends unrelated to consumer protection."44 Liquormart, Inc., 517 U.S. at 497-98  He did note, however, that the Court has at the same time recognized that states may regulate commercial advertising to a greater degree than non-commercial advertising.
While Stevens essentially reaffirmed the principle that states have a wider latitude to regulate commercial speech, he stated that Rhode Island had gone too far.  Specifically, he stated that the Court has, in the past, been wary of the "dangers" of outright content-based bans on commercial speech.  He further stated: 
Having described the regulation as a "paternal" one, which assumes that the public will respond badly to the truth, the Stevens court then went on to address Rhode Island's argument that it had "substantial interest" in promoting temperance.  Stevens, however, did not give much weight to this argument, because the state provided no findings of fact showing that the ban actually did promote temperance.44 Liquormart, Inc., 517 U.S. at 505
Stevens further rejected Rhode Island's argument that because the facts supporting or opposing a conclusion that the total ban did, in fact, promote temperance could "go both ways," the First Circuit Court of Appeals was correct in deferring to the legislature.  In rejecting the state's argument, Stevens called into question the Supreme Court's ruling in Posadas de Puerto Rico Associates v. Tourism Company of Puerto Rico, which was extremely deferential to the legislature.44 Liquormart, Inc., 517 U.S. at 509.
Finally, Stevens quickly rejected Rhode Island's contention that the Twenty-first Amendment gave the state the power to enforce the complete advertising ban.  He conceded that the Amendment did give the state's greater ability to regulate alcohol without violating the dormant commerce clause, but that it did not "license the States to ignore their obligations under other provisions of the Constitution.”44 Liquormart, Inc., 517 U.S. at 516.
 Concurrences 
Stevens wrote for the majority as to Parts I, II, VII, and VIII.  The major holdings from these sections were that the Twenty-first Amendment did not "save" Rhode Island's total ban from unconstitutionality and the result that the ban was unconstitutional.
Stevens, in Parts III and V, which were joined by Justice Ginsburg and Justice Kennedy, and Justice Souter, stated that the First Amendment allowed for greater regulation of commercial advertising than non-commercial advertising.
Stevens, in Part IV, which was joined by Justice Kennedy and Justice Ginsburg, concluded that not all commercial advertising is as protected as other types of commercial advertising.
Stevens, in Part VI, which was joined by Justice Kennedy, Justice Ginsburg, and Justice Thomas, rejected the Court's reasoning in Posadas.
References
 External links 
Case brief: Quimbee
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States commercial speech case law
Category:1996 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Rhode Island
Category:United States Twenty-first Amendment case law
Category:Advertising regulation
Category:Alcohol law in the United States
"""

From "62 Cases of Jam v. United States" ==> """
62 Cases of Jam v. United States, 340 U.S. 593 (1951), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that "imitation jam," so labeled, was not a "misbranded" product under § 403 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act of 1938,  21 U.S.C. § 343, even though it did not meet federal regulations for being fruit jam.
The form of the styling of this case—the defendant being an object, rather than a legal person—is because this is a jurisdiction in rem (power over objects) case, rather than the more familiar in personam (over persons) case.
 Background 
The case arose on a libel, that is, an in rem condemnation action filed by the government to seize the jam for being in violation of federal law.  The jam, a product called "Delicious Brand Imitation Jam", had been manufactured in Colorado and shipped to New Mexico, where the government libeled it..  The jars were assorted flavors of grape, strawberry, apricot, plum, peach and blackberry, and "contained 55% sugar, 25% fruit and 20% of a water solution of pectin."United States v. 62 Cases, More or Less, Containing Six Jars of Jam, Etc., 183 F.2d 1014, 1016 & n.1 (10th Cir. 1950).  Federal jam regulations, however, as promulgated by the Federal Security Administrator, required that fruit jams contain a higher proportion of fruit to sugars.21 C.F.R. § 29.0 (1949).  And although the jars themselves were labeled "Imitation [name of flavor] Jam", the parties stipulated that these jams were
Under the FDCA, as it read at the time, a food was to be considered "misbranded", and therefore subject to condemnation, if "it purports to be or is represented as a food for which a definition and standard of identity has been prescribed by regulations ... unless ... it conforms to such definition and standard ... ."23 U.S.C. § 343(g) (1938).  On the other hand, the statute also provided that "[i]f it is an imitation of another food" a food would not be deemed misbranded if "its label bears, in type of uniform size and prominence, the word 'imitation' and, immediately thereafter, the name of the food imitated."23 U.S.C. § 343(c) (1938).  This provision originated in the Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906. Act of June 30, 1906, 34 Stat. 768, 770-771, § 8.
Although the federal trial court in New Mexico, where the libel had been brought in 1949, had found the jams to be properly identified imitations and thus not mislabeled,United States v. 62 Cases of Jam, 87 F. Supp. 735 (D.N.M. 1949). on appeal a two-judge majority of the Tenth Circuit (Phillips, Chief Judge, joined by Huxman, Judge) disagreed.  "They are a sub-standard jam", the court said.  "They are not imitation fruit jam."
In construing the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, the court considered the legislative history of the FDCA, and determined that "its purpose was not confined to a requirement of truthful and informative labeling," but rather that Congress intended to forbid deviation, labels notwithstanding, where the Administrator had prescribed "a definition and standard of identity" for a food.62 Cases, 183 F.2d at 1017.  Thus, the court held,
Because these jams "purported to be, and were represented to be" something whose definition and identity had been prescribed, the court concluded manufacturer "could not escape the impact" of the FDCA merely by labeling them "imitation" and "truthfully setting forth on the label" the jams' contents and their proportions.
Judge Pickett dissented, finding in the FDCA a Congressional intent "to permit on the market a wholesome and nutritious food which is within the means of a great mass of our people who are unable to purchase the standard products," so long as such an imitation is properly labeled under § 343(c).  "If the section is not given this construction it is meaningless."62 Cases, 183 F.2d at 1019 (Pickett, J., dissenting).
 Opinion of the Court 
Upon certiorari, the Supreme Court reversed in a 7−2 opinion delivered by Justice Frankfurter.  The Court characterized the Tenth Circuit's holding: "that, since the product seized closely resembled fruit jam in appearance and taste, and was used as a substitute for the standardized food, it 'purported' to be fruit jam, and must be deemed 'misbranded' notwithstanding that it was duly labeled an 'imitation.62 Cases, 340 U.S. at 595.
The court began by determining the appropriate method of statutory construction to employ.  Although the purpose of the FDCA was to protect the health of those who "are largely beyond self-protection" in a world of industrially produced and mass-marketed food,62 Cases, 340 U.S. at 595 (quoting . the issue in this case:
In ordinary speech," the Court said, "Delicious Brand Imitation Jam" was an imitation jam; and it was so labeled, putting it within the compass of § 343(c), which would allow such a practice, for "Congress did not give an esoteric meaning to 'imitation.' It left it to the understanding of ordinary English speech."62 Cases, 340 U.S. at 599.  Thus, the jam could be illegal only if a product expressly allowed under § 343(c) should be considered "impliedly prohibited" by § 343(g).62 Cases, 340 U.S. at 600. That is, because it was imitation jam under the plain meaning of those words, the product could be illegal only if it also purported to be real jam.  But in fact the product "purports and is represented to be only what it is—an imitation." The Court continued:
Justice Douglas, joined by Justice Black, issued a four-sentence dissent, calling the majority's reasoning "tortuous, to say the least", and stating without further explanation that "if petitioner's product did not purport to be 'jam,' petitioner would have no claim to press, and the Government no objection to raise."62 Cases, 340 U.S. at 601 (Douglas, J., dissenting). His meaning may have been that where a manufacturer relies on "confusion" between his imitation and the genuine article, he cannot claim protection under § 343(c).See Sandra Braman, "Triggering: Law, Labeling, and the Hyperreal," in David S. Allen & Robert Jensen eds., Freeing the First Amendment, p. 169, 185.  NYU Press 1995.  retrieved December 16, 2009.
 Subsequent developments 
62 Cases of Jam was significant both for its main holding about the scope of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and for its reliance on an "ordinary speech" interpretation of the statute.
Judge Pickett of the Tenth Circuit had expressed his fear that the government's view of the FDCA would allow the Federal Security Administrator "absolute control over the ingredient" of all foods for which he issued a regulation. "He will have the right to standardize the same, which will mean virtually a standardization of the price.  It will remove from the market a nutritious and wholesome food which sells for approximately one-half the price of standard product. The purchasing public, regardless of their ability to pay, will be forced to purchase the same quality of food."62 Cases, 183 F.2d at 1019–20 (Pickett, J., dissenting).  After the Supreme Court's opinion, however, manufacturers could reduce the standards of a regulated food and still market their product under the food's name so long as they called it an "imitation".Institute of Medicine, Nutrition Labeling:  Issues and Directions for the 1990s, p.325.  Net'l Academies Press 1990. 
Since 1951, 62 Cases of Jam has been quoted and cited many times by the Supreme Court and by lower courts for its language on statutory construction, particularly the canon that in interpreting language enacted by Congress it is neither right for a court "to add nor to subtract, neither to delete nor to distort."E.g., , 190 n.11 (1982); McLean v. United States, 566 F.3d 391 (4th Cir. 2009); 
 References 
External links
 Full text of the Tenth Circuit opinion
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:1951 in United States case law
Category:Counterfeit consumer goods
Category:United States in rem cases
Category:Jams and jellies
"""

From "88 stations case" ==> """
The 88 stations case was a 1935–40 controversy and court case involving the Old Colony Division of the New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad. The New Haven entered bankruptcy in 1935; the next year, it ended the 1893 lease of the unprofitable Old Colony Division, but continued operating those lines by court order. The Old Colony and New Haven closed 88 stations in Massachusetts (plus five in Rhode Island) on July 18, 1938, ending passenger service altogether on some lines. In May 1939, the Old Colony filed to abandon all freight and passenger service on its lines. In November 1939, the Supreme Court of the United States ruled in Palmer v. Massachusetts that a district court did not have authority to order the discontinuance of intrastate passenger service. Thirty-two of the stations were reopened in 1940, with 40 percent of service cut in lieu of total abandonment.
History
Background
The Old Colony Railroad consolidated most rail lines in southeastern Massachusetts under its control in the 1870s and 1880s, including a lease of the Boston and Providence Railroad in 1888. The New York and New England Railroad (NY&NE) controlled several additional lines including the Charles River Branch, Dorchester Branch, and its Boston–Hartford mainline. The New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad (New Haven) leased the Old Colony in 1893 and the NYN&NE in 1895, creating a railroad monopoly in southeastern Massachusetts and much of Rhode Island.
The New Haven's 99-year lease of the Old Colony was treated as equivalent to ownership, with the Old Colony fully integrated into the New Haven system. Redundant routes were cut, and both public and internal documents used only the New Haven name. By the 1930s, the New Haven's largest freight terminal and only steam locomotive shop were both on the ex-Old Colony system; more passengers entered Boston on Old Colony lines than entered New York on the New Haven.
Short-distance passenger service in New England peaked around 1900, and began falling as electric streetcars and then automobiles took traffic. Increased freight traffic during World War I further reduced passenger operations. Several lightly used Old Colony branch lines were replaced with buses in the 1920s and early 1930s, while the Shawmut and Milton branches were replaced by a rapid transit extension. The New Haven suffered a sharp reduction in revenues during the early years of the Great Depression.
Cases such as Munn v. Illinois (1876) and Wabash, St. Louis & Pacific Railway Co. v. Illinois (1886) had established the rights of the state and federal governments to regulate railroads to protect the public interest. Interstate service was largely regulated by the federal Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC), which had limited intrastate authority – it could prevent a railroad from abandoning service on a line, but could not regulate the quantity of service provided. State agencies, such as the Massachusetts Public Utilities Commission (PUC), had more regulatory power over intrastate service.
Prior to 1933, railroad reorganizations rarely had negative effects on users (passengers and freight shippers), as receivership typically involved a deferment of debts rather than cuts to service. Management changes and a reduction in deferred maintenance sometimes even resulted in improved service for users. The Act of March 3, 1933 (the final day of Herbert Hoover's presidency) added three new sections to the Bankruptcy Act of 1898; Section 77 brought railroads under the Bankruptcy Act for the first time. Major amendments on August 27, 1935, attempted to streamline the bankruptcy process, as the complexity of railroads had resulted in protracted proceedings. The Depression and automobile competition made increasing revenues near-impossible, while the Railway Labor Act disallowed wage reductions. Since only major corridors tended to be profitable, lesser-used lines and stations were increasingly targeted for elimination during bankruptcy proceedings.
New Haven bankruptcy
On October 23, 1935, the New Haven petitioned the United States District Court for the District of Connecticut to begin bankruptcy proceedings under Section 77. The court appointed
trustees for the railroad, who "tentatively" continued paying the Old Colony lease. The public largely saw the proceedings as a chance for the New Haven to escape its early-20th-century debt; Old Colony stock rose from 39 to 70 by March 1936. On June 1, 1936, the trustees rejected the Old Colony lease based on studies that found it unprofitable. As the Old Colony was merely a "bookkeeping device" with all railroad operations directed by the New Haven, the court ordered on June 3 that the New Haven continue to operate the Old Colony but on the Old Colony's account. The court also approved the Old Colony's petition to enter the same reorganization proceedings as the New Haven; on June 18, the three New Haven trustees were also designated trustees of the Old Colony.
On June 1, 1937, the New Haven submitted its reorganization plan, under which the Old Colony would be acquired at a rate of two New Haven shares per Old Colony share. Old Colony shareholders demanded a higher rate, leading the ICC to examine the value and costs of the Old Colony to the greater New Haven system. The trustees produced a formula to segregate the earnings and costs of the Old Colony to establish charges for continued operation. The ICC approved the formula, albeit with substantial doubts about the validity of its results, on April 15, 1938. The court approved it on May 25; the Old Colony did not appeal. Abandonments of several minor lines during this time deprived the Old Colony of connecting traffic, as did the July 1937 discontinuance of Fall River Line steamship service between New York City and the South Coast. 
Station closures case
The railroad attempted to close 22 low-ridership stations effective September 27, 1937, and removed them from public timetables. The Massachusetts Public Utilities Commission (PUC) rejected the closures because they were improperly filed, and the stations remained open; passenger counts were taken at most of the stations in October. On November 18, the PUC ordered that the 22 stations be restored to timetables effective November 29, and remain open for at least 30 days afterward. The same day, the railroad filed a new petition with the PUC to abandon 14 of the stations. On December 28, 1937, the Old Colony trustees filed with the PUC to abandon passenger service to 74 additional stations in Massachusetts, bringing the total to 88, while retaining freight service.
The railroad filed the proposed new schedules on January 31, 1938; the PUC began "lengthy" hearings.  All passenger service was to end on the Randolph Branch, the Cape Main Line between Yarmouth and Provincetown, the Newport Secondary between Newport and Fall River (including five additional stations in Rhode Island), the Dorchester Branch, the Wrentham Branch, the Charles River Branch, between  and , and between North Easton and Taunton; some minor stations would be closed on lines that retained service. Fifty-eight of the stations were on Old Colony lines; ten were on B&P lines, and 25 on NY&NE lines.
On June 20, 1938, the trustees and a bondholders committee petitioned the court to allow closure of the 93 stations regardless of the PUC outcome. The PUC (which had not yet finished its hearings) appeared in the hearing but did not call or cross-examine witnesses, and did not argue whether the court had jurisdiction in the matter. On July 7, Judge Carroll C. Hincks issued an order allowing the railroad to close the stations; the PUC appealed, and the state formed a legislative committee to investigate the matter. The 93 stations were closed effective Sunday, July 17, 1938. (part 2, part 3)  
The PUC, doubtful the validity of Hicks' order, selected the Yarmouth–Provincetown service – the most disruptive of the closures – as a test case.  In late July, the PUC ordered the Old Colony to reinstate one round trip and seven of the fourteen stations. The railroad filed a bill in equity in the United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts, seeking an injunction to prevent the PUC or Massachusetts Attorney General Paul A. Dever from enforcing the PUC order. Dever, in return, petitioned the Massachusetts Supreme Court to enforce the PUC order, and appealed Hincks' decision to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. The parties agreed to postpone the conflicting court filings until the appeals court ruled.
The PUC appeal went to the appeals court before judges Learned Hand, Thomas Walter Swan, and Augustus Noble Hand. On January 16, 1939, the court ruled 2–1 in Converse v. Massachusetts that Hincks had exceeded his jurisdiction by issuing the order closing the 88 stations. The trustees appealed, and the stations remained closed. On November 6, 1939, the United States Supreme Court ruled 8–0 in Palmer v. Massachusetts to confirm the circuit court ruling that only the PUC had the power to allow station closures, and that the ongoing bankruptcy proceedings did not give Hincks the power to overrule the PUC. 
On November 28, 1939, the PUC issued an order that the 88 stations in Massachusetts be reopened by December 10.   The New Haven and the PUC reached an agreement on December 5 under which the order would be stayed for 30 days and that the PUC would allow some lesser-used stations to close, in exchange for the railroad agreeing to reopen some stations. After hearings, the PUC ruled on February 21, 1940, that the railroad must restore service to 32 of the 88 stations, with the remaining 56 allowed to permanently close.  Service was restored to 25 stations – including Readville–Boston service on the Dorchester Branch, and service on the Charles River Branch as far as Caryville – on March 11, 1940.  Many of the station buildings had been abandoned or sold, with small wooden shelters provided instead.  Seven additional stations on the Yarmouth–Provincetown segment reopened around June 24 for summer seasonal service.
Abandonment proposal
On July 18, 1938, the court approved the New Haven charging the Old Colony over $11 million (equivalent to over $ million in ) in operating costs under the segregation formula. The Old Colony could not appeal the charges because it had not appealed the formula earlier in the year. By this point, Old Colony stock was below 50 cents.
On May 31, 1939, with Palmer v. Massachusetts pending, the Old Colony filed an amended reorganization plan calling for the abandonment of all passenger service in the "Boston Group" – the primary group of lines into Boston, including the Greenbush, Plymouth, and Middleborough lines and the shared mainline north of Braintree. At that time, 121 daily trains were operated on those lines. Freight service on some lines of the Boston Group would continue, though others would be fully abandoned. (part 2, part 3)  The New Haven simultaneously filed its own amended plan which stated that it was not willing to directly acquire the Old Colony unless all Boston Group passenger service was discontinued, but did wish to directly acquire the B&P. The New Haven would continue to operate passenger trains from the South Coast and Cape Cod, which together lost one-third of what the Boston group did, reaching Boston via Taunton and the B&P mainline. It would purchase the Old Colony's lines in Cape Cod and west of Boston (which collectively made a profit on freight), as well as the South Boston Market Terminal; the New Haven and Old Colony would split the latter's share of the Union Freight Railroad. 
On June 12, 1939, the trustees filed for a September 24 discontinuance of all passenger service in the Boston Group, as well as to Cape Cod (which had not been slated for discontinuance in the May proposal).  This resulted in an "uproar of confusion, resentment, and panic" from the public and the Massachusetts government. Dever, alleging that the New Haven had betrayed the public trust and failed to prove the claimed losses on the Old Colony, threatened to revoke the franchise of the New Haven in the state.  On June 14, the ICC unexpectedly announced that the proposed abandonment would not be considered as part of the ongoing reorganization, but would instead require separate proceedings. 
In late August, the state legislature and the railroad agreed to postpone any discontinuance until January 1, 1940.  In September 1939, the New Haven proposed to cut most Old Colony passenger service. Boston–Braintree service would continue to operate, with three trips each serving , , and Hingham at peak hours. Service to Greenbush, Plymouth, Middleborough, Hyannis, and Woods Hole would be replaced by buses, as would all off-peak service south of Braintree. 
In November 1939, the trustees filed with the ICC to outright abandon freight and passenger service on the entire Boston Group.    Under a December deal between the New Haven and a legislative commission, Boston Group service was reduced from 121 to about 80 daily trips effective January 7.  As PUC hearings continued into 1940, the railroad continued to advocate for its September proposal with only limited service beyond Braintree.  In March, the PUC approved schedules with 72 daily trains.  These schedules, which eliminated most midday and evening service past Braintree, took effect on April 1. 
The ICC began abandonment proceedings on March 16, 1940. On February 18, 1941, the ICC refused abandonment of the Boston Group, forcing the Old Colony to continue operations. (Passenger service on one short line in the Boston Group, the West Quincy Branch, was separately discontinued by PUC approval in September 1940. ) Whether to incorporate the Old Colony into the New Haven, and whether the Old Colony should be required to continue passenger service, continued to be argued as part of the reorganization.
Later changes
Most of the reopened stations did not remain in service for long. Provincetown service ended after the 1940 summer season, and three stations (Forest Hills, Boylston Street, and Jamaica Plain) also closed that year. Caryville service was cut back to West Medway in September 1941. Dorchester Branch service ended on March 12, 1944, with nine stations closed. Ferry Street station reopened sometime after 1940.
Increased passenger and freight traffic during World War II lifted the fortunes of the New Haven. The reorganization continued; the railroad was ultimately required to continue Old Colony passenger service unless losses exceeded $850,000 in a single calendar year. The New Haven emerged from bankruptcy on September 11, 1947, and fully acquired the Old Colony a week later; the B&P was kept as a separate New Haven-owned company. Palmer v. Massachusetts had been just one of eight Supreme Court cases generated by the reorganization. Losses on the Old Colony reached the critical value in October 1948; after threatening to discontinue all service, the New Haven cut back to a 26-train peak-only schedule on the Boston Group in March 1949.
Under the 1951–1954 presidency of Frederic C. Dumaine Jr., the New Haven increased passenger service, using new Budd Rail Diesel Cars to reduce costs. Boston service reached 86 trains in April 1954. As losses mounted, Boston-area railroads made major cuts in the late 1950s. All service to Taunton, Fall River, and New Bedford (which used the B&P rather than the Old Colony mainline) ended in 1958. All remaining year-round Old Colony Division service ended on June 30, 1959, though limited seasonal service continued for several more years. The Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA) was founded in 1964 to subsidize remaining suburban service. West Medway service was cut back to Millis in 1966, and ended entirely the next year. East Foxboro station closed in 1977.
MBTA Commuter Rail service expansions have restored several former Old Colony lines, including some stations closed in 1938. Service on the Dorchester Branch began in 1979 as a temporary bypass during Southwest Corridor construction (at which time Mount Hope station was closed). The service was made permanent in 1987, with several additional stations near former station sites opened in 2012, 2013, and 2019. The MBTA restored service to Plymouth and Middleborough in 1997 (including 1938-closed ), and to Greenbush in 2007 (including 1938-closed  and ). A new Bourne station, relocated from the original site, opened in 2019 for the seasonal CapeFLYER service. Only one station reopened in 1940 –  – remained continuously open past 1979; it was temporarily closed in 2020, and subsequently permanently closed in 2021.
Stations
LineStation Reopened Greenbush BranchEast BraintreeMarch 11, 1940October 31, 2007October 31, 2007North Cohasset–Black Rock–Beechwood–Randolph BranchRandolph– Plymouth BranchNorth Hanson–Burrage–September 30, 1997Plympton– Middleboro Main LineMatfield–Westdale–Stanley– Cape Main LineRock–South Middleboro––May 24, 2019–––June 24, 1940–June 24, 1940–––June 24, 1940June 24, 1940––June 24, 1940–June 24, 1940–June 24, 1940Woods Hole Branch– New Bedford SubdivisionNorton–East Freetown–Brayleys–Weld Street– Fall River–NewportTiverton, RI–Bristol Ferry, RI–Portsmouth, RI–Middletown, RI–Newport, RI– Canton Junction–Whittendon–West Stoughton–Easton–Whittendon– Providence–BostonMarch 11, 1940March 11, 1940March 11, 1940March 11, 1940–March 11, 1940West Mansfield– Dorchester BranchMarch 11, 1940Bird StreetMarch 11, 1940March 11, 1940March 11, 1940March 11, 1940March 11, 1940March 11, 1940River StreetMarch 11, 1940March 11, 1940 Wrentham Branch––Walpole Heights–Pondville–Wrentham–Lake Pearl–Wampum–Plainville–North Attleboro– Midland DivisionAshcroft––March 11, 1940Highland Lake–City Mills––Spring Street– Charles River BranchMarch 11, 1940March 11, 1940March 11, 1940March 11, 1940March 11, 1940March 11, 1940March 11, 1940March 11, 1940CaryvilleMarch 11, 1940North Bellingham–Bellingham Junction–
References
Notes
External links
Category:1939 in United States case law
Category:Old Colony Railroad
Category:1930s in Massachusetts
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "303 Creative LLC v. Elenis" ==> """
303 Creative LLC v. Elenis (Docket 21–47621-476 303 CREATIVE LLC V. ELENIS) is a pending United States Supreme Court case related to the conflict between LGBT rights in public accommodations and the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.
 Background 
Lorie Smith is a website designer, running her business as 303 Creative, LLC. registered in Colorado. Smith had been developing websites for others and wanted to move into making wedding announcement websites. Smith claims it would have been against her Christian faith to make sites for non-heterosexual marriages. She wanted to post a notice on her business website to notify users of her unwillingness to create websites promoting same-sex marriages, and instead would refer gay patrons to other potential designers who may provide services to them.
Before implementing the notice, Smith discovered that such a notice would violate the Colorado anti-discrimination state laws that were amended in 2008, which prevent public businesses from discriminating against gay people, as well as making statements to that effect. Smith, represented by the Alliance Defending Freedom, sued Colorado in 2016 in the United States District Court for the District of Colorado, seeking to block enforcement of the anti-discrimination law. The district court waited for the result of the 2018 Supreme Court case Masterpiece Cakeshop v. Colorado Civil Rights Commission which dealt with the same anti-discrimination law. As Masterpiece was ruled on narrow procedural grounds, finding that the Colorado agency that ruled against Phillips were unfairly hostile to his religious beliefs, the district court ruled against Smith in 2019. At that time, Colorado had not investigated Smith and there was no evidence that she had engaged in discrimination
Smith appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit, which upheld the district court decision in a 2–1 ruling. In the majority ruling, the Tenth Circuit held the anti-discrimination law satisfied strict scrutiny under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, deepening a circuit split with decisions issued by the Arizona Supreme Court and the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit. Chief Judge Timothy Tymkovich dissented in the Tenth's decision, writing "the majority takes the remarkable — and novel — stance that the government may force Ms. Smith to produce messages that violate her conscience."
 Supreme Court 
Smith filed a petition for a writ of certiorari, which the Supreme Court granted in February 2022. While the petition asked whether Employment Division v. Smith should be overruled, the Supreme Court limited the case to the question of whether Colorado's law violates the Free Speech Clause of the First Amendment. Unlike the previous decision in Masterpiece, where the court had a 5-4 majority of conservative justices, 303 Creative was heard under a 6-3 conservative majority following the retirement of Anthony Kennedy and death of Ruth Bader Ginsburg, replaced with Justices Brett Kavanaugh and Amy Coney Barrett, respectively. This new court has been seen as more favorable to religious rights based on several key cases decided during previous terms. 
About 75 amicus briefs were submitted prior to oral hearings. Among those supporting Smith include 20 conservative-leaning states, law professors, several religious organizations, and libertarian leaning think tanks such as the Americans for Prosperity Foundation and the Cato Institute. Those supporting the state of Colorado include twenty other liberal states, the Biden administration, several law professors, and liberal-leaning groups such as Public Citizen, the American Civil Liberties Union, and the NAACP Legal Defense Fund. 
Oral hearings were held on December 5, 2022. Court observers believed the conservative majority would favor Smith in that she should not be compelled to write speech against her faith, but were concerned about where to draw a line so that other anti-discrimination laws would not be affected by their decision.
See also
Jones v. Alfred H. Mayer Co., private discrimination case based on race
Public accommodations in the United States
References
Category:2023 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States LGBT rights case law
Category:Discrimination against LGBT people in the United States
Category:LGBT in Colorado
"""

From "A.L.A. Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States" ==> """
A.L.A. Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States, 295 U.S. 495 (1935), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States that invalidated regulations of the poultry industry according to the nondelegation doctrine and as an invalid use of Congress' power under the Commerce Clause..  This was a unanimous decision that rendered parts of the National Industrial Recovery Act of 1933 (NIRA), a main component of President Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal, unconstitutional. The case from which the ruling stemmed was nicknamed the "Sick Chicken Case".
Facts
The regulations at issue were promulgated under the authority of the National Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA) of 1933.  These included price and wage fixing, as well as requirements regarding the sale of whole chickens, including unhealthy ones. The government claimed the Schechter brothers sold sick poultry, which has led to the case becoming known as "the sick chicken case".  Also encompassed in the decision were NIRA provisions regarding maximum work hours and a right of unions to organize. The ruling was one of a series which overturned elements of President Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal legislation between January 1935 and January 1936, until the Court's intolerance of economic regulations shifted with West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish.. The National Industrial Recovery Act allowed local codes for trade to be written by private trade and industrial groups. The President could choose to give some codes the force of law. The Supreme Court's opposition to an active federal interference in the local economy caused Roosevelt to attempt to pack the Court with judges who were in favor of the New Deal.
There were originally 60 charges against Schechter Poultry, which were reduced to 18 charges plus charges of conspiracy by the time the case was heard by the U.S. Supreme Court.
Among the 18 charges against Schechter Poultry were "the sale to a butcher of an unfit chicken" and the sale of two uninspected chickens.
Ten charges were for violating codes requiring "straight killing". Straight killing prohibited customers from selecting the chickens they wanted; instead a customer had to place his hand in the coop and select the first chicken that came to hand.  There was laughter during oral arguments when Justice George Sutherland asked, "Well suppose however that all the chickens have gone over to one end of the coop?"Shlaes, Amity.  The Forgotten Man.  New York: HarperCollins (2007), , pp. 240–241.
The Schechter brothers were Jewish (the surname Schechter means "slaughter" in Yiddish, and specifically refers to a ritual slaughterer). According to the trial record, at least some of their customers preferred to select individual chickens, believing that this made it easier to have their rabbi certify the chicken as kosher, though this may not have been a universal belief. The Supreme Court decision did not address any issue of religious liberty, however.
Judgment
Chief Justice Hughes wrote for a unanimous Court in invalidating the industrial "codes of fair competition" which the NIRA enabled the President to issue.Schechter Poultry Corp., 295 U.S. at 535, 551.  The Court held that the codes violated the constitutional separation of powers as an impermissible delegation of legislative power to the executive branch.  The Court also held that the NIRA provisions were in excess of congressional power under the Commerce Clause.
The Court distinguished between direct effects on interstate commerce, which Congress could lawfully regulate, and indirect effects, which were purely matters of state law.  Though the raising and sale of poultry was an interstate industry, the Court found that the "stream of interstate commerce" had stopped in this caseSchechter's slaughterhouse's chickens were sold exclusively to in-state buyers.In the 1960s, Prof. Harold Hyman told students in his Constitutional History course at U.C.L.A., "The Supreme Court was wrong!"  As a child he had worked for the Schechter brothers, and among other tasks, took chickens from Brooklyn to Jersey City – interstate commerce.  Any interstate effect of Schechter was indirect, and therefore beyond federal reach.
Though many considered the NIRA a "dead statute" at this point in the New Deal scheme, the Court used its invalidation as an opportunity to affirm constitutional limits on congressional power, for fear that it could otherwise reach virtually anything that could be said to "affect" interstate commerce and intrude on many areas of legitimate state power.  The court ruled that the law violated the Tenth Amendment.  According to Supreme Court historian David P. Currie, the court believed that "to permit Congress to regulate the wages and hours in a tiny slaughterhouse because of remote effects on interstate commerce would leave nothing for the tenth amendment to reserve."  Currie added that "it can hardly have escaped the Justices that apart from its limitation to business there was little to distinguish what Congress had attempted from the 1933 legislation authorizing Adolf Hitler to govern Germany by decree ... the delegation decision in Schechter was a salutary reminder of the Framers' decision to vest legislative power in a representative assembly."Currie, David P.  The Constitution in the Supreme Court:  The Second Century, 1888–1986.  Chicago and London:  The University of Chicago Press (1990), , pp. 210, 223.
Justice Benjamin Cardozo's concurring opinion clarified that a spectrum approach to direct and indirect effects is preferable to a strict dichotomy.Schechter Poultry Corp., 295 U.S. at 551–552 (Cardozo, J., concurring). Cardozo felt that in this case, Schechter was simply too small a player to be relevant to interstate commerce.
This traditional reading of the Commerce Clause was later disavowed by the Court, which after threats from Roosevelt, began to read congressional power more expansively in this area, in cases such as NLRB v. Jones & Laughlin Steel Corp (1937)..  However, more recent cases such as United States v. Lopez (1995). perhaps signal a growing inclination in the Court to once again affirm limits on its scope.  In a unanimous 2011 decision, Bond v. United States, the Supreme Court cited Schechter as a precedent..
Significance
Speaking to aides of Roosevelt, Justice Louis Brandeis remarked that, "This is the end of this business of centralization, and I want you to go back and tell the president that we're not going to let this government centralize everything."Harry Hopkins, "Statement to Me by Thomas Corcoran Giving His Recollections of the Genesis of the Supreme Court Fight," April 3, 1939, typescript in Harry Hopkins Papers
In Hyde Park, New York, a few days after the decision, Roosevelt denounced the decision as an antiquated interpretation of the Commerce Clause.Shlaes, Amity.  The Forgotten Man.  New York:  HarperCollins (2007), , p. 245.
After the decision was announced, newspapers reported that 500 cases of NIRA code violations were going to be dropped.Shlaes, Amity.  The Forgotten Man.  New York:  HarperCollins (2007), , p. 244.
See also
 United States labor law
 Panama Refining Co. v. Ryan (1935)
 Louisville Joint Stock Land Bank v. Radford (1935)
 Constitutional challenges to the New Deal
Notes
External links
 Case Brief: https://web.archive.org/web/20111002085620/http://www.quimbee.com/cases/706870
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:1935 in United States case law
Category:United States Tenth Amendment case law
Category:National Recovery Administration
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:New Deal in New York (state)
Category:History of New York City
Category:History of Brooklyn
Category:Chicken as food
Category:United States nondelegation doctrine case law
Category:Food safety in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Constitutional challenges to the New Deal
"""

From "Abbate v. United States" ==> """
Abbate v. United States, 359 U.S. 187 (1959), is a decision of the U.S. Supreme Court. The decision held that the double jeopardy Clause of the Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution does not prohibit the prosecution of a conspiracy in federal court under federal law when that same conspiracy has already resulted in a conviction in state court under state law..
Background
Abbate was part of a conspiracy to blow up multiple facilities owned by the Southern Bell Telephone Company. He was convicted in Illinois under a state law making it a crime to conspire to destroy the property of another and sentenced to three months of imprisonment. Thereafter, Abbate was indicted in federal district court for a violation of federal law stemming from the same conspiracy.
Decision
The question presented in this case had already been decided by the Supreme Court in United States v. Lanza. Abbate asked that the Court overrule its prior decision, which the Court declined to do. The Court reasoned that overruling Lanza would result in serious and undesirable consequences. Particularly, the state conviction here resulted in only three months' imprisonment, while the federal conviction made up to five years of imprisonment available. The Court deemed this potential disparity to be problematic. The only way to ensure that federal law enforcement interests would be vindicated under such a regime would be to displace state power to prosecute actions that also constitute federal crimes, which would be a massive shift in the balance of criminal power as between the states and the federal government.
Justice Brennan wrote separately to address an additional argument that the government had presented but that was unnecessary to the resolution of the case. The government contended that the Double Jeopardy Clause should not be construed to bar separate prosecutions for the same acts when those prosecutions are based on different evidence and vindicate different interests. Brennan rejected this argument, noting that it could lead to harassment of defendants by empowering the government to prosecute the same people over and over again using different statutes that protect different interests.
The dissenters argued for reversal, relying on two arguments. First, they observed that most civilized countries recognized that a conviction elsewhere barred a conviction in their own jurisdiction. Second, they argued that the Double Jeopardy Clause was intended to represent a national policy against allowing the federal government to prosecute someone who had already been prosecuted in another court for an offense stemming from his actions.
Facts
This case was decided the same day as Bartkus v. Illinois, a case with similar facts except the order of the convictions was reversed: the state conviction followed the federal conviction. The Supreme Court likewise did not find a double jeopardy violation.
This case is, along with Logan v. Zimmerman Brush Co., a rare example of the majority opinion's author writing a separate opinion concurring in his own majority opinion.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1959 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
"""

From "Abbott Laboratories v. Gardner" ==> """
Abbott Laboratories v. Gardner, 387 U.S. 136 (1967), was a case heard before the United States Supreme Court. Abbott Laboratories held that drug companies were not prohibited by the ripeness doctrine from challenging a U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulation requiring a prescription drug's generic name to appear on all related printed materials. The government argued that the case was not ripe because the regulation had yet to be enforced. That argument failed as the Court found the issues to be fit for judicial resolution, and that the drug companies would experience substantial hardship if denied a pre-enforcement challenge to the statute. Prosecution for non-compliance was likely, civil and criminal penalties could be imposed, and the drug companies would suffer reputational damage if required to violate the regulation before challenging it in court.
 Facts 
The action was brought by individuals and associations accounting for more than 90% of the prescription drug industry. Specifically, the petitioners challenged the decision by the Commissioner of Food and Drug to promulgate the "established name" rule pursuant to a statute granted by Congress. After inviting and considering comments submitted by interested parties, the Commissioner established the following rule:
 External links 
 Supreme Court favors reviewability of administrative actions – Abbott Laboratories et al. v. Gardner, 87 S. Ct. 1507, 387 U.S. 136 (1967)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:1967 in United States case law
Category:Abbott Laboratories
Category:United States ripeness case law
"""

From "Abbott v. Abbott" ==> """
Abbott v. Abbott, 560 U.S. 1 (2010), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States holding that a parent's ne exeat right (in this case: the right to prevent a child to leave the country) is a "right to custody" under the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction and the US International Child Abduction Remedies Act. The child thus should have been returned to Chile, the country of "habitual residence" because the mother violated the ne exeat right of the father when taking the child to the United States without the father's consent.
Background
History
In 1995, "A.J.A." was born in Hawaii to parents Timothy Abbott, a British citizen, and Jacquelyn Abbott, a U.S. citizen. The family subsequently moved to Chile for Mr. Abbott's work with a U.S. Observatory, where the parents separated. Mrs. Abbott was awarded full care and custody of A.J.A, and Mr. Abbott was granted weekend visitation and partial summer possession of the child.  The Chilean family court entered  a decree with a ne exeat order prohibiting either parent from removing the child from Chile at the request of Mrs. Abbott.
In July 2005, Mr. Abbott sought to modify the court's visitation order and expand his visitation rights. Mrs. Abbott removed A.J.A. to Texas without Mr. Abbott's prior consent. Mrs. Abbott did not request permission from the Chilean court to take the child out of Chile or to override Mr. Abbott's ne exeat right.
Mr. Abbott brought suit in the US Federal District Court seeking an order compelling A.J.A's return to Chile under the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction. The district court denied Mr. Abbott's requested order and held that the child's removal did not violate the father's rights of custody, as defined by the Hague Convention.  Mr. Abbott appealed the district court ruling to the U.S. Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals, which affirmed the lower court's ruling.
Amicus curiae
In support of Mr. Abbott's position, amicus curiae briefs were filed by the Permanent Bureau of the Hague Conference on Private International Laws, United States of America, the State of California, the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children, S&W International ChildFind Program, the Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, Justice for Children, Pathways for Children, Children's Law Center of Los Angeles, and Emerge.
In support of Ms. Abbott's position, amicus curiae briefs were filed by  Delegates Lawrence H. Stotter and Matti Savolainen on the Drafting and Negotiating of the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction, the University of Cincinnati College of Law Domestic Violence and Civil Protection Order Clinic, eleven law professors, the Domestic Legal Violence Legal Empowerment and Appeals Project, the Battered Women's Justice Project- Domestic Abuse Interviention Programs, Inc., the National Coalition Against Domestic Violence, Legal Momentum, and the National Network to End Domestic Violence.
In support of neither party, an amicus curiae brief was filed by Reunite International Child Abduction Center.
 Opinion of the Court 
thumb|left|150px|Justice Kennedy delivered the opinion of the Court.
On May 17, 2010, Justice Kennedy, joined by Chief Justice Roberts and Justices Scalia, Ginsburg, Alito and Sotomayor, delivered the opinion of the Court in holding that a parent's ne exeat right is a "right to custody" under the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction and the International Child Remedies Act.  In so finding, the Supreme Court overruled the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals and remanded the case for further proceedings in conformity with the Supreme Court ruling..
The threshold question considered by the Court was whether the child at issue, A.J.A., was "wrongfully removed" from Chile in violation of a parent's "right of custody" so as to trigger the applicable compulsory return provisions of the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction. In determining whether the child was "wrongfully removed," the Court considered the plain language of the Hague Convention, the position of the U.S. Department of State, Chilean law, rulings of several foreign jurisdictions that had considered the issue, and the purpose of the Hague Convention. The Court found broad acceptance for the view that a ne exeat right, or a right to prevent a child's removal from his country of residence, is "decisionmaking authority regarding a child's relocation", which is specifically mentioned as classifying for (joint) "right of custody" under the definition of the convention.
Accordingly, when A.J.A. was removed from Chile in violation of Mr. Abbott's ne exeat right, the child was "wrongfully removed" within the meaning of the Hague Convention.  Under such circumstances, the Convention compels A.J.A.'s return to Chile unless Mrs. Abbott can establish an exception under the Hague Convention based on the child's need for emergency protection.  To determine whether such emergency circumstances exist, the Supreme Court remanded the case for further proceedings consistent with its ruling.
 Stevens' dissent 
150px|thumb|Justice Stevens delivered the dissenting opinion.
Justice Stevens, joined by Justice Thomas and Justice Breyer, delivered the dissenting opinion of the Court.   The dissent concluded that reliance on the Hague Convention to compel A.J.A.'s return to Chile was improper;  in a situation like the Abbotts',  the Hague Convention provides recourse for the non-custodial parent to exercise his "rights of access" internationally, but the Convention does not provide a non-custodial parent the right to compel the child's return to its habitual country of residence.
The dissenting opinion noted that Mr. Abbott's rights are limited to visitation and the right to restrict the child's travel outside of Chile.  The dissent also emphasized the fact that Mrs. Abbott has the exclusive right to make decisions about the child's education, medical care and day-to-day life.  Contrary to the majority view, the dissent concluded that Mr. Abbott's limited parental rights fall well short of the Hague Convention's requirements for compulsory return of a child. Mr. Abbott had neither a right to determine the child's residence nor a right to make decisions about the child's care; Mr. Abbott's limited rights do not elevate his status to that of a custodial parent.  According to the dissent, Mr. Abbott is not a custodial parent and cannot satisfy the requirements set forth in the Hague Convention for compulsory return of a child to his home country.
 Subsequent developments 
The Abbott case was ultimately dismissed because the child turned 16 and was no longer subject to the compulsory return provisions of the Hague Convention.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 560
References
External links
 Transcript of Oral Argument
 International Family Law: Federal Courts Violate the Hague Abduction Convention http://www.internationalfamilylawfirm.com/2012/02/federal-courts-violate-hague-abduction.html Wednesday, February 15, 2012
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:Trials regarding custody of children
Category:Chile–United States relations
Category:United States family case law
"""

From "Abbott v. Perez" ==> """
Abbott v. Perez, 585 U.S. ___ (2018), was a United States Supreme Court case dealing with the redistricting of the state of Texas following the 2010 Census.
Background
As a result of the 2010 United States Census, the state of Texas was found to have gained more than four million new residents, many of them of Latino or African-American heritage. This granted Texas four additional seats in the United States House of Representatives, requiring the state to redraw both its congressional and legislative districts to incorporate these four new seats. At this time, the Texas state government was controlled by the Republican Party. Initial redistricting maps were completed by the state legislature by 2011, and sent to the United States District Court for the District of Columbia for preclearance as required by Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 (VRA). While the District Court reviewed the maps, some Texas citizens believed the redistricting diluted minority votes and used unconstitutional racial gerrymandering to define the new districts, violating both Section 2 of the VRA, and filed a separate suit in the United States District Court for the Western District of Texas. The Texas federal district court heard arguments in this case, but held off ruling until the preclearance was completed. However, with the 2012 elections nearing, the D.C. federal district court recognized it would not be able to complete the preclearance in time. The Texas federal district court, using proposals from parties in the current Section 2 case, developed the three interim district plans for the state's congressional and legislative districts by November 2011.
The state, defending its maps, issued an emergency request to the United States Supreme Court to reject the District Court maps. The Supreme Court agreed to the emergency request, and on January 20, 2012, vacated the maps developed by the Texas federal district court and instructed it to draw up new maps.. The Texas federal district court used the state-derived maps as a starting point and issued their new maps by February 2012. Separately, the D.C. federal district court continued the evaluation of the redistricting maps, and ruled that all three redistricting maps provided by the state for preclearance did not meet the requirements for Section 5 of the VRA by August 2012. The judges determined that the state had not been able to prove that the redistricting plan was developed without intentional discrimination. Due to timing with the 2012 elections to be held in November, Texas continued to use the Texas federal district court-derived maps.
During these events, the Supreme Court ruled in Shelby County v. Holder. that the means of which states were determined to have preclearance of voter-related laws was unconstitutional, eliminating the need for Texas to seek preclearance of their maps. The state, with only minor changes, adopted all three maps from the Texas federal district court as the permanent maps in June 2013.
The original suit in the Texas federal district court continued, with petitioners seeking to also amend the 2013 redistricting maps as part of their complaints, as to prevent these maps to be used in the next set of elections. This case became protracted in the District Court, but ultimately the court issued its ruling in August 2017. It ruled that the 2011 redistricting map violated either the VRA or the Constitution or a combination of both, and because the state used the maps proposed by Texas federal district court based on the original state maps following the U.S. Supreme Court ruling as the basis for the 2013 redistricting, that these were also similarly flawed. The court ordered the Texas governor to call a special meeting of legislators to redraw the maps in a timely manner, but the state instead turned to the U.S. Supreme Court to appeal the opinion, as well as to freeze the Texas federal district court's order to redraw the maps due to nearness of the 2018 elections. In a 5–4 decision split between the conservative and liberal justices, the U.S. Supreme Court agreed in September 2017 to freeze the redistricting order, and hear the case in January 2018.
U.S. Supreme Court
The case presented at the U.S. Supreme Court combines two separate rulings issued by the Texas federal district court on the redistricting maps. The state in their petition asked on several issues, including whether the 2013 maps, adopted from those presented by the Texas District Court, could be considered unconstitutional, whether the Texas federal district court had ruled appropriately in challenging specific district lines identified in the 2013 maps, and whether the Texas federal district court had authority to demand the rapid redistricting session. The Court itself further considered if they had jurisdiction on the case, given that their action to freeze the Texas federal district court's ruling could have been seen as premature. Oral arguments were heard on April 24, 2018, with observers stating that the judges appeared to be split along conservative and liberal lines. Allison Riggs argued the case for the plaintiffs (Perez, et al).Southern Coalition for Social Justice
The decision was issued on June 25, 2018.
 Opinion of the Court 
In a 5–4 decision written by Justice Samuel Alito, the Court upheld the current redistricting maps as valid districts, outside of one district, Texas House District 90 near Fort Worth, which the court found was an "impermissible racial gerrymander", remanding the case to lower courts to correct the redistricting to eliminate the racial gerrymandering.
The court majority stated that state legislatures are entitled to a presumption of legislative good faith, especially in districting cases. “Whenever a challenger claims that a state law was enacted with discriminatory intent,” Justice Samuel Alito stated in the opinion of the Court, “the burden of proof lies with the challenger, not the State.” Although there was evidence of discrimination by the state in the past, this past discrimination was not sufficient to undermine the good faith presumption. "This means that the plaintiffs challenging a redistricting plan still have to show that the legislature intended to discriminate when it enacted the current plan."
 Concurrence and Dissent 
Justice Clarence Thomas, joined by Neil Gorsuch, filed a concurrence asserting that redistricting is not covered by the Voting Rights Act. On behalf of the court's four liberals, Justice Sonia Sotomayor criticized the conservative majority. The majority's "disregard for both precedent and fact comes at serious costs to our democracy," she wrote in 46-page dissent. "It means that after years of litigation and undeniable proof of intentional discrimination, minority voters in Texas ... will continue to be underrepresented in the political process." Justice Sotomayor also accused the court of running interference for racists by “blind[ing] itself to the overwhelming factual record” to let Texas use maps that, “in design and effect, burden the rights of minority voters.” Justice Alito, Justice Sotomayor wrote, is “just flat wrong,” relying on “a selective reading” of the facts to ignore clear evidence of “racial discrimination.”
 Impact and criticism 
The Voting Rights Acts of 1965 contains a section known as Section 2. Section 2 encompasses two separate parts which are designed to protect against voting discrimination. Election laws enacted with racially discriminatory intent are prohibited by the first part. The second part is a prohibition of any voting procedure that "results in a denial or abridgement of the right of any citizen of the United States to vote on account of race or color." These two prongs of Section 2 are known as the “intent” test and the “results” test. The Supreme Court's holding in City of Mobile v. Bolden (1980) made it nearly impossible to win Section 2 suits, because plaintiffs must prove that the lawmakers who passed voting-related laws acted with “racially discriminatory motivation.” Congress overrode the Mobile decision with the aforementioned second Section 2 prohibition. This made suits easier for plaintiffs, because they no longer needed to prove racist intent. Plaintiffs must only show that the voting-related law had a disparate negative effect on voters of color.
Vox journalist Ian Millhiser stated in several articles that the Abbott decision, under which courts must apply a strong presumption that lawmakers did not act with racist intent, makes Section 2 suits more difficult because "lawmakers enjoy such a strong presumption of racial innocence that it is now extremely difficult to prove that those lawmakers acted with racist intent — so difficult that it may be impossible except in the most egregious cases." He compared an argument made by Justice Alito in the Abbott decision with resistance by Southern States to the 1954 Supreme Court ruling in Brown v. Board of Education: "Alito's argument, in other words, is that the 2013 maps weren't enacted to preserve a racial gerrymander; they were enacted to shut down litigation challenging a racial gerrymander. And this distinction is sufficient to cleanse the state legislature of any allegation of racism. It's as if the school districts on the losing end of Brown v Board of Education (1954) had passed a new law recreating the same racially segregated schools that were challenged in the Brown litigation, but claimed that these segregated schools should be upheld because the new law had a legitimate purpose — to bring the litigation challenging public school segregation to an end as expeditiously as possible."
Journalist Vann R. Newkirk II asserted in July 2018 that the Roberts Court with its Shelby County v. Holder decision along with the 2018 Supreme Court decisions in Husted v. Randolph Institute and Abbott v. Perez has "set the stage for a new era of white hegemony", because these cases "furthered Roberts's mandate to distance the federal judiciary from Thurgood Marshall's vision of those bodies as active watchdogs for the Fourteenth and arbiters for America's racial injustices." With the three cases together "the Court has established that not only are the legacies of Jim Crow no longer a valid justification for proactive restrictions on states, but the Court doesn't necessarily have a role in advancing the spirit of the franchise. Furthermore, with Alito's gerrymandering decision, the Court holds that past discrimination by states—even at its boldest and most naked—is not really a consideration in assessments of current policies. This part is crucial, because in an era where crafty state politicians have moved toward race-neutral language that clearly still seeks to disenfranchise people of color, a certain default suspicion by federal courts and the Department of Justice based on those state politicians' histories has been the main protective force for the minorities' voting rights. That suspicion is gone now, as are all vestiges of Marshall's intended vigilance."
See also
 Shelby County v. Holder (2013) A case dealing with Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, a core section of the Act
 Voter suppression in the United States
 References 
External links
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Congressional districts of Texas
"""

From "Abbott v. United States" ==> """
Abbott v. United States, 562 U.S. 8 (2010), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States that addressed the mandatory sentencing increase under federal law for the possession or use of a deadly weapon in drug trafficking and violent crimes.  In an 8–0 decision, the Court ruled that , which required a minimum five-year prison sentence, was to be imposed in addition to any other mandatory sentence given for another crime, including the underlying drug-related or violent offense.  The only exception to the five-year addition applied only when another provision required a longer mandatory term for conduct violating §924(c) specifically, rather than a mandatory sentence for another crime as the defendants had unsuccessfully argued.
Abbott was the first signed opinion of the Court's 2010 term.; .  The newly appointed Justice Elena Kagan did not participate, having disqualified herself because she had worked on the case as Solicitor General of the United States prior to joining the Court..
Background of the case
Statutory provisions
 was originally enacted as part of the Gun Control Act of 1968.Abbott v. United States, slip op. at 5.  §924(c)(1) prohibits using, carrying, or possessing a deadly weapon in connection with "any crime of violence or drug trafficking crime," and provides for a minimum sentence of five years in prison in addition to any other sentence imposed for the predicate crime.  Congress amended the provision in 1998, to add that the five-year increase would apply "[e]xcept to the extent that a greater minimum sentence is otherwise provided by this subsection or by any other provision of law."Abbott, slip op. at 5.  The interpretation of this "except" clause, at , was the sole issue in Abbott v. United States.
Lower court proceedings
Kevin Abbott was convicted of drug trafficking and of being a felon in possession of a firearm, which required a fifteen-year mandatory minimum prison sentence under the Armed Career Criminal Act .  The court added five additional years to his sentence under §924(c) for the gun possession, for a total of twenty years.Abbott v. United States, slip op. at 3-4; .  Gould, in an unrelated prosecution, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to possess with intent to distribute cocaine base, which carried a ten-year mandatory minimum sentence, and to a §924(c) violation, receiving a total sentence of sixteen years and five months.Abbott, slip op. at 4.
In their respective appeals, Abbott and Gould both argued that the "except" clause at §924(c) was triggered by the mandatory minimums for the other crimes for which they were sentenced: the fifteen years for Abbott as a felon-in-possession, and the ten years for Gould for drug trafficking.  Congress' intent, in their view, was to ensure that convictions brought at least five years in prison, not to add on additional years..  The Third Circuit in Abbott's case and the Fifth Circuit in Gould's both rejected their arguments and affirmed their sentences, ruling that the "except" clause only applied to sentences arising from violations of §924(c), not other crimes.
Abbott and Gould petitioned to the Supreme Court for review.  Noting a circuit split on the issue, the Supreme Court granted certiorari and consolidated their cases for argument.Abbott, slip op. at 5 (collecting lower court cases and noting divergent interpretations).
The Court's decision
The Supreme Court affirmed the decisions of the Third and Fifth Circuits, upholding the imposition of the additional five-year minimum on both petitioners in an opinion delivered by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg.
The Court agreed with the government's statutory interpretation, that the "except" clause is triggered only when another provision commands a longer term for conduct specifically violating §924(c).Abbott, slip op. at 14-15.  "For example, the mandatory minimum sentence for a §924(c) offense is five years, but if the firearm is brandished, the minimum rises to seven years, and if the firearm is discharged, to ten years. §924(c)(1)(A)(i), (ii), (iii). A defendant who possessed, brandished, and discharged a firearm in violation of §924(c) would thus face a mandatory minimum term of ten years."  Slip op. at 3.  The Court's view was that "Congress intended the "except" clause to serve simply as a clarification of §924(c), not as a major restraint on the statute's operation."Abbott, slip op. at 16.
Gould argued that the "except" clause applied to any other mandatory minimum sentence imposed, while Abbott argued more narrowly that it applied to mandatory sentences arising from the same "criminal transaction" that constituted the §924(c) violation.Abbott, slip op. at 9-10.  The Court noted that Gould's sentence would remain unchanged under Abbott's formulation.  Both of the petitioners' arguments, however, would often remove any penalty for a violation of §924(c) and also anomalously give shorter sentences to more serious offenders.Abbott, slip op. at 11-12.  The Court considered it implausible that Congress intended to lessen the severity of sentencing under §924(c) in 1998, particularly by doing so under a bill dubbed "An Act [t]o throttle criminal use of guns," an act that had as a "primary objective" the expansion of §924(c)'s coverage to reach firearm possession.Abbott, slip op. at 10.
Notes
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 562
References
Abbott v. United States, No. 09-479.  Supreme Court of the United States, November 15, 2010 (slip opinion).
.
.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States sentencing case law
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Armed Career Criminal Act case law
"""

From "Abel v. United States" ==> """
Abel v. United States, 362 U.S. 217 (1960), was a United States Supreme Court case.
 Background 
The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) suspected Rudolph Abel of being a spy for the Soviet Union. They also suspected him of being in the United States illegally. Rather than arresting him for espionage, the FBI turned over their evidence to the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), which has a lower threshold for securing arrest warrants. The INS chose to arrest Abel for being in the United States illegally, but agreed to allow the FBI to try to flip Abel into becoming a double agent against the Soviet Union before carrying out the arrest. The INS apprehended Abel in his hotel room and after Abel refused to flip the INS arrested him. Pursuant to the arrest, the INS searched the hotel room. They allowed Abel to take some papers with him and check out of the hotel, and the INS searched those papers later. The INS searches uncovered evidence of Abel using a false identity and engaging in espionage and turned this evidence over to the FBI. After Abel had checked out of the hotel, the FBI searched the room with the consent of the hotel and found additional evidence of espionage.
The evidence turned up by the INS and FBI searches was used in Abel's trial, in which he was convicted and sentenced to 30 years imprisonment. Abel, represented by James B. Donovan, appealed to the Supreme Court that the searches violated the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution and thus the evidence should not have been used at his trial. The Supreme Court granted a writ of certiorari on October 13, 1958, to decide two issues:
Was the administrative warrant issued by the INS constitutionally adequate to search and seize evidence in Abel's rooms after he was detained for deportation proceedings but not arrested for having committed a crime; and 
Was the Constitution violated when such evidence, unrelated to the immigration interests of the INS, was later used to convict Abel of espionage?
After arguments on these issues the Supreme Court could not come to a decision. Thus the case was re-argued to decide the issues reformed as follows:
 Whether under laws and Constitution of the United States (a) the administrative warrant of the New York Acting District Director of the Immigration and Naturalization Service was validly issued, (b) such administrative warrant constituted a valid basis for arresting petitioner or taking him into custody, and (c) such warrant furnished a valid basis for the searches and seizures affecting his person, luggage, and the room occupied by him at the Hotel Latham;  
 Whether, independently of such administrative warrant, petitioner's arrest, and the searches and seizures affecting his person, luggage, and the room occupied by him at the Hotel Latham, were valid under the laws and Constitution of the United States; and
 Whether on the record before [the Court] the issues involved in Questions '1(a)', '1(b)', and '2' are properly before the Court.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court affirmed Abel's conviction in a 5–4 decision.  Justice Felix Frankfurter wrote the Court opinion, joined by Justices Tom C. Clark, John Harlan, Potter Stewart and Charles Evans Whittaker.  While noting that the government must not be permitted to circumvent the Fourth Amendment by invoking an administrative procedure, the Court accepted the lower courts' findings that the FBI's interaction with the INS in this case was in good faith.  The Court then found that the INS searches were made pursuant to a valid arrest, and thus the evidence was discovered appropriately.  Further, having appropriately uncovered evidence of a crime, it was appropriate for the INS to share that evidence with the FBI, since this merely represented cooperation between two branches of the United States Department of Justice.  Finally, after Abel had checked out of the hotel room, it was appropriate for the hotel to give the FBI permission to search the vacated room, and thus the evidence uncovered by the FBI in its own search was valid.
Dissenting opinions
Four Justices dissented from the decision in two separate opinions.  Justice William O. Douglas wrote a dissent that was joined by Justice Hugo Black,  and Justice William Brennan wrote a dissent that was joined by Justices Douglas, Black and Chief Justice Earl Warren.  The dissenting opinions put forth the view that the evidence was tainted because the FBI did not get a search warrant.
In popular culture
The 2015 Steven Spielberg film Bridge of Spies includes a scene that dramatizes James B. Donovan, portrayed by Tom Hanks, arguing the case before the Supreme Court.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1960 in United States case law
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:Search and seizure case law
"""

From "Abington School District v. Schempp" ==> """
Abington School District v. Schempp, 374 U.S. 203 (1963), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court decided 8–1 in favor of the respondent, Edward Schempp on behalf of his son Ellery Schempp, and declared that school-sponsored Bible reading and the recitation of the Lord's Prayer in public schools in the United States was unconstitutional..
 Background 
Origin of case
The Abington case began when Edward Schempp, a Unitarian Universalist and a resident of Abington Township, Pennsylvania, filed suit against the Abington School District in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania to prohibit the enforcement of a Pennsylvania state law that required his children, specifically Ellery Schempp, to hear and sometimes read portions of the Bible as part of their public school education.Dierenfield, Bruce J. "The Most Hated Woman in America: Madalyn Murray and the Crusade Against School Prayer"], Journal of Supreme Court History 32, no.1 (2007), 62-84 That law (24 Pa. Stat. 15-1516, as amended, Pub. Law 1928) required that "[a]t least ten verses from the Holy Bible [be] read, without comment, at the opening of each public school on each school day." Schempp specifically contended that the statute violated his and his family's rights under the First and Fourteenth Amendments.
Pennsylvania law, like that of four other states, included a statute compelling school districts to perform Bible readings in the mornings before classes. Twenty-five states had laws allowing "optional" Bible reading, with the remainder of the states having no laws supporting or rejecting Bible reading. In eleven of those states with laws supportive of Bible reading or state-sponsored prayer, the state courts had declared the laws to be unconstitutional.
A related case was that brought by Madalyn Murray O'Hair, mother of plaintiff William J. Murray III (b. 1946), who filed suit against the local school system in Murray v. Curlett to prohibit compulsory prayer and Bible reading in public schools. In 1963, she founded the group American Atheists (originally known as the Society of Separationists). The Murray case was consolidated with Schempp's case on appeal to the Supreme Court.
 District court arguments 
During the first trial in federal district court, Edward Schempp and his children testified as to specific religious doctrines purveyed by a literal reading of the Bible "which were contrary to the religious beliefs which they held and to their familial teaching" (177 F. Supp. 398, 400). The children testified that all of the doctrines to which they referred were read to them at various times as part of the exercises. Edward Schempp testified at the second trial that he had considered having his children excused from attendance at the exercises but decided against it for several reasons, including his belief that the children's relationships with their teachers and classmates would be adversely affected.
 District court ruling 
The district court ruled in Schempp's favor, and struck down the Pennsylvania statute. The school district appealed the ruling. While that appeal was pending, the Pennsylvania legislature amended the statute to allow children to be excused from the exercises upon the written request of their parents. This change did not satisfy Schempp, however, and he continued his action against the school district, charging that the amendment of the law did not change its nature as an unconstitutional establishment of religion. Because of the change in the law, the Supreme Court had responded to the school district's appeal by vacating the first ruling and remanding the case to the district court.  The district court again found for Schempp. The school district appealed to the Supreme Court again, and, on appeal, the case was consolidated with a similar Maryland case launched by O'Hair.
When striking down the statute during the second trial, the district court made specific findings of fact that the children's attendance at Abington Senior High School was compulsory. The court also found that the law compelled reading 10 verses from the Bible, going on to say that:
The reading of the verses, even without comment, possesses a devotional and religious character and constitutes in effect a religious observance. The devotional and religious nature of the morning exercises is made all the more apparent by the fact that the Bible reading is followed immediately by a recital in unison by the pupils of the Lord's Prayer. The fact that some pupils, or theoretically all pupils, might be excused from attendance at the exercises does not mitigate the obligatory nature of the ceremony for ... Section 1516 ... unequivocally requires the exercises to be held every school day in every school in the Commonwealth. The exercises are held in the school buildings and perforce are conducted by and under the authority of the local school authorities and during school sessions. Since the statute requires the reading of the 'Holy Bible,' a Christian document, the practice ... prefers the Christian religion. The record demonstrates that it was the intention of ... the Commonwealth ... to introduce a religious ceremony into the public schools of the Commonwealth. (201 F. Supp., at 819; quoted in )
 Precedents for case 
The Court explicitly upheld Engel v. Vitale, in which the Court ruled that the sanctioning of a prayer by the school amounted to a violation of the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, which states, "Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion." The Abington court held that in organizing a reading of the Bible, the school was conducting "a religious exercise," and "that cannot be done without violating the 'neutrality' required of the State by the balance of power between individual, church and state that has been struck by the First Amendment" ().
Over the previous two decades, the Supreme Court, by incorporating specific rights into the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, had steadily increased the extent to which rights contained in United States Bill of Rights were applied against the states. Abington was a continuation of this trend with regard to the Establishment of Religion Clause of the First Amendment, and specifically built upon Supreme Court precedents in , , and .
 Opinions of the Court 
The Supreme Court granted certiorari in order to settle the persistent and vigorous protests resulting from its previous decision in Engel v. Vitale regarding religion in schools. Henry W. Sawyer argued the case for Schempp.
 Decision 
The Supreme Court upheld the District Court's decision and found the Pennsylvania prayer statute unconstitutional by virtue of the facts in the case, as well as the clear line of precedent established by the Supreme Court. In writing the opinion of the Court, Justice Tom C. Clark stated, "This Court has decisively settled that the First Amendment's mandate [in the Establishment Clause] has been made wholly applicable to the States by the Fourteenth Amendment ... in a series of cases since Cantwell.
What was unexpected, however, were the ideas expressed in the second portion of Justice Clark's opinion written for the majority. The Court's recognition of religious ideals as valuable to the culture of the United States in that opinion are generally not cited much by either side of the church-state debate when discussing the case and the effect it had on the United States. His opening thoughts explicitly spelled out that view in past jurisprudence with cases similar to Abington v. Schempp.
Clark continued that the Court was of the feeling that no matter the religious nature of the citizenry, the government at all levels, as required by the Constitution, must remain neutral in matters of religion "while protecting all, prefer[ring] none, and disparag[ing] none." The Court had clearly rejected "the contention by many that the Establishment Clause forbade only governmental preference of one faith over another."
Citing Justice Hugo Black in Torcaso v. Watkins, Justice Clark added, "We repeat and again reaffirm that neither a State nor the Federal Government can constitutionally force a person 'to profess a belief or disbelief in any religion.' Neither can it constitutionally pass laws or impose requirements which aid all religions as against non-believers, and neither can it aid those religions based on a belief in the existence of God as against those religions founded on different beliefs." Such prohibited behavior was self-evident in the Pennsylvania law requiring Bible reading (and allowing recitation of the Lord's Prayer) in its public schools. The Court recognized the value of such ideal neutrality from lessons of history when government and religion were either fully fused or cooperative with one another and religious liberty was nonexistent or seriously curtailed.
 Brennan's concurrence 
Justice Brennan filed a lengthy and historically significant concurrence, taking seventy-three pages to elaborate his ideas about what the Framers intended in the formation of the First and Fourteenth Amendments, gauging the value of religion in American culture, reviewing legal precedents, and suggesting a course for future church-state cases. Brennan focused on the history of the Establishment Clause to counter numerous critics of the Court's Engel decision, who pointed out that prayer in public schools, as well as in many other areas of public life, was a longstanding practice going back to the framing of the Constitution and Bill of Rights. He professed to be aware of the "ambiguities in the historical record",Quoting author in  and felt a modern-day interpretation of the First Amendment was warranted. In defense of that approach, Brennan stated:
In answer to critics of a broad interpretation of the prohibitions against government in the realm of religion, Brennan said, "nothing in the text of the Establishment Clause supports the view that the prevention of the setting up of an official church was meant to be the full extent of the prohibitions against official involvements in religion".
In the third section of his exhaustive concurrence, Justice Brennan charted the course that led to the incorporation of the First Amendment's religion clauses by way of answering the charge of Abington Township's counsel that Pennsylvania's Bible reading statute was a state issue, outside the purview of the federal court system, including that of the Supreme Court. He labeled the daily recitals of the Lord's Prayer and reading of the Bible as "quite [clear] breaches of the command of the Establishment Clause". He noted the long history of such practices, even before the "founding of our Republic". Additionally, he stated that most of those who demanded reading of the Bible and prayer in schools were hoping to serve "broader goals than compelling formal worship of God or fostering church attendance". He cited the 1858 words of the Wisconsin Superintendent of Public Instruction, who saw the Bible as aptly suited to "teaching the noblest principles of virtue, morality, patriotism, and good order".
Justice Brennan took great pains to also show that many states, such as South Dakota, New Hampshire, Wisconsin, Ohio and Massachusetts, had already enacted and revoked laws similar to Pennsylvania's by the first half of the 20th century. In addition, many political leaders including attorneys general and presidents like Ulysses S. Grant and Theodore Roosevelt insisted that "matters of religion be left to family altars, churches and private schools" and "[It] is not our business to have the Protestant Bible or the Catholic Vulgate or the Talmud read in [public] schools" .
Brennan's concurrence also recognized the plurality of religious thought in the nation as basis enough for restriction of church and state relations. He cited this lack of appreciation of that pluralism as the "basic flaw" of Pennsylvania's Bible reading statute and Abington Township's defense of it:
There are persons in every community—often deeply devout—to whom any version of the Judaeo-Christian Bible is offensive. There are others whose reverence for the Holy Scriptures demands private study or reflection and to whom public reading or recitation is sacrilegious.... To such persons it is not the fact of using the Bible in the public schools, nor the content of any particular version, that is offensive, but the manner in which it is used.
 Stewart's dissent 
Justice Potter Stewart filed the only dissent in the case. In it, he was critical of both the lower court opinions and the decision the Supreme Court had reached regarding them. He wished to remand the case to lower courts for further proceedings.
Stewart had dissented in Engel v. Vitale and viewed the doctrine relied on in that case as implausible, given the long history of government religious practice in the United States, including the fact that the Supreme Court opens its own sessions with the declaration, "God Save this Honorable Court" and that Congress opens its sessions with prayers, among many other examples. Stewart believed that such practice fit with the nation's long history of permitting free exercise of religious practices, even in the public sphere.
He declared the cases consolidated with Schempp as "so fundamentally deficient as to make impossible an informed or responsible determination of the constitutional issues presented"—specifically, of whether the Establishment Clause was violated. As to the intent and scope of the religion clauses of the First Amendment:
It is, I think, a fallacious oversimplification to regard the [religion clauses] as establishing a single constitutional standard of "separation of church and state", which can be applied in every case to delineate the required boundaries between government and religion.... As a matter of history, the First Amendment was adopted solely as a limitation upon the newly created National Government. The events leading to its adoption strongly suggest that the Establishment Clause was primarily an attempt to insure that Congress not only would be powerless to establish a national church, but would also be unable to interfere with existing state establishments. ... So matters stood until the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment, or more accurately, until this Court's decision in Cantwell....
He stated his agreement with the doctrine of the Fourteenth Amendment's embrace and application of the Bill of Rights, but pointed out the irony of such an amendment "designed to leave the States free to go their own way should now have become a restriction upon their autonomy".
Other critics of the Court's findings in Abington v. Schempp often quote the following excerpt from Justice Stewart's opinion:
If religious exercises are held to be an impermissible activity in schools, religion is placed in an artificial and state-created disadvantage.... And a refusal to permit religious exercises thus is seen, not as the realization of state neutrality, but rather as the establishment of a religion of secularism, or at least, as governmental support of the beliefs of those who think that religious exercises should be conducted only in private.
 Subsequent developments 
The public was divided in reaction to the Court's decision; the decision has sparked persistent and ongoing criticism from proponents of prayer in school. In 1964, Life magazine declared Madalyn Murray O'Hair, the mother of the plaintiff in one of the associated cases, to be "the most hated woman in America."
Newspapers were no exception. The Washington Evening Star, for example, criticized the decision, declaring that "God and religion have all but been driven from the public schools. What remains? Will the baccalaureate service and Christmas carols be the next to go? Don't bet against it." In contrast, The New York Times was more accepting of the Court's ruling. The paper printed significant portions of the opinions with no significant comments, either supportive or critical. Opponents characterized the decision as the one which "kicked God and prayer out of the schools".
The views of various religious entities on the decision split between mainline Protestants and Jews, who in general strongly supported the decision, and evangelical Protestants and conservative Catholics, who strongly opposed the decision. Speaking from the evangelical perspective, Billy Graham said, "[i]n my opinion ... the Supreme Court ... is wrong. ... Eighty percent of the American people want Bible reading and prayer in the schools. Why should a majority be so severely penalized ...?"Billy Graham voices shock over decision. (June 18, 1963). New York Times. p. 17. The mainline denominations, with the exception of the Roman Catholic Church, expressed less critical opinions of the verdict. Some considered it to support religious freedom because it limited governmental authority in the sphere of public schools.
The United States Congress reacted by drafting more than 150 resolutions to overturn the ruling by a constitutional amendment. Abington v. Schempp was used as precedent for similar cases such as Board of Education v. Allen and Lemon v. Kurtzman in the decades that followed. The three-part Lemon test had its basis in the jurisprudence of Abington v. Schempp. Under the test, the constitutionality of a given church-state law is weighed by three criteria: whether a law has a non-secular purpose, advances or inhibits religion, or results in excessive government entanglement with religion.
The Lemon test was overturned in the 2022 decision of Kennedy v. Bremerton School District. There, the Court ruled that a coach that held a private prayer on the sports field, joined voluntarily by students and others, did not violate the Establishment Clause and maintained the First Amendment rights of the coach. However, this decision did not affect Schempp and restrictions against school prayer.thehill.com/opinion/congress-blog/3614778-a-new-challenge-for-schools-and-teachers-school-prayer/amp/
 See also 
 Edgerton Bible Case
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 374
 School prayer
 Notes 
 References 
Citations
Sources
 Billy Graham voices shock over decision. (June 18, 1963). New York Times. p. 17.
 * Laats, Adam. "Our schools, our country: American evangelicals, public schools, and the Supreme Court decisions of 1962 and 1963." Journal of religious history 36.3 (2012): 319-334.
 External links 
 An article in the encyclopedia of civil liberties in the United States Abington Township School District v. Schempp author Timothy L. Hall
 Casey Scott McKay, "Tactics, Strategies, & Battles – Oh My!: Perseverance of the Perpetual Problem Pertaining to Preaching to Public School Pupils & Why it Persists," University of Massachusetts Law Review: Vol. 8: Iss. 2, Article 3 (2013). 
Category:1963 in United States case law
Category:Religion and education
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:United States education case law
Category:Education in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania
Category:Legal history of Pennsylvania
Category:1963 in religion
Category:1963 in education
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Ableman v. Booth" ==> """
Ableman v. Booth, 62 U.S. (21 How.) 506 (1859), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court unanimously held that state courts cannot issue rulings that contradict the decisions of federal courts,Hoiberg, Dale H. (2010) overturning a decision by the Supreme Court of Wisconsin. The Court found that under the Constitution, federal courts have the final power to decide cases arising under the Constitution and federal statutes, and that the States do not have the power to overturn those decisions. Thus, Wisconsin did not have the authority to nullify federal judgments or statutes. For example, it is illegal for state officials to interfere with the work of U.S. Marshals acting under federal laws.  The Ableman decision emphasized the dual form of American government and the independence of State and federal courts from each other. 
The federal law in question was a strengthened Fugitive Slave Act, which northern free states saw as violating their territorial integrity, and conflicting with their traditions of liberty.
Background
In 1850, the Congress of the United States adopted a strengthened Fugitive Slave Act as part of the Compromise of 1850. Tensions over slavery in the United States, nonetheless, continued to rise.
In 1854, abolitionist editor Sherman Booth was arrested for violating the Act when he allegedly helped incite a mob to rescue an escaped slave, Joshua Glover, in Wisconsin from US Marshal Stephen V. R. Ableman. Booth sought a writ of habeas corpus from a Wisconsin state judge. The Wisconsin judge granted the writ, ordering Booth released from federal custody. The US Marshal appealed to the state supreme court, which ruled the federal law unconstitutional and affirmed Booth's release. When Ableman turned to the federal courts, the Wisconsin Supreme Court refused to recognize the authority of the federal courts, again ordered Booth's release, and declared the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 unconstitutional. The Wisconsin Supreme Court thereby attempted to annul the judgment of the federal court.  Glover escaped to Canada, beyond the reach of Federal law enforcement.
When the case was appealed, the Wisconsin Supreme Court even refused to send the record for review, despite a direct order by U.S. Chief Justice Roger Taney, thereby forcing the U.S. Supreme Court to issue a decision without the record.
Decision
The case went to the U.S. Supreme Court. The Court, in a unanimous opinion written by Chief Justice Roger B. Taney, stated that the Wisconsin Supreme Court had effectively asserted the supremacy of state courts over federal courts in cases arising under the Constitution and laws of the United States. The Court noted that if the Wisconsin courts could annul the judgment of conviction by the federal district court in this case, then any state court could annul any conviction under federal law. The Court held that the states do not have that power.
The Court stated that in adopting the Constitution, the people granted certain powers to the federal government: 
This was accomplished by adoption of the Supremacy Clause, which makes federal law the supreme law of the land:
The Court noted that the supremacy of federal law could be effective only if the federal government were given judicial power to enforce federal law. If the interpretation of the Constitution and federal statutes were left to the states, then 
Accordingly, said the Court, the Constitution granted this judicial power to the federal government. The Constitution provides in Article III that the judicial power in all cases arising under the Constitution or laws of the United States rests in the federal courts, and that the Supreme Court has appellate jurisdiction in all such cases.
Therefore, the Court concluded that the Constitution gives the federal courts the final authority in matters involving interpretation of the Constitution and laws of the United States. Because the Constitution grants this power to the federal courts, the state courts do not have the power to review or interfere with the judgments of federal courts in matters arising under the Constitution or laws of the United States. The Court therefore found that the power of the State of Wisconsin "is limited and restricted by the Constitution of the United States." Wisconsin did not have the power to nullify the judgment of the federal court or to hold the Fugitive Slave Act unconstitutional. Booth's conviction therefore was upheld.
Aftermath
The case radicalized Wisconsin politics and furthered the polarization of the nation just before the American Civil War.  The facts of the case and the early rulings occurred in 1854–1855. As a result, in the 1856 state elections, the new Wisconsin Republican party ran on a strong anti-Federal Fugitive Slave Act platform, and took both houses of the legislature.  The new legislature required the state's U.S. Senate candidates to pledge their support for the Wisconsin Supreme Court.
Booth was ultimately pardoned for his offense by President James Buchanan shortly before he left office in 1861.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 62
 Dred Scott v. Sandford, 
References
Sources
Further reading
External links
 Constitutional Minutes; Abelman v. Booth; 101. Boston, MA: PBS Wisconsin, American Archive of Public Broadcasting (WGBH and the Library of Congress), Boston, MA and Washington, DC. 
Category:1859 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Supremacy Clause case law
Category:Nullification (U.S. Constitution)
Category:United States slavery case law
Category:Legal history of Wisconsin
Category:1859 in Wisconsin
Category:Criminal cases in the Taney Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
Category:African-American history of Wisconsin
"""

From "Abood v. Detroit Board of Education" ==> """
Abood v. Detroit Board of Education, 431 U.S. 209 (1977), was a US labor law case where the United States Supreme Court upheld the maintaining of a union shop in a public workplace. Public school teachers in Detroit had sought to overturn the requirement that they pay fees equivalent to union dues on the grounds that they opposed public sector collective bargaining and objected to the political activities of the union. In a unanimous decision, the Court affirmed that the union shop, legal in the private sector, is also legal in the public sector. They found that non-members may be assessed agency fees to recover the costs of "collective bargaining, contract administration, and grievance adjustment purposes" while insisting that objectors to union membership or policy may not have their dues used for other ideological or political purposes.. 
Abood was overturned in the 2018 case Janus v. AFSCME, which found that Abood had failed to properly assess the First Amendment principles in its decision.
Facts
Michigan law authorized agency shop agreements between public agencies and unions representing government workers. The Detroit Federation of Teachers was certified as the exclusive union for Detroit schoolteachers in 1967. D. Louis Abood, a school teacher, who objected to union membership and to the union's endorsements of political candidates, sued in Michigan state court in 1969.
Judgment
The Court upheld collective bargaining fees on the basis of private sector precedents in Railway Employees' Dept. v. Hanson (1956) and International Ass'n of Machinists v. Street (1966).
The restriction on union use of funds for non-collective-bargaining purposes was based on First Amendment protections regarding freedom of speech and association. The Court found,
Thus, in the United States' public sector, employees of the employer are entitled to not be members of the union, but they can be required to pay the documented costs of contract administration and negotiation.  If they object, typically such a determination is submitted for hearing to a neutral arbitrator who will take evidence and render a final and binding decision as to the propriety of the fees assessed.Chicago Local Teachers Union v Hudson 475 U.S. 292. 310 (1986)
Aftermath
Since Justice Samuel Alito's confirmation to the Supreme Court in 2006, anti-union groups have looked to challenge the decision of Abood by arguing that the inherent activities of a public section union including political campaigning that make it difficult to separate the use of non-member dues. The Court had prepared to rule on Friedrichs v. California Teachers Ass'n, , which appeared to be ready to overturn Abood, but with the death of Justice Antonin Scalia, the case was closed on a deadlock 4–4 decision that left Abood in place.
Abood was overruled in Janus v. AFSCME, , which ruled that public sector unions may not collect fees from non-members. In Janus, the 5–4 majority agreed that Abood had not properly considered the First Amendment principles, and was "wrongly decided".
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
References
External links
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States public employment trade union case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Detroit Public Schools Community District
Category:American Federation of Teachers
Category:United States trade union case law
Category:Legal history of Michigan
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
"""

From "Abrams v. United States" ==> """
Abrams v. United States, 250 U.S. 616 (1919), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States upholding the 1918 Amendment to the Espionage Act of 1917 which made it a criminal offense to urge the curtailment of production of the materials necessary to wage the war against Germany with intent to hinder the progress of the war. The 1918 Amendment is commonly referred to as if it were a separate Act, the Sedition Act of 1918.
The defendants were convicted on the basis of two leaflets they printed and threw from windows of a building in New York City. One leaflet, signed "revolutionists", denounced the sending of American troops to Russia. The second leaflet, written in Yiddish, denounced the war and American efforts to impede the Russian Revolution. It advocated the cessation of the production of weapons to be used against Soviet Russia.
The defendants were charged and convicted of inciting resistance to the war effort and urging curtailment of production of essential war material. They were sentenced to 10 and 20 years in prison.  The Supreme Court ruled, 7–2, that the defendants' freedom of speech, protected by the First Amendment, was not violated.. Justice John Hessin Clarke in an opinion for the majority held that the defendants' intent to hinder war production could be inferred from their words, and that Congress had determined such expressions posed an imminent danger. Their conviction was accordingly warranted under the "clear-and-present-danger" standard, derived from the common law and announced in Schenck v. United States and companion cases earlier in 1919. Opinions for a unanimous Court in those cases were written by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes. In the Abrams case, however, Holmes dissented, rejecting the argument that the defendants' leaflets posed the "clear and present danger" that was true of the defendants in Schenck. He suggested that the 10-20 year sentence was "...not for what the indictment alleges but for the creed that they avow." In 1969, Abrams was largely overturned by Brandenburg v. Ohio.
Background of the case
On August 12, 1919, Hyman Rosansky was arrested after throwing flyers out of a 4th-floor window of a hat factory located near the corner of Houston and Crosby, in lower Manhattan, New York.Szajkowsky, Z. (1971) Double Jeopardy - The Abrams Case of 1919. The American Jewish Archives XXIII(1), 6-32.  Rosanky had received the flyers the night before while attending an anarchist meeting.  Two different flyers were given to him, in English and Yiddish.  The flyers were an acerbic protest against the Woodrow Wilson administration for interfering with the Russian Revolution in support of the Russian government. The flyers had been printed on or about June 15, 1919, in a basement rented by Jacob Abrams located at 1582 Madison Avenue.  With Rosansky's help, police arrested six other Russian Jews: 
 Mollie Steimer, (later fled to Mexico and died in exile) 
 Jacob Abrams,  (later fled to Mexico and died in exile)
 Hyman Lachowsky,  (executed for anarchy by the Bolshevik government after being deported to the Soviet Union) 
 Jacob Schwartz (died in jail),  
 Gabriel Prober,  
 Samuel Lipman (executed for anarchy by the Bolshevik government after being deported to the Soviet Union). 
All had emigrated from Russia to the United States.Polenberg, R. (1987), Fighting Faiths: The Abrams Case, the Supreme Court, and Free Speech.  Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press.
The defendants were indicted for conspiring to violate the Espionage Act of 1917.  Although trial had begun on October 10, 1919, actual trial proceedings were set to commence on October 15, 1919.  On October 14, Jacob Schwartz died at Bellevue Hospital. The official cause of death was that he succumbed to the Spanish flu.
The trial concluded on October 23, 1919, resulting in the following dispositions:
(1) Gabriel Prober was acquitted, 
(2) Hyman Rosansky was convicted and sentenced to 3 years, 
(3) Jacob Abrams, Hyman Lachowsky, and Samuel Lipman were convicted and sentenced to 20 years and a $1,000 fine, and 
(4) Mollie Steimer was convicted and sentenced to 15 years and a $5,000 fine. 
The defendants appealed their convictions to the United States Supreme Court.
Majority opinion
Writing for the majority, Justice John Hessin Clarke asserted that the leaflets demonstrated an intent to hinder production of war material, and could not be characterized as simple expressions of political opinion. Quoting English translations of a leaflet written in Yiddish, Clark concluded: 
In answer to the claim that the defendants were concerned only with United States' intervention in Russia, he asserted that the leaflets 
The Court held that the leaflets' call for a general strike and the curtailment of munitions production violated the Sedition Act of 1918. Congress' determination that all such propaganda posed a danger to the war effort was sufficient to meet the standard set in Schenck v. United States for prosecution of attempted crimes, when the attempt was made through speech or writing. Holmes' argument, in dissent, that criminal prosecution required a showing of the specific intent to bring about the particular harm at which the statute was aimed, was rejected.
Holmes's dissent
left|thumb|Oliver Wendell Holmes
In his dissent, Oliver Wendell Holmes wrote that although the defendant's pamphlet called for a cessation of weapons production, it had not violated the Act of May 16, 1918. He wrote that the defendants did not have the requisite intent "to cripple or hinder the United States in the prosecution of the war" against Germany. The defendants were objecting only to the United States intervention in the Russian civil war. The defendants therefore lacked the specific intent to commit the crime of obstructing the war effort.Abrams, 250 U.S. at 626.
Holmes's three earlier opinions for a unanimous Supreme Court concerned convictions under the 1918 Sedition Act, in the first of which, Schenck v. United States, he stated the famous "clear and present danger" standard: speech could be punished if it posed a clear and present danger of causing some harm that Congress had power to forbid.. The defendants in Schenck had mailed leaflets to men awaiting induction, urging them to resist the draft. The defendants did not deny that they intended this result. Since they could have been prosecuted for a crime if they accomplished the intended result, and there was a clear and present danger that they would, they could also be convicted of an attempt to commit the crime of obstructing the draft. The statute only applied to successful obstructions, but common-law precedents allowed prosecution in this case for an attempt. In his opinion, Holmes relied on the common law of "attempts," and concluded without much discussion that an attempt might be made by words as by other means, the First Amendment notwithstanding.
In his Abrams dissent, Holmes explained why some speech was protected by the Constitution, an explanation that was not called for in the earlier cases. His opinion for the Court in Schenck had been criticized by a scholar, Zechariah Chafee, who said the Court had explained only that attempts to commit crimes could be prosecuted. Holmes had young friends, Jewish immigrants who had themselves been attacked for their left-wing opinions, and he therefore may have felt more strongly about this case than its predecessors. In his dissent he now explained his views more fully. He did insist that the majority had departed from the standard adopted by a unanimous court that same year, since the Abrams defendants neither intended the forbidden result nor did their leaflets, written in Yiddish, threaten to cause a forbidden result. Holmes's dissent is now accepted as the better statement of the standard, but the Court's ruling that legislation could criminalize all seditious speech has also been upheld.Thomas Healy, The Great Dissent: How Holmes Changed His Mind—and Changed the History of Freedom of Speech in America, 2013
Holmes's passionate, indignant opinion is often quoted:
Holmes expressed himself more fully in this dissent than in his earlier opinions for a unanimous Court concerning the value of free expression, and the reasons for which it might be regulated. In his Abrams dissent, he added this explanation of his dissent. He had not asked the Court as a whole to endorse this larger expression in the earlier cases.
Scholars have debated whether Holmes altered his views over the course of the weeks between the two sets of opinions.Albert J. Alschuler, Law Without Values: The Life, Work, and Legacy of Justice Holmes (2000) pp. 71-72. Holmes always maintained that he had adhered to the standard for punishing criminal attempts used in the earlier convictions, a standard based on long years as a common-law judge and scholar.Sheldon M. Novick, "The Unrevised Holmes and Freedom of Expression," 1991 The Supreme Court Review, p. 303 (1992) Critics of his earlier "clear-and-present-danger" opinion have insisted that the Abrams dissent stands on a different footing, and is more protective. The objection may be based in part on a misunderstanding. In his Abrams dissent, Holmes first disposed of the argument that the facts in the case supported a conviction under the clear-and-present-danger standard, insisting that a criminal prosecution required proof of specific intent to commit the crime that was charged. He then went on to say, however, that even if the defendants' speech could be punished as an attempted crime, even if "enough can be squeezed from these poor and puny anonymities to turn the color of legal litmus paper," the sentences of ten and twenty years, followed by deportation, showed that Abrams and his friends were prosecuted, not for their dangerous attempts, but for their beliefs. Holmes went on to challenge, not the Court's conclusion, but the Wilson Administration's prosecution of these defendants as an outrageous abuse of power. The "marketplace of ideas" Holmes insisted is the foundation of the constitutional system, not merely the First Amendment, and efforts to suppress opinions by force therefore contradict a fundamental principle of the Constitution.
Holmes's friends and colleagues generally supported the decision in Schenck, but he encountered mild criticism from a young judge, Learned Hand, who had ruled differently in a similar case. In an article Zechariah Chafee complained that Holmes had failed in his opinions for the Court to define the contours of the privilege accorded to speech, holding only that criminal speech could be prosecuted. In his Abrams dissent, Holmes expanded his statement of the privilege accorded to honest expressions of opinions, on much the lines that Chafee had recommended, extending the analysis made in Schenck. Scholars have claimed that Holmes was influenced by Chafee and Hand, by Brandeis, or by others. These claims are stated in numerous articles, and summarized in a book by Richard Polenberg.Richard Polenberg, Fighting Faiths: The Abrams Case, the Supreme Court, and Free Speech, pp. 218–228 (1987) In 1989 Sheldon Novick's first full biography of Holmes suggested that the justice had been consistent in his decisions, as he claimed to have been.Sheldon Novick, "Preface: Honorable Justice at Twenty-Five," in  Honorable Justice: The Life of Oliver Wendell Holmes (1989, 2013). Building on the argument that Holmes changed his mind, scholars have claimed not only that the dissent in Abrams expressed a different and more liberal understanding of the First Amendment, but that the Abrams dissent set the standard for modern First Amendment jurisprudence.Thomas Healy, The Great Dissent, supra, and sources cited therein.
Subsequent jurisprudence
thumb|upright=0.75|Judge Learned Hand.
The Abrams case has been kept alive by the scholarly dispute, but in recent years the Supreme Court has not cited either the majority opinion or Holmes' dissent as authority. The World War I sedition cases were overshadowed by new prosecutions under new statutes in World War II, the Cold War, the Vietnam War and the War on Terror. Learned Hand, a judge of the Second Circuit Court of Appeals, contributed to the modern dislike of the "clear-and-present-danger" formula by citing it in an opinion upholding the convictions of the leaders of the Communist Party; his opinion was upheld by a bitterly divided Supreme Court in Dennis v. United States (1951),. and the Supreme Court subsequently avoided use of that phrase, replacing it with a similar formula in Brandenburg v. Ohio (1968), holding that speech can only be prosecuted as an attempt if it is intended to produce "imminent lawless action"..
More recently, the Court has expressly rejected the reasoning of Holmes' Abrams dissent in two decisions. In Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project (2010) the facts were similar to those in Abrams. Respondents had offered advice and other verbal assistance to organizations fighting established governments in Sri Lanka and Turkey, organizations that had been designated as terrorists, and were subject to prosecution for attempting to provide material support to terrorist organizations in violation of what is now the USA PATRIOT Act, section 2339B. The respondents argued, supported by three dissenting justices, that they lacked the specific intent to aid in terrorist acts, and therefore could not be prosecuted for a criminal attempt. The majority rejected this argument, however, and repeated without citing the majority opinion in Abrams, that Congress had the power to determine that all such expressive conduct posed a threat to national security..
In the same year, in Citizens United v. FEC dissenting judges made Holmes's argument that the Constitution broadly protects the "marketplace of ideas", but the majority opinion brushed this aside, saying that freedom of expression was an individual right, not rooted in community interests, possessed by artificial as well as natural persons.. As the law now stands, it appears that neither the majority opinion in Abrams, with its reliance on the clear-and-present-danger formula, nor Holmes's dissent, are authoritative, and while Schenck appears to remain good law, it is now more common to cite Brandenburg v. Ohio for the standard to be applied in criminal prosecutions, except in cases involving national security in which Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project governs.
See also
Clear and present danger
Imminent lawless action
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 250
Shouting fire in a crowded theater
Threatening the president of the United States
Brandenburg v. Ohio, 
Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 
Dennis v. United States, 
Feiner v. New York, 
Hess v. Indiana, 
Korematsu v. United States, 
Kunz v. New York, 
Masses Publishing Co. v. Patten, (1917)
Sacher v. United States,  
Schenck v. United States, 
Terminiello v. Chicago, 
Whitney v. California, 
References
Further reading
External links
 Case brief: Quimbee
First Amendment Library entry for Abrams v. United States
Category:1919 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States home front during World War I
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "Abramski v. United States" ==> """
Abramski v. United States, 573 U.S. 169 (2014), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court found that making arrangements for a straw purchase of a gun is in violation of the Gun Control Act of 1968, and is different from re-selling or gifting a previously purchased gun. In the Abramski case, a former police officer from Virginia took advantage of a local discount to buy a gun for his uncle and later transferred it to Pennsylvania—the uncle's residence—using the appropriate federal procedure. During the purchase, Abramski falsely declared that he was purchasing the gun for himself.
Initially, Abramski's defense was that (a) the misrepresentation was not material since his uncle was legally capable of making the purchase himself, and (b) since the answer to the question of whether he was purchasing the gun for himself was not required to be kept on the firearms dealer's record, no law was violated. However, when the case came before the Supreme Court, Abramski modified his defense and claimed that the misrepresentation was not material because the law only cares about the person buying the gun from the dealer, not the final receiver of the gun. The Court disagreed with this interpretation and held that the law cared about the final receiver, which is properly considered the person buying the gun. Such straw arrangements, the Court held, are different from allowed transfers where a person buys a gun for himself and later decides to sell it. Accordingly, the Court found that the misrepresentation was material. Additionally, the Court found that the answer was required to be kept on the dealer's record. The Court thus held that the purchase violated 18 U.S.C. § 922(a)(6),. which makes it unlawful to falsify facts "material to the lawfulness of the sale," and 18 U.S.C. § 924(a)(1)(A),. which prohibits misrepresentation with respect to information which a dealer is required to maintain on record. In a dissenting opinion, Justice Antonin Scalia argued that the declaration about the ultimate recipient of the gun was not material to the sale, and that it is not included in the information that the dealer is required to keep on the records. After the ruling, proponents of gun control stated that the Court's decision will help keep guns out of the hands of dangerous people, while opponents of gun control stated that the ruling is a horrible injustice.
 Background 
Statutory background
The Gun Control Act of 1968 regulates the sale and transfer of guns. Section 922(a)(6) of the act makes it unlawful for any person acquiring a gun from a gun dealer to "knowingly ... make any false or fictitious ... written statement ... likely to deceive" the dealer, "with respect to any fact material to the lawfulness of the sale." Section 924(a)(1)(A) of the same act, makes it unlawful and provides a penalty for anyone who "knowingly makes any false statement or representation with respect to the information required by this chapter to be kept in the records of a firearms dealer under this chapter." These provisions of the Act only apply to purchasers in the "primary market," that is purchasers buying guns from gun dealers. The provisions do not apply to the "secondary market," that is second hand guns sold or gifted by a private party..
Factual background
Bruce Abramski, a former Roanoke, Virginia, police officer, offered to buy his uncle, Angel "Danny" Alvarez, a resident of Pennsylvania, a Glock 19 handgun at a police discount.What? Straw Purchase a Gun? Abramski v. US, Daily Kos (January 6, 2014) Agreeing, Alvarez sent Abramski a check, for $400, which stated "Glock 19 handgun" in the memo line.Abramski, 573 U.S. at 175. Abramski proceeded to purchase the gun, and filled the required ATF Form 4473. Question 11.a. on the form asks: "Are you the actual transferee/buyer of the firearm(s) listed on this form? Warning: You are not the actual buyer if you are acquiring the firearm(s) on behalf of another person. If you are not the actual buyer, the dealer cannot transfer the firearm(s) to you." Abramski's answer to this question was yes.Donald Scarinci, Abramski v. United States: Supreme Court Rules Against Straw Purchaser in Gun Case , Constitutional Law Reporter (August 7, 2014) After passing the background checks, and receiving the gun, Abramski contacted a federally licensed firearms dealer (FFL) in Pennsylvania, which conducted its own background check on Alvarez and then proceeded to transfer the gun to Alvarez through the FFL.Supreme Court Grants BATFE Broad Leeway on "Straw Purchase" Rules in Abramski v. United States, NRA Institute for Legislative Action (November 7, 2014) Completing the transaction, Abramski deposited the check and received a receipt from Alvarez. Later, Abramski was suspected of committing a bank robbery,Abramski v. United States, Oyez (June 16, 2014) and his house was searched by Federal agents who found the receipt.
 Procedural history
After being indicted by a grand jury, Abramski moved to dismiss the indictment. Abramski claimed that: (1), his misrepresentation on Question 11.a. was not "material to the lawfulness of the sale," under § 922(a)(6), since Alvarez was able to lawfully purchase the gun; and (2), since the answer to Question 11.a. is not "required ... to be kept in the records" of the gun dealer, the false statement is not in violation of §924(a)(1)(A). The District Court denied both motions, and Abramski entered a conditional guilty plea, where he reserved the right to challenge the sentence. Abramski was then sentenced to five years of probation on every count. The United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit affirmed the District Court's conviction.
 Supreme Court 
The Supreme Court noted that the Fifth Circuit agreed with Abramski's claim that falsifying the answer to Question 11.a is not considered material, if the true-buyer can legally buy and possess the gun. The Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve a split between the circuit courts, even though Abramski's defense had changed, and he now claimed that the answer to Question 11.a is never material.Abramski, 573 U.S. at 176-77. Various parties filed amicus briefs supporting either side. Parties supporting Abramski included the National Rifle Association Civil Rights Defense Fund, and West Virginia and 25 other states, while others, like the Brady Center to Prevent Gun Violence, and Hawaii and 8 other states (plus the District of Columbia), filed amicus briefs supporting Abramski's conviction.
 Opinion of the Court 
thumb|upright=1.0|right|Justice Elena Kagan, author of the majority opinion
The Court held that despite not mentioning the words "straw buyers", the federal gun law that regulates transactions with "persons" or "transferees" considers the "persons" or "transferees" to be the ones getting the gun at the end of the day, not the straw persons completing the transaction on their behalf.Abramski, 573 U.S. at 179. Failure to interpret the law in such way, the Court held, would undermine the purpose of the law, which is to prevent guns from falling into the wrong hands. "Deliverymen, after all, are not so hard to come by."Abramski, 573 U.S. at 182. The majority found Abramski's theory, that the federal law only cares about the person that is buying the gun and not the final buyer not to be true. The Court's majority opinion, written by Justice Kagan, held that if you interpret the terms "person" and "transferee," to mean "the man at the counter", you would undermine the purpose of the statutes, which is to prevent guns from falling into the wrong hands.Abramski, 573 U.S. at 183. The Court therefore preferred to interpret the terms "person," and "transferee," to mean "the man getting, and always meant to get, the firearm".
The Court further stated that although congress allowed the resale and gifting of a gun by an individual, without requiring form or background checks, that is not proof that congress did not care about straw buyers. "Yes, Congress decided to regulate dealers' sales, while leaving the secondary market for guns largely untouched ...  And yes, that choice (like pretty much everything Congress does) was surely a result of compromise. But no, straw arrangements are not a part of the secondary market, separate and apart from the dealer's sale." The Court also rejected Abramski's claim that since Alvarez was able to buy the gun legally on his own the misrepresentation is not material, stating: "Abramski's false statement was material because had he revealed that he was purchasing the gun on Alvarez's behalf, the sale could not have proceeded under the law—even though Alvarez turned out to be an eligible gun owner. The sale, as an initial matter, would not have complied with §922(c)'s restrictions on absentee purchases."Abramski, 573 U.S. at 189. The court held that Abramski's case is analogous to a situation where a person that can buy a gun legally buys a gun under an alias. Such misrepresentation is material regardless of the fact that the buyer may purchase a gun legally, and the theory of "no harm, no foul" should not apply.Abramski, 573 U.S. at 190. Finally, the Court rejected Abramski's claim that the misrepresentation is not in violation of §924, because it is not part of what the dealer is statutorily required to maintain on his record. The Court held that §924 requires the dealer to maintain information "required by this chapter", and that ATF Form 4473 is required by this chapter.Abramski, 573 U.S. at 191-92.
Accordingly, the Supreme Court affirmed the decision of the Fourth Circuit against Abramski.Abramski, 573 U.S. at 193
Dissent
Dissenting, Justice Scalia would have held that although Abramski made a false statement by claiming that he was the buyer/transferee, since Alvarez was lawfully able to buy the gun, the statement is not "with respect to any fact material to the lawfulness of the sale," which is the requirement in §922(a)(6). Additionally, the dissent criticized the government's use of the "agency law" principle to determine that Abramski was a third party's common-law agent for Alvarez. Instead, the dissent believed that common English should be used to interpret statutes, and therefore, under the statute, Abramski was the "person" buying the gun, not Alvarez.Abramski, 573 U.S. at 197-97 (Scalia, J., dissenting.) Furthermore, the dissent did not think that the statute is "rendered meaningless" simply because one can buy a gun on behalf of another, just like it is not rendered meaningless when one gifts a gun. The dissent also wondered why the majority wouldn't agree that this is yet another loophole to a statute that has so many loopholes, and argued that perhaps it was Congress' intent to only limit the actual person at the counter. The dissent also stated that even if the majority had the proper interpretation of the statute, the ambiguity should be resolved in favor of lenity.Abramski, 573 U.S. at 203-04 (Scalia, J., dissenting). Regarding the Section 924 charges, the dissent explained that the statute clearly lists what the dealer is required to maintain on record, and that the answer to the question of whether he is the actual buyer is not on the list. The dissent stated that the majority's interpretation ultimately carried the text too far. "[I]f the bureaucrats responsible for creating Form 4473 decided to ask about the buyer's favorite color, a false response would be a federal crime."Abramski, 573 U.S. at 206(Scalia, J., dissenting). Justice Scalia concluded with the statement:
Responses and analysis
Although not considered a "ground breaking rule" by some law reviewers, the case received responses from both proponents and opponents of gun control. The Brady Center to Prevent Gun Violence, which was the only gun prevention group to file an amicus brief, American Bar Association
(last visited April 21, 2016)Abramski v. United States , Brady Center To Prevent Gun Violence (last visited April 21, 2016) hailed the Court's decision as a victory over the "corporate gun lobby." Dan Gross, the president of the Brady Center to Prevent Gun Violence, stated that the decision "will save lives by keeping guns out of the hands of dangerous people," and that "the Supreme Court rejected efforts by the corporate gun lobby to undermine federal gun laws, reaffirming that sensible laws can have a big impact while being consistent with the Second Amendment."Benjamin Goad, Supreme Court rules that 'straw' purchases of guns are illegal, The Hill, (June 16, 2014)Jennifer Fuson, U.S. Supreme Court Upholds Law Prohibiting "Straw Purchasing" of Guns, Brady Center To Prevent Gun Violence (June 16, 2014) Adam Winkler, writing for New Republic, also supported the ruling, stating that it is a "relief to law enforcement."Adam Winkler, Maybe the Supreme Court Isn't as Pro-Gun as We Thought, New Republic (June 16, 2014) However, others, like the National Rifle Association (NRA),  criticized the ruling, stating that it "seemingly allows the government to require virtually any information it wants from a person buying a firearm from a federally licensed dealer, whether or not that information has any relationship to public safety or the policies of federal law." John Lott, a gun rights advocate, criticized the Court's statement that collecting this "information helps to fight serious crime," claiming that registration doesn't help solve crimes, since registered guns are rarely left at the scene. He noted, for example, that Hawaii's requirement to register guns hasn't solved a single crime in 50 years, though Lott cited no evidence to support his claim. According to Lott, the Court "confirmed a horrible injustice, with no understanding of how gun tracing works, and without producing any increased safety for Americans."John R. Lott, What the Supreme Court still doesn't understand about guns, Fox News (June 25, 2014) A Harvard Law Review case note contended that, as a matter of law, the word "person" was properly interpreted by the majority, thus avoiding "gutting key provisions of the statute," and argued, against the dissent, that the majority's interpretation is also consistent with common English.Abramski v. United States, Harvard Law Review (Nov 10, 2014) However, the case note argued that a narrower reading of the second count was more appropriate, because the statute explicitly requires the name age and residence, and not anything else. Thus, the law review concluded, the Supreme Court established an unnecessary precedent.
 See also 
 Firearm case law in the United States
 Gun law in the United States
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 573
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2014 in United States case law
"""

From "Abuelhawa v. United States" ==> """
Abuelhawa v. United States, 556 U.S. 816 (2009), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a defendant who used a cellphone for the misdemeanor purchase of cocaine could not be charged with a felony for using a "communication facility" to facilitate the distribution of an illegal drug under 21 U.S.C. § 843(b).. In a unanimous opinion delivered by Justice Souter, the Court reasoned that the Government's interpretation of "facilitate" exposed a first-time buyer using a phone "to punishment 12 times more severe than a purchase by a recidivist offender and 8 times more severe than the unauthorized possession of a drug used by rapists," and was clearly not in line with Congress's intent, since it conflicted with the classification of the drug sale itself as a misdemeanor.
 References 
External links
 Text of appealed-from opinion by the Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2009 in United States case law
"""

From "Ackley School District v. Hall" ==> """
Ackley School District v. Hall, 113 U.S. 135 (1885), was a suit to recover principal and interest claimed to be due the defendant on negotiable bonds issued by the plaintiff.Ackley School Dist. v. Hall, .
Background
Municipal bonds issued under the authority of law for the payment at all events to a named person or order a fixed sum of money at a designated tune therein limited, being endorsed in blank, is a negotiable security.  Its negotiability is not affected by a provision of the statute under which it was issued that it should be "payable at the pleasure of the district at any time before due."
An act of the Legislature of Iowa entitled "An act to authorize independent school districts to borrow money and issue bonds therefor for the purpose of erecting and completing schoolhouses, legalizing bonds heretofore issued, and making school orders draw six percent interest in certain cases" is not in violation of the provision in the Constitution of that state which declares that "every act shall embrace but one subject and matters properly connected therewith, which subject shall be expressed in the title.
By an Act of the General Assembly of the State of Iowa approved April 6, 1868, it is provided that independent school districts shall have power and authority to borrow money for the purpose of erecting and completing school houses by issuing negotiable bonds of the independent district, to run any period not exceeding ten years, drawing a rate of interest not exceeding ten percent, which interest may be paid semiannually, which indebtedness shall be binding and obligatory on the independent school district for the use of which said loan shall have been made.
The Independent School District of Ackley, Hardin County, Iowa, promises to pay to Foster Brothers, or order at the Hardin County Bank at Eldora, Iowa, on the first day of May, 1872, five hundred dollars for value received, with interest at the rate of ten percent per annum, said interest payable semiannually, on the first day of May and November in each year thereafter at the Hardin County Bank at Eldora, on the presentation and surrender of the interest coupons hereto attached
This bond is issued by the board of school directors by authority of an election of the voters of said school district held on the 23d day of August, 1869, in conformity with the provisions of chapter 98, acts 12, General Assembly of the State of Iowa.
In testimony whereof the said Independent School District, by the board of directors thereof, have caused the same to be signed by the President and secretary, this first day of November, 1869.
Treasurer of Independent School District, Ackley, Hardin County, Iowa, will pay the holder hereof, on the 1st day of November, 1874 at the Hardin County Bank at Eldora, Iowa, twenty-five dollars, for interest due on school house bond No. 8.
Decision
The defendant,...who is averred to be a citizen of New York, became the holder of eight of these obligations with interest coupons attached, each one being endorsed in blank by Foster Brothers, the original payees. This suit was brought to recover the amount due thereon, without any averment in the pleadings as to the citizenship of the payees. The district made defense upon various grounds. The case was tried by the court without the intervention of a jury, and there was a general finding for the plaintiff, upon which a judgment was entered against the district. To that finding and judgment the defendant excepted (but without preserving, by bill of exceptions, the evidence upon which the court acted), and brought this writ of error.
Judgment was affirmed.
 See also 
 City of Quincy v. Jackson: Supreme Court case on defaulted municipal bonds form Illinois
 Findlay v. McAllister: Supreme Court case on defaulted county bonds from Missouri
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
 References 
External links
Category:United States securities case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Education in Hardin County, Iowa
Category:Government bonds issued by the United States
"""

From "Adair v. United States" ==> """
Adair v. United States, 208 U.S. 161 (1908), was a US labor law case of the United States Supreme Court which declared that bans on "yellow-dog" contracts (that forbade workers from joining labor unions) were unconstitutional..  The decision reaffirmed the doctrine of freedom of contract which was first recognized by the Court in Allgeyer v. Louisiana (1897). For this reason, Adair is often seen as defining what has come to be known as the Lochner era, a period in American legal history in which the Supreme Court tended to invalidate legislation aimed at regulating business.Philips, Michael J. The Lochner Court, Myth and Reality: Substantive Due Process from the 1890s to the 1930s. Greenwood Publishing Group, 2001. p. 10.Wiecek, William M. The History of the Supreme Court of the United States. Volume 12, The Birth of the Modern Constitution: The United States Supreme Court, 1941–1953. Cambridge University Press, 2006. p. 25 f.
In earlier cases, the Court had struck down state legislation limiting the freedom of contract by using the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, which only applied to the states. In Adair the doctrine was expanded to include federal legislation by way of the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment.
Facts
The Erdman Act of 1898, section 10, passed by Congress to prevent unrest in the railroad labor industry, prohibited railroad companies engaged in interstate commerce from demanding that a worker not join a union as a condition for employment. The law provided for voluntary arbitration of disputes between the interstate railroads and their workers organized into labor unions. It applied to individuals who worked on moving trains which transported freight and passengers between states. Workers who maintained railroad cars, and station clerks, did not come under the statute's jurisdiction. In 1906, William Adair, a master mechanic who supervised employees at the Louisville & Nashville Railroad, fired O. B. Coppage for belonging to labor union called the Order of Locomotive Fireman. Adair's actions were in direct violation of Section 10 of the Erdman Act which made it illegal for employers to "threaten any employee with loss of employment" or to "unjustly discriminate against an employee because of his membership in ... a labor corporation, organization or association."Carter, Saalim A. Labor Unions and Antitrust Legislation: Judicial Activism vs. Judicial Restraint from 1890-1941. Penn State University, 2006. p. 30. Adair was indicted in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Kentucky, which upheld the law as constitutional. In a subsequent trial, Adair was found guilty of violating the act and ordered to pay a $100 fine. Adair appealed the District Court's decision to the Supreme Court.
Judgment
In a 6-2 decision, the Court held that Section 10 of the Erdman act was unconstitutional. In the majority opinion, written by Justice John M. Harlan, the question to be decided was described as such:
In answering this question, Harlan first examined whether Section 10 of the act on which the indictment against Adair was based "is repugnant to the Fifth Amendment." Harlan found that the due process clause of the Amendment guarded against "an invasion of the personal liberty, as well as the right of property", and that "[s]uch liberty and right embraces the right to make contracts for the purchase of the labor of others and equally the right to make contracts for the sale of one's own labor". Harlan further cited the landmark decision in Lochner v. New York (1905) in which the Court had struck down state regulation which was found to infringe on the laborers' "liberty of contract". In reference to the prerogatives of both parties in the termination of a labor contract, Harlan wrote:
Having found that the Fifth Amendment barred against limiting the right of an employer to fire an employee due to membership in a labor union, Harlan concluded that Congress could not criminalize such action. Furthermore, it had been argued by the government in defending the statute that Section 10 was a valid exercise of Congress' powers under the Commerce Clause. In the second part of the opinion, Harlan examined this claim, at first acknowledging that Congress had "a large discretion in the selection or choice of the means to be employed in the regulation of interstate commerce". But this discretion was dependent on the regulation:
Harlan rejected that the provision had any such connection, asking rhetorically:
Harlan concluded that Congress' control over interstate commerce did not extend to membership in labor unions:
Justices Joseph McKenna and Oliver W. Holmes, Jr. filed separate dissents.
McKenna's dissent
In his dissent, McKenna stressed the importance of the purpose of Congress' regulation, viz. its remedial efforts to counter the recurring clashes between workers and management in the railroad industry:
By the same token, McKenna argued that the invalidation of Section 10 would hamper Congress' intentions, as a scheme devised for effective arbitration would thus come to lack an integral component. In reference to the right of an employer to fire an employee at will, which would unravel Congress' arbitration scheme, McKenna asked:
In apparent admonition of the reasoning in the majority opinion, McKenna cautioned: "Liberty is an attractive theme, but the liberty which is exercised in sheer antipathy does not plead strongly for recognition." McKenna found that the legislation was within the boundaries of Congress' powers to regulate interstate commerce, and, in regard to the Fifth Amendment, a line was to be drawn between private and public business: "We are dealing with rights exercised in a quasi-public business, and therefore subject to control in the interest of the public."
Holmes' dissent
Holmes, in a succinct dissent, began by saying that he too thought that the act was constitutional, and that "but for the decision of my brethren, I should have felt pretty clear about it." In Holmes' view, Section 10 presented "in substance, a very limited interference with the liberty of contract, no more." Holmes also criticized past decisions of the Court in this regard, stating that "I confess that I think that the right to make contracts at will that has been derived from the word liberty in the amendments has been stretched to its extreme by the decisions". Like McKenna, Holmes contended that Congress' interest in preventing strikes and make effective its scheme of arbitration was sufficient justification for the act, while also adding, in conclusion:
Significance
The Court followed up the decision in Adair with Coppage v. Kansas (1915), which denied to states as well the power to ban yellow-dog contracts. In 1932, yellow-dog contracts were outlawed in the United States under the Norris-LaGuardia Act.
David P. Currie has remarked that the Court's decision in Adair is difficult to square with two of its other decisions that same year: Damselle Howard v. Illinois Central Railroad Company (1907), in which the Court held that it was within Congress' power to abrogate the fellow-servant rule (which absolves an employer of liability for injury to a worker resulting from the negligence of a co-worker) for railway employees injured in interstate commerce; and Loewe v. Lawlor (1908), in which it held that Congress could prevent union members from boycotting goods shipped from one state to another.Currie, David P. The Constitution in the Supreme Court: The Second Century, 1888–1986. University of Chicago Press, 1990. p. 27.
See also
US labor law
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 208
Notes
External links
Category:History of labor relations in the United States
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:1908 in United States case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:Louisville and Nashville Railroad
Category:United States contract case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Adams v. Burke" ==> """
Adams v. Burke, 84 U.S. (17 Wall.) 453 (1873), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court first elaborated on the exhaustion doctrine. According to that doctrine, a so-called authorized sale of a patented product (one made by the patentee or a person authorized by it to sell the product) liberates the product from the patent monopoly. The product becomes the complete property of the purchaser and "passes without the monopoly." The property owner is then free to use or dispose of it as it may choose, free of any control by the patentee. Adams is a widely cited, leading case. A substantially identical doctrine applies in copyright law and is known as the "first sale doctrine".
As the Supreme Court recently explained, in Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 133 S. Ct. 1351 (2013), the principle comes from early English common law of property, explained in Coke on Littleton early in the 17th century. Under the common law, if a man is possessed of a chattel (item of personal property) and he transfers his property in it to another, no restriction against the use or disposition of the chattel will be effective, for that would hinder trade and commerce – it would interfere with bargaining among men. If once a patented product was sold and allowed to enter the stream of commerce, if it could be subject to restrictions (perhaps secret) on its use or further disposition, businessmen would not be able to know whether transactions in the product were effective and business certainty would be greatly impaired.
Factual background
In 1863, U.S. Patent No. 38,713 issued to the inventors Merrill and Horner for a  coffin lid that permitted interested persons to view the name-plate and inscription of the decedent in the coffin, irrespective of whether the coffin cover is open or closed. In 1865 they assigned to Lockhart & Seelye of Cambridge. Massachusetts, the ownership of the patent in a circular area around Boston having a ten-mile radius. Adams, the plaintiff in this case, was the assignee of the patent in an area outside this circle which included the town of Natick, Massachusetts.Adams v. Burks, 1 Fed. Cas. 100 (Case No. 50) (C.C.D. Mass. 1871).
Burke, the defendant, was an undertaker doing business in Natick, Massachusetts, seventeen miles from Boston. Burke purchased some patented coffin lids from Lockhart & Seelye, who had manufactured them. Burke then took them to Natick (more than ten miles from Boston), and used them in his business. Adams then sued him.1 Fed. Cas. at 100.
Trial court opinion
The circuit court for the district of Massachusetts dismissed the case. It said:
Supreme Court opinion
Adams appealed to the Supreme Court, which affirmed. The Court began by observing that this was a case of first impression in the Supreme Court although the governing principle had been involved in other patent cases."The question presented by the plea in this case is a very interesting one in patent law, and the precise point in it has never been decided by this Court, though cases involving some of the considerations which apply to it have been decided and others of analogous character are frequently recurring." Adams, 84 U.S. at 455. That principle was this:
Accordingly, the Court ruled that "we hold that in the class of machines or implements we have described, when they are once lawfully made and sold, there is no restriction on their use to be implied for the benefit of the patentee or his assignees or licensees."Adams, 84 U.S. at 457.
Subsequent Supreme Court cases following the doctrine of the Adams case include:
 Motion Picture Patents Co. v. Universal Film Mfg. Co., 243 U.S. 502 (1917).
 Straus v. Victor Talking Machine Co., 243 U.S. 490 (1917).
 Ethyl Gasoline Corp. v. United States, 309 U.S. 436 (1940).
 United States v. Univis Lens Co., 316 U.S. 241 (1942).
 Aro Mfg. Co. v. Convertible Top Replacement Co., 365 U. S. 336 (1961).
 Quanta Computer, Inc. v. LG Electronics, Inc., 553 U.S. 617 (2008).
But see:
 United States v. General Electric Co., 272 U.S. 476 (1926).In this case, the Court ruled that the Adams patent exhaustion doctrine applied to sales, but not to agency agreements or licenses to manufacture.
 General Talking Pictures Corp. v. Western Electric Co., 304 U.S. 175 (1938).In this case, the Court ruled that the Adams patent exhaustion doctrine did not apply to a sale made by a licensee to manufacture a patented product only for use or sale in a defined field, where the licensee's customer had notice of the license limitation or restriction.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States misuse law
Category:1873 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
"""

From "Adams v. Robertson" ==> """
Adams v. Robertson, 520 U.S. 83 (1997), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the court, in a per curiam opinion, "dismissed the writ of certiorari as improvidently granted."
Background
The defendant, Charlie Frank Robertson, filed a class action lawsuit in 1992, alleging that "Liberty National Life Insurance Company had fraudulently encouraged its customers to exchange existing health insurance policies for new policies" that provided an insubstantial amount of coverage for cancer treatment.  At trial, a settlement was agreed upon that precluded class members from individually suing Liberty National. However several of the people included in the class action lawsuit disagreed with the settlement. Guy E. Adams, the plaintiff in this case, was one of those people.
Question before the court
Does the Supreme Court of Alabama's approval of the settlement violate the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment?
Decision of the Supreme Court
In a unanimous decision in favor of Robertson, the opinion of the court was written per curiam. The court dismissed the writ of certiorari and noted that the State Supreme Court "did not expressly address the question on which certiorari was granted." Further, the court found that the petitioners had "failed to establish that they had properly presented the issues to that court." The court concluded that it could not answer the question before the court because it would "unbalance" the US dual system of government.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1997 in United States case law
"""

From "Adams v. Tanner" ==> """
Adams v. Tanner, 244 U.S. 590 (1917), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a Washington state law that prohibited employment agencies was unconstitutional.
Facts
Washington voters passed a ballot initiative, supported by the then Federal Department of Labor, to prohibit private employment agencies charging fees to people seeking work. It read as follows,
The constitutionality of the law was challenged.
Judgment
Majority
Chief Justice White, Justices Day, Van Devanter, Pitney and McReynold held that a ban would breach the principle of due process of law in the deprivation of liberty and property. The ban was arbitrary and oppressive. Mr Justice Reynold said,
Dissent
Justice Brandeis (with whom Justice Holmes, Clarke and McKenna dissented) laid out in his dissenting judgment why employment agency activities were a legitimate concern. He highlighted sources from US Labor Department giving examples of abuse, attempts in over thirty states to regulate and have free public agencies compete. He stated how all methods short of abolition had ultimately failed (601-9).
In this period, the practice of charging destitute workers upfront fees for finding work was widespread. People might give up their last pennies for the chance of work. Sometimes, agencies made no effort to place the worker, or the work would last a few days and the employer would then split the next fee with the agent to bring in fresh replacements. Justice Brandeis cited from a report to a 1912 Congress Committee.
Mr Justice Holmes and Mr Justice Clarke concurred.
Importance
International Labour Organization policy
Probably inspired by the dissenting judgments in this case, the International Labour Organization's first ever Recommendation took on the views of Justice Brandeis. The Unemployment Recommendation, 1919 (No.1), Art. 1 called for each member to,
The Unemployment Convention, 1919, Art. 2 instead required the alternative of,
In 1933 the Fee-Charging Employment Agencies Convention (No.34) formally called for abolition. The exception was if the agencies were licensed and a fee scale was agreed in advance. In 1949 a new revised Convention (No.96) was produced. This kept the same scheme, but secured an 'opt out' (Art.2) for members that did not wish to sign up. Agencies were an increasingly entrenched part of the labor market. The United States did not sign up to the Conventions. The latest Convention, the Private Employment Agencies Convention, 1997 takes a much softer stance and calls merely for regulation.
Supreme Court policy
In Ribnik v. McBride, 277 U.S. 350 (1928), the Court struck down a similar New Jersey law attempting to regulate agencies, Justices Stone, Brandeis and Holmes dissenting. This is probably no longer good law.
Doubt was placed on the leading dicta of Adams v. Tanner in Olsen v. State of Nebraska, 313 U.S. 236 (1941), and Lincoln Union v. Northwestern Co., 335 U.S. 525, 535 (1949). In the latter, Mr Justice Black said that Adams v. Tanner was part of the "constitutional philosophy" that struck down minimum wages and maximum working hours.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 244
Olsen v. Nebraska (1941)
United Kingdom agency worker law
Temporary work
Notes
External links
Category:1917 in United States case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "Adams v. Texas" ==> """
Adams v. Texas, 448 U.S. 38 (1980), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held on an 8–1 vote that, consistent with its prior opinion in Witherspoon v. Illinois, a Texas requirement that jurors swear an oath that the mandatory imposition of a death sentence would not interfere with their consideration of factual matters such as guilt or innocence during a trial was unconstitutional.
The surrounding factual issues (involving defendant Randall Dale Adams) were the subject of a partially autobiographical book of the same name, and were featured in the 1988 movie The Thin Blue Line.
Further reading
External links
Adams v. The Death Penalty
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1980 in United States case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment jury case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Adamson v. California" ==> """
Adamson v. California, 332 U.S. 46 (1947), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding the incorporation of the Fifth Amendment of the Bill of Rights.  Its decision is part of a long line of cases that eventually led to the Selective Incorporation Doctrine.
Background
In Adamson v. California, Admiral Dewey Adamson (his given name, not a military rank) was charged with first-degree murder but chose not to testify on his own behalf because he knew the prosecutor would impeach him with questions about his prior criminal record. The prosecutor then argued that refusal to testify could be seen as an admission of guilt under a California statute that allowed the jury to infer guilt in such cases.
On appeal, however, Adamson's attorney Morris Lavine argued that Adamson's freedom against self-incrimination guaranteed by the Fifth Amendment had been violated. He argued that because the prosecutor had drawn attention to Adamson's refusal to testify, his freedom against self-incrimination had been violated.
Decision
In the majority opinion written by Justice Stanley Forman Reed, the Supreme Court found that while Adamson's rights may have been violated had the case been tried in federal court, the rights guaranteed under the Fifth Amendment did not extend to state courts based on the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.Adamson v. California, 332 U.S. 46, 51 (1947).
Justice Reed stated succinctly, "It is settled law that the clause of the Fifth Amendment, protecting a person against being compelled to be a witness against himself, is not made effective by the Fourteenth Amendment as a protection against state action on the ground that freedom from testimonial compulsion is a right of national citizenship...."Id. at 51.
Justice Reed based his decision, in part, on the Court's 1937 decision in Palko v. Connecticut in which the Court found that the Fifth Amendment's protection against double jeopardy did not apply to the states through the Fourteenth Amendment and the Court's 1908 decision in Twining v. New Jersey.Id. at 53.
Frankfurter's concurrence
Justice Felix Frankfurter wrote a concurrence, arguing that incorporation of the Bill of Rights by the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment would "tear up by the roots much of the fabric of law in the several States, and would deprive the States of opportunity for reforms in legal process designed for extending the area of freedom."Id. at 67. He ended, "It seems pretty late in the day to suggest that a phrase so laden with historic meaning should be given an improvised content consisting of some but not all of the provisions of the first eight Amendments, selected on an undefined basis, with improvisation of content for the provisions so selected."Id.
This assertion would not carry the day, however. It was later rebuffed by a whole line of cases that incorporated many of the provisions of the first eight amendments of the Bill of Rights.McDonald v. City of Chicago, 130 S. Ct. 3020, 3034 n.12
Black's dissent
Justice Hugo Black, however, strongly opposed the decision and wrote a lengthy dissenting opinion, in which he argued for the incorporation of the first eight amendments of the Bill of Rights.
Specifically, Black argued that while the Court should not incorporate rights not specifically enumerated in the Bill of Rights, it should "extend to all the people of the nation the protection of [the specific enumerated rights of] the Bill of Rights."Adamson, 332 U.S. at 90.
Black's dissent, beyond advocating for incorporation, was also a criticism of the Court's use of natural law in the arena of incorporation. Black thought that the Court's use of natural law to discard the argument that the right to be free from self-incrimination should be incorporated was misguided: "I further contend that the 'natural law' formula which the Court uses to reach its conclusion in this case should be abandoned as an incongruous excrescence on our Constitution. I believe that formula to be itself a violation of our Constitution, in that it subtly conveys to courts, at the expense of legislatures, ultimate power over public policies...."Id at 75.
Because of the belief that natural law actually restricted the rights of citizens under the Constitution, Black also called for the overruling of Twining v. New Jersey (1908) in which the Court turned to natural law to support its decision. Indeed, Black thought that the Court's guiding light for incorporation, asking whether the interest at stake is "implicit in the concept of ordered liberty,"Palko v. Connecticut, 302 U.S. 319, 325 "degraded the constitutional safeguards of the Bill of Rights, and simultaneously appropriate for this Court a broad power which [it is] not authorized by the Constitution to exercise."Adamson, 332 U.S. at 70.
Murphy's dissent
Justice Frank Murphy agreed, in sum and substance, with Black but would have also left open the option that the Court incorporate rights not specifically enumerated in the Bill of Rights. He stated, "Occasions may arise where a proceeding falls so far short of conforming to fundamental standards of procedure as to warrant constitutional condemnation in terms of a lack of due process despite the absence of a specific provision in the Bill of Rights."Id at 124.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 332
References
External links
 Adamson v. California Case Brief at Lawnix.com
Category:1947 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:1947 in California
Category:Legal history of California
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
"""

From "Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Peña" ==> """
Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Peña, 515 U.S. 200 (1995), was a landmark United States Supreme Court case which held that racial classifications, imposed by the federal government, must be analyzed under a standard of "strict scrutiny," the most stringent level of review which requires that racial classifications be narrowly tailored to further compelling governmental interests..  Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote the majority opinion of the Court, which effectively overturned Metro Broadcasting, Inc. v. FCC,. in which the Court had created a two tiered system for analyzing racial classifications. Adarand held the federal government to the same standards as the state and local governments through a process of "reverse incorporation," in which the 5th Amendment's Due Process Clause was held to bind the federal government to the same standards as state and local governments are bound under the 14th Amendment.
Background
At the time this case was litigated, many contracts led by agencies of the United States federal government contained financial incentives for the prime contractor to employ subcontractors that were owned or controlled by "socially and economically disadvantaged individuals." The US Small Business Administration would certify certain businesses as disadvantaged. That usually meant that the business was owned by racial or ethnic minority groups or by women. In this particular case the contract stated that "the contractor shall presume that socially and economically disadvantaged individuals include Black Americans, Hispanic Americans, Native Americans, Asian Pacific Americans, and other minorities...."In 1989, the US Department of Transportation (DOT) awarded a highway construction contract in Colorado to Mountain Gravel and Construction Company. Mountain Gravel solicited bids for a subcontract for guardrails along the highway. The lowest bid was submitted by Adarand Constructors, with a higher bid being submitted by Gonzales Construction. However, Gonzales Construction had been certified by the Small Business Administration as a disadvantaged business and so Mountain Gravel awarded the subcontract to Gonzales because of financial incentives in the Mountain Gravel's contract for employing disadvantaged businesses. Adarand filed suit in federal court against DOT by arguing that the subcontracting incentive clause, or bonus, that caused Adarand to lose a subcontract was unconstitutional. The federal district court and circuit court ruled in favor of DOT and against Adarand, which then appealed to the US Supreme Court. The case was docketed as Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Federico Peña, Secretary of Transportation, et al. because Federico Peña was the US Secretary of Transportation at that time. Mountain States Legal Foundation represented Adarand Constructors.
The questions before the Court was primarily whether the presumption of disadvantage based on race alone, as well as the consequent allocation of favored treatment, was a discriminatory practice that violates the equal protection clause of the 14th Amendment as well as the Due Process clause of the 5th Amendment.
 Opinion 
 Majority 
In a 5–4 decision, Justice O'Connor wrote for the majority joined in full only by Justice Kennedy while Justice Rehnquist, Justice Thomas and Justice Scalia also joined in part. Justice O'Connor found that while reviewing the process of "reverse incorporation", there is congruency between the 5th and 14th amendment. Justice O'Connor held that regardless of the motive, strict scrutiny analysis applied to all race-based classification for both the State and Federal governments. The court specifically noted that Metro Broadcasting departed from prior cases by holding "benign" racial classifications need only satisfy intermediate scrutiny, which goes against the congruency of the 5th and 14th amendment.
 Dissent 
Justice Stevens, joined by Justice Ginsburg and Justice Breyer, dissented from the majority regarding the congruency between the 5th and 14th amendment. Justice Stevens argues that the concept of congruence "ignores important protected and legal differences federal state and local decision makers...a rule of 'congruence' that ignores a 'purposeful incongruity' so fundamental to our system of government is unacceptable."  
 Subsequent developments 
On September 5, 2005, the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights issued a report finding that, ten years after the Adarand decision, federal agencies still largely fail to comply with the rule in Adarand.U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, Federal Procurement After Adarand (September 2005)  Specifically, the Commission found that the Departments of Defense, Transportation, United States Department of Education, Energy, Housing and Urban Development, State, and the Small Business Administration, do not seriously consider race-neutral alternatives before implementing race-conscious federal procurement programs.  The Commission found that such consideration is required by the strict scrutiny standard under Adarand and Court decisions. Commissioner Michael Yaki dissented from the commission's report, arguing that the commission was taking a "radical step backwards" from the "race-progressive policies" of the past.
References
 External links 
 Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Peña Case Brief at Lawnix.com
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States affirmative action case law
Category:1995 in United States case law
Category:United States due process case law
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
"""

From "Adderley v. Florida" ==> """
Adderley v. Florida, 385 U.S. 39 (1966), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding whether arrests for protesting in front of a jail were constitutional.
Background information
In 1966, a group of students from Florida A&M University demonstrated against racial segregation, and were subsequently arrested. The day after, around 200 FAMU students gathered in front of the Leon County jail to protest their arrest.
Petitioners, 32 students, were members of a group of about 200 who on a nonpublic jail driveway, which they blocked, and on adjacent county jail premises had, by singing, clapping, and dancing, demonstrated against their schoolmates' arrest and perhaps against segregation in the jail and elsewhere. The sheriff, the jail's custodian, advised them that they were trespassing on county property and would have to leave or be arrested. The 107 demonstrators refusing to depart were thereafter arrested and convicted under a Florida trespass statute for "trespass with a malicious and mischievous intent." Petitioners contend that their convictions, affirmed by the Florida Circuit Court and the District Court of Appeal, deprived them of their "rights of free speech, assembly, petition, due process of law and equal protection of the laws" under the Fourteenth Amendment.
Decision
The U.S. Supreme Court upheld the trespassing conviction in a 5–4 decision. The majority opinion, authored by Justice Black, argued that county jails were not public places and so it did not infringe on their right to assembly. The decision argued that states may protect their property and withhold its use from demonstrators for nondiscriminatory reasons such as protection from damage.Adderley v. Florida Oyez Project
Dissenting opinion
Justice Douglas authored a dissenting opinion in which Chief Justice Warren and Justices Brennan and Fortas concurred. Douglas argued that the protesters did not engage in or threaten violence or block the entrance of the jail.  Public officials should not, according to this vision of the First Amendment, be given discretion to decide which public places can be used for the expression of ideas.385 U.S. at 49–57
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 385
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Warren Court
Free speech zone
Brown v. Louisiana
Cox v. Louisiana
Edwards v. South Carolina
References
External links
 Case brief: Quimbee
Category:1966 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:Freedom of assembly
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Void for vagueness case law
"""

From "Addington v. Texas" ==> """
Addington v. Texas, 441 U.S. 418 (1979), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court that set the standard for involuntary commitment for treatment by raising  the burden of proof required to commit persons for psychiatric treatment from the usual civil burden of proof of "preponderance of the evidence" to "clear and convincing evidence".
 Background 
Before Frank Addington was arrested on the misdemeanor charge of "assault threat" against his mother, Addington's mother filed a petition with the  court, in accordance with Texas law, requesting that Addington be indefinitely involuntarily committed to a state psychiatric hospital. Addington had a long history of mental and emotional problems and past psychiatric hospitalizations.  The state trial court issued jury instructions that the decision be based on "clear, unequivocal and convincing evidence" that Addington was mentally ill and that hospitalization was required for his own welfare and the welfare of others. The jury found that Addington was mentally ill and required hospitalization. Thereupon the trial court ordered his indefinite commitment. He was indefinitely committed to Austin State Hospital.
However, Addington appealed to the Texas Court of Appeals, based on the argument the court should have used the "beyond a reasonable doubt" standard of proof. The appeals court  reversed, agreeing with Addington. The Texas Supreme Court then reversed the Court of Appeals' decision, reinstating the trial court's orders. It concluded that the standard of proof of the preponderance of the evidence satisfied due process in a civil commitment proceeding.
Addington then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court on a writ of certiorari.
 Opinion of the Court 
The appeal was dismissed and certiorari granted; the lower court's decision was vacated and remanded. The court said the issue of an individual's interest in liberty is of such weight and gravity that a higher standard of proof is required than is normal in civil cases brought under state law.  Because of the uncertainties of psychiatric diagnosis, the burden of proof does not need to be as high as "beyond a reasonable doubt" in criminal cases, but should be a "clear and convincing" standard of proof as required by the Fourteenth Amendment in such a civil proceeding to commit an individual involuntarily for an indefinite period to a state psychiatric hospital.
Further, the opinion touched on the issue of an involuntary commitment as primarily medical in nature and needing the expertise of mental health experts.
 Subsequent developments 
The court raised the bar for committing someone against their will in a civil commitment proceeding. When the stakes are exceptionally high in civil matters, the burden of proof must be "clear and convincing evidence". The case raised important issues regarding civil commitment by placing the burden of proof on the petitioner, that is the party seeking the involuntary commitment of a person.
The opinion also suggested that it was not necessarily for the trier of facts to draw the necessary conclusions without the expertise of psychiatrists and psychologists.
The Supreme Court also cited the Addington case in Santosky v. Kramer, which set a clear and convincing evidence standard in termination of parental rights cases.
 See also 
 Jackson v. Indiana (1972)
 O'Connor v. Donaldson (1975)
 Jones v. United States (1983)
 Foucha v. Louisiana (1992)
 Footnotes 
 External links 
  Landmark Case Summaries
 Public Health Law Articles
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States civil commitment case law
Category:Mental health case law in the United States
Category:1979 in United States case law
"""

From "Addyston Pipe & Steel Co. v. United States" ==> """
Addyston Pipe and Steel Co. v. United States, 175 U.S. 211 (1899), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that for a restraint of trade to be lawful, it must be ancillary to the main purpose of a lawful contract. A naked restraint on trade is unlawful; it is not a defense that the restraint is reasonable.
Facts
The defendants were pipemakers who were operating in agreement. When municipalities offered projects available to the lowest bidder, all companies but the one designated would overbid, guaranteeing the success of the designated low bidder if no bidder outside the group submitted a bid.
The government argued that some antitrust violations, such as bid rigging, were such egregious anti-competitive acts that they were always illegal (the so-called "per se" rule). The defendants asserted that it was a reasonable restraint of trade and that the  Sherman Act could not have meant to prevent such restraints.
Judgment
Court of Appeals (6th Circuit)
The United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit noted that it would be impossible for the Sherman Act to prohibit every restraint of trade for that would even encompass employment contracts, which, by their nature, restrain the employee from working elsewhere while they are being paid to work for the employer. Therefore, reasonable restraints were permitted, but this would only apply if the restraint was ancillary to the main purpose of the agreement. No conventional restraint of trade can be enforced unless it is both ancillary to the main purpose of the lawful contract and necessary to protect the enjoyment of legitimate fruits of the contract or protect from the danger of unjust use of those fruits by the other party.
If the primary purpose is to restrain trade, then the agreement is invalid, and in this case, the restraint was direct and therefore invalid.
The opinion was written by Chief Judge William Howard Taft (who later became President of the United States and then Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court). Taft's reasoning was subsequently adopted by the Supreme Court as the proper interpretation of the Sherman Act.
Supreme Court
This case was appealed to the Supreme Court as Addyston Pipe and Steel Company v. United States, 175 U.S. 211 (1899). However, on appeal, the defendants did not attack the reasoning of the Sixth Circuit. Instead, they argued that the Commerce Clause of the Constitution did not empower Congress to regulate purely private agreements but instead authorized Congress only to remove barriers to interstate commerce erected by individual states. They argued that even if Congress possessed the authority to regulate purely private agreements, banning defendants' cartel would infringe liberty of contract because the defendants' cartel purportedly set reasonable prices. The defendants' last argument was that their cartel did not directly restrain trade but was simply a partial restraint, which ensured the defendants merely a reasonable rate of return and thus would have been enforceable at common law.
The Court, in an opinion by Justice Peckham, rejected all three arguments and affirmed the decision of the Court of Appeals. Peckham conceded that the framers and ratifiers of the Constitution likely anticipated that the Commerce Clause would authorize mainly Congressional interdiction of state-created barriers to interstate commerce. At the same time, Peckham observed that in some cases, purely private agreements can have the same economic impact and directly restrain commerce among the several states. Moreover, Peckham also held that contracts that directly restrain trade are not the sort of ordinary contracts and combinations that find shelter in liberty of contract. Finally, Peckham held that the defendants' cartel directly restrained trade. Peckham quoted extensively from Judge Taft's opinion below, which found, as a matter of fact, that the defendant's cartel set unreasonable prices. See 85 F. 291-93. In particular, Peckham quoted Taft's finding that pipe produced by the cartel could have been produced and delivered to Atlanta for a cost, including a reasonable profit and the cost of transportation, or $17 or $18 per ton, but the cartel charged instead $24.25 per ton.
See also
 US antitrust law
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 175
Notes
Further reading
 Fiss, Owen M. Troubled beginnings of the modern state, 1888-1910 (1993) pp 125-59. Online
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit cases
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:1898 in United States case law
Category:William Howard Taft
Category:United States contract case law
Category:Piping
"""

From "Adickes v. S. H. Kress & Co." ==> """
Adickes v. S. H. Kress & Co., 398 U.S. 144 (1970), was a United States Supreme Court case where the majority ruling, written by Justice Harlan, asserted that the burden of showing a lack of factual controversy rests upon the party asserting the summary judgment. It was later challenged by Celotex Corp. v. Catrett (1986), but the case was not officially overruled.Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986) While the issue before the Supreme Court was a fairly technical matter, the subject matter regarded the violation of white teacher Sandra Adickes' civil rights in the segregated South, after being refused service at a restaurant because she wished to eat with her black students.
 Background 
The case centered around a series of incidents on August 14, 1964, in segregated Hattiesburg, Mississippi. The passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 on July 2 had on paper outlawed segregation but in practice had yet to catch up, especially in the deeply segregated South.
Plaintiff Sandra Adickes was a white schoolteacher at the Mississippi Freedom School. The Freedom School movement was part of a broad attempt to increase education for black people across the South; at the time the average black Mississippian had only a 6th grade education. The School relied greatly on liberal white teachers from the North, of which Adickes was one. She had spent the first half of 1964 training in New York to become a Freedom School teacher. She arrived in Mississippi on July 4 in the majority black Hattiesburg. Despite its large black population, its white residents had been on a prolonged offensive of harassment and intimidation, especially against supposed Northern agitators. Already that summer, three people had been beaten in Hattiesburg alone by segregationists. Throughout Mississippi, a campaign of church bombings and killings had marked the last few years; just the summer before Medgar Evers had been assassinated.
With the passage of the Civil Rights act and the nominal end of segregation, Adickes's black students were very excited to finally engage in such simple pleasures as being able to see a movie, visit the library, and go to the local Holiday Inn. Adickes determined to take the students on a field trip to show the civic opportunities now afforded to them. She chose the local library, which was funded by black taxpayer money yet had refused to admit blacks, and then to afterwards take the students to lunch. Thus on August 14, Adickes took six students to the Hattiesburg Public Library. Upon entering, they were told that no library cards would be offered to them, and that the library trustees would rather close the library than racially integrate it. Adickes refused to leave, and the library called police, the chief of which arrived and closed the library.
Adickes then took the students to lunch. Lunch counters had proved a previously explosive topic of the Civil Rights movement, such as in the Greensboro sit-ins. They chose to eat at defendant S. H. Kress & Co.'s lunch counter. The party sat down across two booths, and the black students were served. However, the restaurant refused to serve Adickes, saying that they would not be serving whites who came in with blacks, even though they were required to serve blacks. Testimony from the store manager says that the entrance of the Adickes party immediately soured the atmosphere of the lunch counter, and that a group gathered outside, and patrons inside started milling around, clearly agitated by Adickes. The manager believed mob violence was imminent, and claims that was why he refused to serve Adickes. A police officer entered the lunch counter at some point during this, and went into the back of the store. The group left soon after, without eating their food. Upon exiting, Adickes was arrested by that same officer, on the obviously trumped up charge of vagrancy (Adickes was hardly an itinerant, and earned a $2,200 salary as a teacher). She was bailed out of prison a few hours later by a group of lawyers.
Adickes filed a lawsuit in federal court in New York, alleging two counts: (1) Kress had deprived her of the right under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment not to be discriminated against on the basis of race, and (2) that both the refusal of service and her subsequent arrest were the product of a conspiracy between Kress and Hattiesburg police. The first count went to trial and was ruled in favor of Kress; the second count was dismissed before trial on a motion for summary judgment.  Adickes appealed the case. The United States Supreme Court granted certiorari.Adickes v. S. H. Kress & Co., 398 U.S. 144, 90 S. Ct. 1598, 26 L. Ed. 2d 142 (1970)
 Issues 
The Court addressed two issues upon review of this case:
 Would a conspiracy between Kress and a police officer allow the plaintiff to recover under 42 U.S.C. §1983 (§1983)?
 Did the District Court err in granting summary judgment on the conspiracy count?
The summary judgement issue was the major issue, and regarded interpretation of rule 56(e) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. The rules have since been amended as a result of Adickes and the later Celotex Corp. v. Catrett (1986).
 Holding 
 Yes, a conspiracy between Kress and a police officer would allow the plaintiff to recover under §1983. A §1983 claim requires two elements for recovery: (1) the plaintiff must prove that the defendant has deprived him of a right secured by the, "constitution and laws," of the US, and (2) the plaintiff must show that the defendant deprived him of this constitutional right 'under color of any statute, ordinance, regulation, custom, or usage, of any State or Territory' (under color of law). The Court held that the involvement of a state official in such a conspiracy would plainly provide the state action necessary for a §1983 claim.
 Yes, the District Court erred in granting summary judgment on the conspiracy count. The Court held that the respondent did not carry its burden of showing the lack of any genuine issue of fact. Looking at the evidence provided, the respondent did not,  "foreclose the possibility that there was a policeman in the Kress store while petitioner was awaiting service and this policeman reached an understanding with some Kress employee that petitioner not be served." The store manager claimed that he had no communication with the police officer, but no affidavits were submitted by other store personnel. Additionally, the police officers who arrested Adickes did not provide affidavits to foreclose their potential participation in the conspiracy. Kress argued that Adickes did not bring forth evidence asserting the presence of the police officer in the store and that this allows for the summary judgment. The Court holds that because Kress did not meet the initial burden, Adickes had no need to provide this evidence.
Adickes kept summary judgment an "extraordinary remedy", which meant that summary judgement remained a not widely used tool. The drafters of the original Rules of Civil Procedure had not intended summary judgement to be widely used, as summary judgement prevents a jury from ever hearing the case. The finding in Celotex was seen as a partial reversal, and opened up the floodgates of summary judgement. Despite winning at the Supreme Court, Adickes did not take the case to trial again.
 See also 
 Peterson v. City of Greenville: Another Supreme Court case involving a S. H. Kress lunch counter
 References 
External links
Category:1970 in United States case law
Category:African-American history of Mississippi
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:Hattiesburg, Mississippi
Category:Lunch counters
Category:S. H. Kress & Co.
Category:United States summary judgment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Adkins v. Children's Hospital" ==> """
Adkins v. Children's Hospital, 261 U.S. 525 (1923), is a United States Supreme Court opinion that federal minimum wage legislation for women was an unconstitutional infringement of liberty of contract, as protected by the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment.. 
Adkins was overturned in West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish..
Facts
In 1918, Congress passed a law to set minimum wages for women and children in the District of Columbia. As in other cases, the question was one of balancing the police power of Congress to regulate working and living conditions with the right of individuals to conduct their own affairs without legislative interference. Children's Hospital and a female elevator operator at a hotel brought the case to prevent enforcement of the act by Jesse C. Adkins and the two other members of a wage board.
Judgement
thumb|The Taft Court
The Court's decision, by Justice Sutherland, was that previous decisions (Muller v. Oregon, 208 U.S. 412 (1908) and Bunting v. Oregon, 243 U.S. 426 (1917)) did not overrule the holding in Lochner v. New York, 198 U.S. 45 (1905), which protected freedom of contract. The previous decisions, he noted, addressed maximum hours. The present case addressed a minimum wage. The maximum-hour laws left the parties free to negotiate about wages, unlike the present law, which restricted the employer's side of the negotiation. The Court argued that if legislatures were permitted to set minimum wage laws, they would be permitted to set maximum wage laws.  Sutherland asserted: 
Sutherland cited the changes that had occurred in the years since Muller, particularly the Nineteenth Amendment, which guaranteed the right to vote for women.  He notes that Muller and other cases had emphasized differences between men and women as justifying special protection for women, but "[in] view of the great—not to say revolutionary—changes which have taken place since [Muller], in the contractual, political, and civil status of women, culminating in the Nineteenth Amendment, it is not unreasonable to say that these differences have now come almost, if not quite, to the vanishing point."
Dissents
Taft
thumb|upright|Chief Justice Taft
Chief Justice Taft, dissenting, argued that there was no distinction between minimum wage laws and maximum hour laws since both were essentially restrictions on contract. He noted that Lochners limitations seemed to have been overruled in Muller and Bunting.
Holmes
Justice Holmes, also dissenting, noted that there were many other constraints on contract (such as blue laws and usury laws). He cited the standard that he had put forth in Lochner: if a reasonable person could see a power in the Constitution, the Court should defer to legislation that used such a power.
References
 Sources 
Bernstein, David E. Rehabilitating Lochner: Defending Individual Rights against Progressive Reform. Chapter 4. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011. 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:1923 in United States case law
Category:Minimum wage law
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:1923 in women's history
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Adler v. Board of Education" ==> """
REDIRECT Irving_Adler#Adler_v._Board_of_Education
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Adoptive Couple v. Baby Girl" ==> """
Adoptive Couple v. Baby Girl, 570 U.S. 637 (2013), was a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States that held that several sections of the Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) do not apply to Native American biological fathers who are not custodians of a Native American child. (hereafter cited as Baby Girl). The court held that the procedures required by the ICWA to end parental rights do not apply when the child has never lived with the father.  Additionally, the requirement to make extra efforts to preserve the Native American family also does not apply, nor is the preferred placement of the child in another Native American family required when no other party has formally sought to adopt the child.
In 2009, a couple from South Carolina, Matthew and Melanie Capobianco, sought to adopt a child whose father, Dusten Brown, was an enrolled member of the Cherokee Nation and whose mother, Christina Maldonado, was predominantly Hispanic. Brown contested the adoption on the grounds that he was not properly notified in accordance with the ICWA, and won both in trial court and on appeal to the South Carolina Supreme Court, and in December 2011, the father was given custody of the child.  The case received extensive coverage in the national media, and spurred calls for Congress to review and make amendments to the 1978 law.
In October 2012, the adoptive couple petitioned the Supreme Court of the United States to review the case. In January 2013, the court granted certiorari and heard the case in April. In June, the Supreme Court issued a 5–4 decision, holding that a non-custodial father did not have rights under the ICWA, and sent the case back to the South Carolina courts for further hearings on the issue. In July 2013, the South Carolina trial court finalized the adoption of the child to the adoptive couple, but this was prohibited in August by the Oklahoma Supreme Court. The stay was lifted in September 2013, and the child was turned over to the Capobiancos the same month.
Background
Indian Child Welfare Act
thumb|left|alt=black & white photo of American Indian children in cadet uniforms at Carlisle Indian School|Group of Omaha boys in cadet uniforms, Carlisle Indian School
Prior to the adoption of the ICWA in 1978, Native American children were often forcibly removed from their homes and placed in either Native American boarding schools or in non-Native American foster and adoptive homes.Troy R. Johnson, The State and the American Indian: Who Gets the Indian Child?, 14  197 (1999); Meg Kinnard, Court agrees with return of Native American girl to Oklahoma father, , July 26, 2012; Zug.   Studies conducted in 1969 and 1974 indicated that as many as 25 to 35 percent of tribal children were being removed from their homes, and consequently from tribal culture. Testimony in the House Committee for Interior and Insular Affairs showed that in some states, the per capita rate of Native American children in foster care was nearly 16 times higher than the rate for non-Native Americans., , reprinted in 1978 U.S.C.C.A.N. 7530 (1978). In some cases, the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) paid the states to remove tribal children and to place them with non-Native American families and religious groups.; ,  254 (1996); Peter D'errico, Stolen Generations: Adoption as a Weapon, , Jan. 2, 2013; Zug. Congress determined that if Native American children continued to be removed from Native American homes at this rate, tribal survival would be threatened and stated that tribal stability was as important as the best interests of the child.,  124 (2d ed. 1999); Zug. One of the factors in this judgment was that, because of the differences in culture, what was in the best interest of a non-Indian child was not necessarily what was in the best interest of an Indian child, especially due to the influence of extended families and tribal relationships.,  12–13 (2d ed. 1995)
The Indian Child Welfare ActThe Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978, Nov. 8, 1978,  (codified as amended at . (ICWA) was enacted in 1978 to protect Indian tribes and their children.; Michael C. Snyder, An Overview of the Indian Child Welfare Act, 7  815, 820 (1995); Marcia Zug, Doing What's Best for the Tribe, , Aug. 23, 2012.
The ICWA applies to "Indian children", defined as "any unmarried person who is under age eighteen and is either (a) a member of an Indian tribe or (b) is eligible for membership in an Indian tribe and is the biological child of a member of an Indian tribe." (1988); Snyder, at 821.  Additionally, in the case of a voluntary adoption of an Indian child, the courts must follow specific guidelines for the Indian birth parents to waive their parental rights or have them terminated. The ICWA provides that to relinquish parental rights, an Indian parent must:
 do so in writing,
 do so before a judge,
 who must certify that the parent understood his or her actions,
 understands spoken English or has a translator available, and
 a relinquishment may not be executed prior to ten days after the child's birth. (1988); Snyder, at 836–37.
The Indian parent may also withdraw their consent to an adoption at any time prior to a final order, or within two years of the final order if their consent was obtained through fraud or under duress. (1988); Snyder, at 837–38.  If involuntary termination occurs, it must be "supported by evidence beyond a reasonable doubt." When consent is withdrawn or if the ICWA procedures are not followed, the Indian child is to be immediately returned to the Indian parent. (1988); Snyder, at 837.
Tribal rights are also covered by the act. (1988); Snyder, at 828.  Tribal courts have exclusive jurisdiction for cases arising on Indian reservationsMississippi Band of Choctaw Indians v. Holyfield, 490 U.S. 30, 51–52 (1989);  (1988); Snyder, at 826. and concurrent jurisdiction elsewhere. The case may be removed from a state court to a tribal court at the request of the tribe unless one of the Indian child's parents object. (1988). In any case, the tribe has a right to intervene in the proceeding and to act to protect the tribal rights of the child.
Case history
thumb|200px|right|alt=Great seal of the Cherokee Nation|Great seal of the Cherokee Nation
Dusten Brown is a member of the Cherokee Nation.Walter Olson, The Constitutional Flaws of the Indian Child Welfare Act  (last visited Aug. 5, 2013). Brown served in the United States Army at Fort Sill, Oklahoma. Christina Maldonado was a non-Indian single mother of two. Brown and Maldonado became engaged to be married in December 2008, and Maldonado informed Brown that she was pregnant in January 2009.Adoptive Couple v. Baby Girl, 731 S.E.2d 550, 552–53 (S.C. 2012); Supreme Court Agrees to Consider 'Baby Veronica' Case, , Jan. 4, 2013; The Baby Veronica Case: Information and Resources,  (last visited Jan. 17, 2013) (hereinafter cited as NICWA). On learning that Maldonado was pregnant, Brown began to press her to go ahead and marry him, and refused to provide any financial support until after the two had married.Baby Girl, 570 U.S. ___, slip op. at 4. In May 2009, Maldonado broke off the engagement by text message and cut all communications with Brown.Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 553. In June, Maldonado sent Brown a text message asking if he would rather pay child support or relinquish his parental rights. Brown responded via text message that he relinquished his rights. No child support order was in place at this time. Furthermore, while laws vary from state to state, it is generally impossible for any parent, male or female, to surrender their parental rights without a court hearing that determines the best interest of the child.Melanie G. McCulley, The Male Abortion: The Putative Father's Right to Terminate His Interests in and Obligations to the Unborn Child, 7  1, 29–30 (1998). A father cannot terminate his parental rights by contract, much less by more informal means (such as by text message).McCulley at 28–29.
A few months prior to the baby's birth, Maldonado began to work with an adoption attorney to place the child with Matthew Capobianco and Melanie Duncan Capobianco of James Island, South Carolina.Allyson Bird, James Island Family turns over 2-year-old Girl Following Court Order, , Dec. 31, 2011 (hereinafter cited as Bird, James Island); NICWA. The adoptive couple provided financial support to Maldanado during her pregnancy and attended Baby Girl's birth (in Oklahoma), where the adoptive father cut the umbilical cord.The Supreme Court, 2012 Term — Leading Cases, 127  368 (2013).  Although Oklahoma law requires that an Indian tribe be informed if an Indian child is to be adopted, Maldonado's attorney misspelled Brown's name and provided an incorrect date of birth. As a result, the tribe was not notified about the proposed adoption.Bird, James Island; NICWA.  After receiving permission from Oklahoma authorities, based in part on the identification of the child as just Hispanic rather than both Hispanic and Native American, the Capobiancos took the child to South Carolina.
Four months after the birth of the child and just days before deployment to Iraq, Brown was served with notice of the proposed adoption.NICWA. Brown signed the document, believing that he was relinquishing rights to Maldonado. Brown, once he realized what he had signed, immediately tried to retrieve the document, and after that failed, contacted the Judge Advocate General at Fort Sill for assistance. Seven days after being notified of the proposed adoption by the Capobiancos, Brown obtained a stay of the adoption proceedings under the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act and he deployed with his Army unit to Iraq.
Trial court
The adoption case was heard in Charleston County Family Court in September 2011.Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 556; Kinnard, NICWA.  Brown contested the adoption, and the Cherokee Nation intervened as a party in its own right in the case.Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 555–56.  The court denied the Capobiancos' petition to adopt the child, and ordered that the child be returned to Brown as the biological father.  Under South Carolina law, a father's parental rights terminate when he neither provides pre-birth support nor becomes involved with the child shortly after birth. The court noted, however, that the ICWA preempts state law.Harriot McLeod, Native American Roots Trump in Adoption Battle over Toddler, , Jan. 8, 2012.  On November 25, 2011, the court issued a ruling, holding that:
 the ICWA applied and was not unconstitutional,
 the "Existing Indian Family" exception was inapplicable in this case,
 Brown did not consent to the termination of his parental rights or the adoption of his child, and
 the Capobiancos had failed to show by clear and convincing evidence that Brown's parental rights should be terminated.
On December 31, 2011, the Capobiancos turned the child over to Brown in accordance with the trial court order.Jesse J. Holland, Court: Child Isn't Required to go to Indian Father, , June 25, 2013 (archived from original, Nov. 30, 2013); Bird, James Island; Kinnard; NICWA.  The Capobiancos then appealed to the Supreme Court of South Carolina.Adoptive Couple v. Baby Girl, 398 S.C. 625; 731 S.E.2d 550 (2012)
State Supreme Court
thumb|right|250px|alt=photo of white building with columns|South Carolina Supreme Court building
Chief Justice Jean H. Toal delivered the opinion of the court on July 26, 2012. The five members of the court split 3–2, with Justices Costa M. Pleicones and Donald W. Beatty joining the majority opinion, while Justice John W. Kittredge, joined by Justice Kaye Gorenflo Hearn, dissented.Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 550; Kinnard.  The opinion decided three issues: First, whether the Capobiancos had improperly removed the child from Oklahoma; second, whether state law or the ICWA is determinative of Brown's status as a parent; and third, whether the Capobiancos met their burden of proof to terminate the parental rights of Brown.
Toal noted that the Capobiancos were correct that the removal of the child from Oklahoma did not create an unsafe environment for the child, but they were incorrect on the legal issue. Had Oklahoma been properly notified that this was an Indian child, the Cherokee Nation would have been alerted, and the child's interests as a member of the tribe would have been protected.Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 559; Zug.  She noted that at this point, the case was properly before the court, and proceeded to address the second issue.Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 559.
The Capobiancos argued that it takes more than mere biology to invoke the provisions of the ICWA, and under South Carolina law, a father must not only reside with the mother for the six-month period preceding the birth of the child but also contribute to pregnancy-related expenses in order to have paternity rights. (2010); Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 560. However, the Court determined that the ICWA does not defer to state law, and the trial court properly determined that the ICWA grants Indian fathers greater rights than state law.Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 560.
Toal then turned to the last issue, the trial court's refusal to terminate Brown's parental rights. The Capobiancos could not show that Brown had agreed to consent to the adoption. The court noted that the ICWA set out clear procedural guidelines and the Capobiancos did not comply with those requirements.Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 561.  The Capobiancos also failed to show by clear and convincing evidence that Brown's parental rights should be terminated. Under the ICWA, prior to terminating an Indian parent's rights to the Indian child, the party seeking to terminate parental rights "shall satisfy the court that active efforts have been made to provide remedial services and rehabilitative programs designed to prevent the breakup of the Indian family and that these efforts have proved unsuccessful."Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 562 (citing ); Lacie Lowery, Cherokee Nation Defends Federal Law In Multi-State Child Custody Battle, , Jan. 6, 2012.  The court noted that the Capobiancos made no efforts to comply with this requirement of federal law,Zug. but had actively sought to prevent the father from obtaining custody since the child was four months old.Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 562.
The court then addressed the best interests of the child. Toal said, quoting Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians v. Holyfield,Holyfield, 490 U.S. at 30. "Where an Indian child's best interests are at stake, our inquiry into that child's best interests must also account for his or her status as an Indian, and therefore, we must also inquire into whether the placement is in the best interests of the Indian child,"Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 565 (emphasis in original); Kinnard. that this was "based on the fundamental assumption that it is in the Indian child's best interest that its relationship to the tribe be protected."Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 565 (citing Holyfield, 490 U.S. at 50, n. 24).  Toal stated that the best interest of the child was to be with her father, which also preserved her tribal affiliation.Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 565.
Finally, Toal addressed the placement requirements of the ICWA, which requires that placement preference be given, in this order, to: 1) another member of the child's family, 2) another member of the child's tribe, and 3) another Indian family.; Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 566.  The court stated that neither Maldonado nor the Capobiancos had intended to comply with the statute, and that the Capobiancos could not thereby claim that the breaking of the bond formed by the child with the Capobiancos is grounds to ignore the statute.Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 566.
The court affirmed the decision of the Charleston County Family Court in returning the Indian child to her father, and reiterated that the ICWA preempts state law in the termination of parental rights for Indian parents.Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 567; Zug.
Dissent
Justice John W. Kittredge, joined by Justice Kaye G. Hearn, dissented.Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 567 (Kittredge, dissenting).  Kittredge argued that the state standards for best interest of the child should trump those of the ICWA, and concluded that the trial court judge erred in her findings of fact.Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 568 (Kittredge, dissenting).  He noted that Brown had an income of approximately $23,000 in 2010, had paid nothing to assist with pre-birth expenses, and had indicated that he did not intend to do so.Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 569 n.34 (Kittredge, dissenting).  In addition, Kittredge stated that the record reflected that Maldonado informed both the adoption agency and the adoption attorney of the child's Cherokee heritage, but the notification to the tribe did not have the correct identifying information for the father.Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 570 (Kittredge, dissenting).  At the child's birth, the Capobiancos were present, and Matt Capobianco cut the umbilical cord.Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 571 (Kittredge, dissenting).
Kittredge then evaluated the ICWA, noting that South Carolina law did not allow a father in Brown's position to contest an adoption. Brown acknowledged paternity, and a DNA test conclusively proved that he was the biological father.Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 573–74 (Kittredge, dissenting).  Because Brown met the definition of an Indian parent, the ICWA does apply to the case.Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 574–75 (Kittredge, dissenting).  Even if Brown had not acknowledged paternity, the child was still an Indian and the federal law would apply.Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 575 (Kittredge, dissenting).  However, Kittredge then stated that even though the ICWA applied, Congress did not intend the ICWA to replace state law with regard to a child's best interests.
Kittredge concluded that Brown had "abandoned" his child and should therefore not be allowed to contest the adoption.Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 574 (Kittredge, dissenting).  He noted that the Capobiancos provided the child with a loving and stable home. Finally, he would have ruled that termination of Brown's parental rights was in the best interest of the child, and would have reversed the decision of the trial court.Adoptive Couple, 731 S.E.2d at 576–79 (Kittredge, dissenting); Kinnard.
Supreme Court
Arguments
After the South Carolina Supreme Court declined to rehear the case, the Capobiancos filed a petition with the Supreme Court of the United States for a writ of certiorari. Seven entities filed amici curiae briefs with the Supreme Court in support of hearing the case. This included amici briefs by two former Solicitors General of the United States, Paul Clement on behalf of the guardian ad litem, and Greg Garre on behalf of the birth mother, suggesting that the Equal Protection Clause requires applying strict scrutiny to ICWA's race-based placement preferences.Katie Eyer, Constitutional Colorblindness and the Family, 162  537 (2014). The American Academy of Adoption Attorneys, the National Council for Adoption, the California State Association of Counties and the Center for Adoption Policy were also among those that submitted briefs.
On January 4, 2013, the Court granted certiorari and agreed to hear the case. This was only the second time that a case involving the ICWA had been granted review by the U.S. Supreme Court, Holyfield being the first.Bird, Broken Home.  On April 1, 2013, the court decided to allow some of the amici to participate in oral argument and divided the time allowed for oral argument as follows: 20 minutes for petitioners, 10 minutes for respondent Guardian ad Litem, 20 minutes for respondent Birth Father, and 10 minutes for the Solicitor General. Brown was represented by Charles Rothfeld, who was a director at the Yale Law School Supreme Court Clinic and Supreme Court litigator with the Washington, D.C., office of the international law firm Mayer Brown. The Cherokee Nation was represented by Carter Phillips of Sidley Austin, LLP. The Capobiancos were represented by Lisa Blatt and Mark Fiddler. Blatt headed the Appellate and Supreme Court practice with international law firm Arnold & Porter. Fiddler was a registered Native American attorney and the founder of the Indian Child Welfare Law Center.Jon Tevlin, Adoption case from long ago brings lessons for one now, " Sept. 5, 2012.   At oral arguments on April 16, U.S. Deputy Solicitor General Edwin Kneedler also appeared, as a friend of the Birth Father.Adoptive Couple v. Baby Girl,  (last visited September 25, 2016).
The issues presented to the court were "(1) Whether a non-custodial parent can invoke the Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978 (ICWA), 25 U.S.C. §§ 1901–63, to block an adoption voluntarily and lawfully initiated by a non-Indian parent under state law; and (2) whether ICWA defines "parent" in 25 U.S.C. § 1903(9) to include an unwed biological father who has not complied with state law rules to attain legal status as a parent."
Three parties filed merit briefs: the Capobiancos as petitioners, and both Brown and the Cherokee Nation as respondents. 32 different amici curiae briefs were filed arguing the merits of the case. Nine were in favor of reversal and the remainder, including the United States Department of Justice, supported the respondents generally and/or affirmation.Preview of United States Supreme Court Cases: 12-399,  (last visited June 4, 2013).
Opinion of the Court
thumb|right|200px|alt=Justice Samuel Alito|Justice Samuel Alito, author of the majority opinion On June 25, the Court reversed and remanded, with Justice Samuel Alito writing for the five justice majority.  Alito began by observing that Baby Girl "is classified as an Indian because she is 1.2% (3/256) Cherokee."Kathleena Kruck, Note, The Indian Child Welfare Act's Waning Power After Adoptive Couple v. Baby Girl, 109  445 (2015).  Alito went on to reject the lower court's reading of the ICWA, reasoning it would discourage adoptive couples and leave "vulnerable Indian children at a unique disadvantage in finding a permanent and loving home."
Alito noted that three provisions of the ICWA were relevant to the case, § 1912(f), § 1912(d), and § 1915(a).Baby Girl, 570 U.S. ___, slip op. at 3. He also noted it is undisputed under South Carolina law that Brown would not be able to object to the adoption.Baby Girl, 570 U.S. ___, slip op. at 6.  Alito stated that the heightened standard required under § 1912(f) does not apply when the parent in question never had custody of the child, focusing on the phrase "continued custody" in the statute.Baby Girl, 570 U.S. ___, slip op. at 6; Andrew Cohan, What the Court's 'Baby Veronica' Ruling Means for Fathers and Native Americans, , June 25, 2013; Holland.  Alito continued that  § 1912(d) does not require remedial efforts be made when the parent did not have custody. Since Brown never had either physical or legal custody, no remedial efforts were required.Baby Girl, 570 U.S. ___, slip op. at 8; Holland.  Finally, § 1915(a) does not prevent a non-Indian couple from adopting when no preferred individuals or entities have formally sought to adopt the child.Baby Girl, 570 U.S. ___, slip op. at 9–10; Holland.  To find otherwise, Alito concluded, would allow Brown to "play his ICWA trump card at the eleventh hour to override the mother's decision and the child's best interests."
Concurring opinions
Justice Thomas
Justice Clarence Thomas issued a concurring opinion. Thomas believed that the canon of constitutional avoidance required the outcome reached by the majority.  Contending that there was no constitutional authority for Congress to enact the ICWA, Thomas disagreed with the Court's precedents holding Congress has "plenary power" over Indian affairs and read the Indian Commerce Clause as applying to only trade relations with tribes.Gregory Ablavsky, Beyond the Indian Commerce Clause, 124  1012 (2015).  Since the application of the ICWA to the adoption would be unconstitutional,Cohan. and the result of the majority avoids this issue, Thomas concurred with the majority.
Justice Breyer
Justice Stephen Breyer also issued a very short concurring opinion. Breyer stated that since the ICWA does not address how to treat absentee fathers, the Court's decision may be too broad.  He also noted that the preferential placement order required under § 1915(a) could be changed by the tribe under § 1915(c) and a tribe could, by resolution, grant the absentee father a place in preferential placement.
Dissenting opinions
thumb|left|150px|alt=Justice Sonia Sotomayor|Justice Sonia Sotomayor, author of a dissenting opinion
Justice Scalia
Justice Antonin Scalia issued a very short dissenting opinion. Scalia noted that, while he joined Sotomayor's dissent, he disagreed with her suggestion that here "literalness may strangle meaning". He goes on to opine the phrase "continued custody" could refer to "custody in the future" – in other words, even if the biological father had no custody of the child in the past, he could have it in the future, and therefore USC § 1912(f) would still apply. Scalia also noted that biological parents also had legal rights and that there was no reason in law or policy to dilute those rights.
Justice Sotomayor
Justice Sonia Sotomayor, joined by Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Elena Kagan, and, in part, Scalia, dissented from the majority opinion. Noting that the majority seemed to consider the Indian placement preference "unwise", she wrote this did not license the Court "to interpret a statute with a view to averting the very consequences Congress expressly stated it was trying to bring about."Jessica Di Palma, Note, Adoptive Couple v. Baby Girl: The Supreme Court's Distorted Interpretation Of The Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978,  (2014).
Sotomayor reasoned that the majority ignored ICWA's logical structure and adopted a "textually backward reading" by starting its analysis with the final clause of § 1912(f). Sotomayor stated that "continued custody" in § 1912(f) is "most sensibly read to refer generally to the continuation of the parent-child relationship that an ICWA "parent" has with his or her child." She also stated that even a non-custodial father-child relationship was a "family" for the purposes of § 1912(d) and therefore efforts needed to be made to prevent its breakup. She stated that the majority turned the law "upside down"Holland. to reach their result. Rather than granting Indian birth fathers an "undeserved windfall", Sotomayor reasoned Congress had simply provided the rights birth fathers already enjoyed in several states. By instead deferring to each state's laws, Sotomayor thinks the majority read ICWA as "an illogical piecemeal scheme".
Responding to the majority's suggestion that its reading avoids "equal protection concerns", Sotomayor noted that the Court's precedents have long held that Indian tribal membership is not an impermissible racial classification.  She goes on to criticize the "majority's repeated, analytically unnecessary references" to the makeup of Baby Girl's ancestry.Adoptive Couple v. Baby Girl, 133 S. Ct. 2552, 2584 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting). Finally, Sotomayor stated that the majority ignored the primary purpose of the ICWA in its interpretation of § 1915(a), and noted that there was nothing to prevent the grandparents from filing a petition to adopt the child. She noted that nothing in the opinion mandated the return of the child to the Capobiancos.
Subsequent developments
Media coverage
Prior to Supreme Court decision
Coverage in the mainstream media was extensive. Charleston's Post and Courier ran a series of articles on the case,Bird, James Island. and the news was picked up by other media outlets. These included local television stations,Eric Egan, Couple Will Fight for Adopted Daughter's Return, , Jan. 2, 2012. distant television stations,Adoption Case Of Oklahoma Girl Causing Outrage , , Jan. 10, 2012; Keri Gift, Cherokee Adoption Controversy, Father Issues Statement , , Jan. 17, 2012. Cable News Network (CNN),George Howell & Greg Botelho, Indian Family Protection Law Central to Emotional Custody Battle, , Jan. 8, 2012. Fox News Channel,"Meghan Kelly, "Young girl taken by biological father 2 years after adoption" national magazines, U.S. News,Wolf, Richard, U.S. News, "The case of 'Baby Veronica' create Supreme Court divide," April 17, 2013. and The New York Times.Adam Liptak, Case Pits Adoptive Parents Against Tribal Rights, , Dec. 24, 2012.  Additionally, Dr. Phil McGraw featured the Capobiancos on his television show in an episode that aired on October 18, 2012.Adoption Controversy: Battle over Baby Veronica, , Oct. 18, 2012.  The show immediately sparked controversy, with some Indian newspapers and internet news sources calling for a boycott of his show due to what they alleged was a one-sided attack on Native Americans.Donna Ennis, Opinion, The Stealing of Our American Indian Children, , Oct. 19, 2012; Viewers Respond to Dr. Phil Episode About Baby Veronica Custody Battle: Boycott the Anti-Native American Dr. Phil Show, , Oct. 19, 2012.  It has also been alleged that the mainstream media has disseminated incorrect and false information that portrayed the Capobiancos in a good light and Brown in a bad light.
Terry Cross of the National Indian Child Welfare Association (NICWA) commented that despite all the negative press, the ICWA was needed to protect Indian children from having their tribal rights taken from them.  He noted that a failure to comply with the ICWA was what caused the controversy in the case.Cross. The author of the ICWA, Senator Jim Abourezk, initially stated that this is "something totally different than what we intended at the time"Allyson Bird, Decades Old Federal Act Removes 2-Year-Old Girl From the Only Family She's Known, , Jan. 8, 2012. but two weeks later said that the main intent of the law was to ensure that tribes had an opportunity to sign off on the adoption of tribal children.Paluka.
Post-opinion
After the Supreme Court decision, most media outlets stated that the Capobiancos won the case, although some correctly noted that they did not gain custody, nor receive an order of adoption.Jonathan Stempel, Supreme Court rule for couple over baby girl's adoption, , June 25, 2013; Josh Voorhees, Justice Alito Just Wrote the Next Chapter in One of the Best RadioLab Episodes Ever , June 25, 2013.  Some noted that even with the decision, the return of the child to the Capobiancos was not "foreordained" and that the case had to return to South Carolina state courts for additional hearings.Sam Spence, U.S. Supreme Court reverses S.C. court in Adoptive Couple v. Baby Girl, siding with James Island couple, , June 25, 2013.
Social media
The case received a great deal of coverage in social media.Bryan.  A friend of Melanie Duncan Capobianco, Jessica Munday, is a publicist who had previously done contracted work for Melanie Duncan's employer MST Services [Multisystemic Therapy] in South Carolina.MST – In the Loop a quarterly e-newsletter for MST professionals , Summer 2009.  Munday started a "Save Veronica" campaign aimed at gathering grassroots support for the couple's efforts to overturn both the Charleston Family Court and the South Carolina Supreme Court decisions.Michael Overall, Baby Veronica Adoption Case Lobbyists Move to Congress , , July 11, 2012.  Munday, who runs the marketing firm Trio Solutions Inc. [TRIO] in Mount Pleasant, South Carolina, is responsible for making the case well known according to at least one source.Allyson Bird, Broken Home: The Saving Veronica Story, , (hereinafter cited as Bird, Broken Home).  Responses from the Native American community pointed out the irony in the campaign, with an editorial cartoon depicting "Veronica" puzzling over a campaign to save her (an Indian child) from other Indians.  In addition, a movement supporting Dusten Brown and the Cherokee, "Standing Our Ground," said that the Baby Veronica case has become a strong example of systemic problems in the adoption industry and has pushed for adoption reform.  Stand Our Ground started on Facebook then swelled in protests and rallies across several states.Michael Overall, Group to push for adoption reforms, , Nov. 4, 2013.
Legal developments
Maldonado filed suit in the South Carolina U.S. District Court on July 24, 2013, asking that the ICWA be declared unconstitutional.Both of Veronica Brown's biological parents pursue separate hearings in the federal court system, , Aug. 1, 2013, at 1. On July 31, 2013, the Capobiancos legally adopted the child.Suzette Brewer, The Gloves Come Off: Civil Rights Suit Filed as Adoption of Veronica Finalized , , Aug. 1, 2013. Concurrently with the South Carolina court finalizing the adoption, the Native American Rights Fund filed a civil rights lawsuit in U.S. District Court on behalf of the child, alleging that her rights had been violated by the South Carolina court. In addition, a South Carolina court order cannot be enforced in Oklahoma without the agreement of an Oklahoma court, and Brown stated that he would fight the order in Oklahoma, with the aid of the Cherokee Nation.Andrew Knapp, Veronica's father vows not to comply with adoption order that harms daughter , July 31, 2013. Prior to the South Carolina adoption being finalized, the Cherokee Nation District Court granted temporary guardianship to Brown's wife and parents while Brown was in military training out of state.Michael Overall, Baby Veronica's biological family: Court fight will move to Oklahoma, , Aug. 6, 2013 (archived from original, Sept. 21, 2013); Michael Overall, Baby Veronica's family pins hopes on tribal, state courts, , Aug. 7, 2013 (archived from original, Sept. 21, 2013). At the same time, a judge in South Carolina ordered Brown to immediately turn over the child to the Capobiancos, which representatives of the Cherokee Nation said was impossible while Brown was performing his military duties.Overall, Baby Veronica's biological family.
On August 30, 2013, the Oklahoma Supreme Court stayed an order of a district court that the child be immediately be transferred from the custody of Brown to the Capobiancos.Baby Veronica' to Stay With Birth Father for Now: Oklahoma High Court, , Sept. 3, 2013. The Capobiancos had court-ordered visits with the girl in Oklahoma, while the Brown family celebrated the girl's fourth birthday at a party on September 15. A court-ordered mediation hearing took place between the Browns and the Capobiancos between September 16 and September 20, but failed to produce a resolution. The Oklahoma Supreme Court lifted its stay of the district court order on September 23, 2013, clearing the way for custody of the child to be returned to the Capobiancos. The girl was turned over to her adoptive parents on the evening of September 23, 2013.Michael Overall, Adoptive parents take custody of Veronica from biological father, , Sept. 23, 2013 (archived from original, Sept. 27, 2013). On September 25, 2013, the Charleston County Family Court began contempt proceedings against Brown and the Cherokee Nation for withholding Veronica in the face of the South Carolina adoption decree, which was finalized in July. Both parties faced potential financial sanctions that could include defraying living and legal expenses for the Capobiancos during the period that Brown and the Cherokee Nation were allegedly in contempt of court.Andrew Knapp, Financial sanctions against Veronica's birth father, tribe considered as attorney calls for truce, , Sept. 25, 2013.  In October 2013, Brown announced that he was dropping his appeals to give his daughter a chance at a normal life.Michael Overall, Baby Veronica case: Dusten Brown to stop custody fight for Veronica, , Oct. 10, 2013.
In November 2013, Matt and Melanie Capobianco filed a lawsuit in Nowata County, Oklahoma, demanding more than $1 million in court costs, accrued during their custody battle. The lawsuit is against Veronica's biological father, Dusten Brown, and the Cherokee Nation.Adoptive Parents Sue Cherokee Nation, Dusten Brown For More Than $1M, , Nov. 5, 2013.  The Cherokee Nation issued a forceful response, saying "it is not responsible for paying the fees and costs for the Capobiancos because of its Eleventh Amendment sovereign immunity from suits without its express consent."  The Cherokees also "made clear the tribe's displeasure with the Capobianco's very public media appearances, interviews and various fundraising schemes during the same time in which all the parties were under statutory gag order in South Carolina".Suzette Brewer, Cherokee Nation Files Forceful Response to Capobiancos' $1 Million Attorneys' Fees Suit, , Nov. 23, 2013.
 Academic and legal scholarship 
After the Supreme Court case was decided, children's rights scholars applauded the decision for eliminating at least a portion of ICWA's overreach, which they view as a reflection of the statute's explicit treatment of children as a "tribal resource" rather than as persons. Professor James Dwyer observed that "ICWA’s scope is grossly excessive, treating many children as `Indian children' who have little or no connection with any Native American tribe, little or nothing to gain by being handed over to tribal authorities or tribal members, and much to lose by being branded Indian children."James G. Dwyer, Adoptive Couple v. Baby Girl: Erasing the Last Vestiges of Human Property, 93 B.U. L. Rev. Annex 51 (2013) Dwyer also noted the inherent illogic of invoking an infant's "culture" as a reason for applying a different set of laws (ICWA) to her life when her ancestry is overwhelmingly from cultures other than that to which those laws are connected, an illogic (and insult to those other cultures) that critics of the Supreme Court's decision entirely avoid addressing.
Legal scholars who promote tribal interests, on the other hand, critiqued the case as a missed opportunity to rectify long-standing issues of Indian child removal. Bethany R. Berger noted that the majority's analysis relied on inaccurate claims about Brown's relationship to the child, noting that records indicate Brown "sought to parent his daughter from the moment he learned his fiancee was pregnant" and distorted the fact that Brown was reportedly "1/8 Cherokee," making Baby Girl "1/16 Cherokee" despite repeated claims during oral arguments and in the majority opinion that baby girl was "3/256 Cherokee."
Marcia A. Yablon-Zug critiqued the decision for significantly eroding Indigenous protections under federal Indian law, and Dustin C. Jones wrote that the decision "unleash[ed] a new form of invidious hostility toward Native Americans... creat[ing] of two classes of Native American parents," one group which includes "those who remain in stereotypical, Anglo-American marital relationships" and receive full protections under ICWA, and a second "amorphous group of parents deemed to have forfeited the parental rights deserving protection under the ICWA merely because of their absence" whether absent from their own choice and negligence or due to happenstance occurrences outside of their control.
References
Footnotes
Notes
External links
 Radiolab: Adoptive Couple v. Baby Girl (42 min) An episode of Radiolab
Category:United States court cases involving the Cherokee Nation
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:South Carolina law
Category:Adoption law in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Trials regarding custody of children
"""

From "Aetna Health Inc. v. Davila" ==> """
Aetna Health Inc. v. Davila, 542 U.S. 200 (2004), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court limited the scope of the Texas Healthcare Liability Act (THCLA). The effective result of this decision was that the THCLA, which held Case Management and Utilization Review decisions by Managed Care entities like CIGNA and Aetna to a legal duty of care according to the laws of The State of Texas could not be enforced in the case of Health Benefit plans provided through private employers, because the Texas statute allowed compensatory or punitive damages to redress losses or deter future transgressions, which were not available under ERISA § 1132. The ruling still allows the State of Texas to enforce the THCLA in the case of Government-sponsored (Medicare, Medicaid, Federal, State, Municipal Employee, etc., Church-sponsored, or Individual Health Plan Policies (High-deductible individual policies, self-pay, any insurance not subsidised by a Private Employer), which are saved from preemption by ERISA. The history that allows these Private and Self-Pay Insurance to be saved dates to the "Interstate Commerce" power that was given the federal Government by the Supreme Court. ERISA, enacted in 1974, relied on the "Interstate Commerce" rule to allow federal jurisdiction over private employers, based on the need of private employers to follow a single set of paperwork and rules for pensions and other employee benefit plans where employers had employees in multiple states. Except for private employer plans, insurance can be regulated by the individual states, and Managed Care entities making medical decisions can be held accountable for those decisions if negligence is involved, as allowed by the Texas Healthcare Liability Act.
Cigna Healthcare of Texas, Inc. v. Calad
CIGNA v. Calad was a Supreme Court of the United States appeal and ruling, where CIGNA Healthcare, Inc. challenged a United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit ruling in favor of Mrs. Ruby Calad, who was insured under her husband's employer's self-funded medical insurance plan in the State of Texas. This was a Landmark Supreme Court Case.
The facts that had been established and were in the record for purposes of the Supreme Court decision were that Mrs. Calad had had a hysterectomy in a CIGNA-approved Hospital, and as Administrator of Mr. Calad's employer's health plan, a CIGNA nurse had preapproved 1 night's hospital stay for the procedure. Mrs. Calad was discharged home the day following the surgery, despite the fact the surgeon who performed the surgery felt that Mrs. Calad needed more time in the hospital to convalesce from the surgery. Mrs. Calad, following discharge, experienced post-surgery complications, for which she had to be emergently readmitted to the hospital. Ms Calad had sued CIGNA for damages. The District Court Judge (where ERISA cases must be tried) had ruled against Calad based on the Judge-made-law of ERISA, being beholden to Higher Court Decisions, awarding no monetary damages, as monetary damages are not one of the 3 so-called "Equitable Remedies" allowed by ERISA for redress for loss resulting from medical-related negligence when the insurance is underwritten in some way by a private employer, as was the plan of Mr. Calad.
Mr. Calad's company medical plan was funded by his private employer but "Administered" by CIGNA, in an "HMO"-type option, which was on its face one of the most advantageous of several plans offered by Mr. Calad's employer, with the lowest monthly premiums and the lowest co-pays for medical services.
Mrs. Calad appealed the US District Court ruling to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, who heard the case and overturned the lower court's ruling and remanded the case back to the Texas State Court for trial, where it could be tried in light of the US Appellate Court ruling and interpretation, and a judge or jury would be allowed to determine "collateral damages," i.e. monetary award, relief that may be sought in a Court of Law but not in a Court of Equity.
The decision to remand had been informed by the fact that Texas had just enacted a law allowing 3rd-party review of Managed Care decisions to determine whether the decision had been negligent, and also an analysis by the 5th Circuit Court of recent Supreme Court ERISA-related rulings that had dated back to a Landmark Supreme Court ERISA ruling in the case of Pilot Life Ins. Co. v. Dedeaux.
Because of their similarity, both the CIGNA appeal and the Aetna appeal were argued before the Supreme Court together, determining the reach that Pilot v. Life might have on HMOs, with the 5th Circuit Court possibly having reversed prior ERISA-related US Supreme Court decisions. Making arguments before the Court included lawyers for CIGNA and Aetna, a lawyer arguing on behalf of the State of Texas, and some "Friend of the Court" arguments.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court ruled that Mr. Davila's and Ms. Calad's  (the Respondents')  state of Texas Causes of Action, both involving  Utilization Review decisions by Managed Care entities (in this case CIGNA and Aetna) that were alleged to adversely affect patient care,  where in both cases Utilization review decisions contradicted the advice of the Respondents' personal physicians),  fell within ERISA § 1132(a)(1)(B). The Court therefore ruled these complaints were completely pre-empted by ERISA § 1132 and Removable to Federal District Court, therefore giving Federal Court Jurisdiction  over resolution of the Complaints and defining ERISA as the law to be followed, superseding the applicable Texas statute (the THCLS). Consequently, the limited so-called "Equitable Remedies" available under ERISA § 1132 must be the exclusive remedies available to redress damage alleged to be suffered as a result of these Managed Care Utilization Review decisions.
The Supreme Court decision reversed a decision of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 5th Circuit that ERISA did not preempt the state causes of action and could be Remanded to Texas State Court to be tried there under Texas law.
Analysis
The ruling was informed largely by ERISA judicial precedent (judge-made, or common law), as established early in ERISA's judicial history, especially Pilot Life v. Dedeaux, 1987. In the latter case, the language of ERISA and other evidence of congressional intent, including ERISA's legislative history; the expansive interpretation of ERISA's preemption clause (i.e. ERISA supersedes state laws that "relate to" private employer-sponsored benefit plans, with no specific guidance in the wording of the clause as to how Congress intended "relate to" to be interpreted); coupled with ERISA's enforcement scheme, which includes Equitable Remedies but not Legal Remedies, led to the conclusion that state law Causes of action for legal remedies under Mississippi common law for Bad faith denial of insurance claims, including compensatory and punitive damages, were not allowed by ERISA.
As Pilot Life challenged a disability insurance claim denial, the equitable remedies that are provided by ERISA might still have been available to Mr. Dedeaux despite this ruling, as ERISA provides several equitable Injunctive remedies to challenge denials of benefit claims, such mandating that the wrongfully denied benefit be provided.
The biggest distinguishing factor from Pilot Life in the case of "CIGNA v. Calad" was the fact that it was too late for ERISA's powerful injunctive remedies to benefit the Respondents, who had already suffered damages for which equitable relief could not compensate them for their loss or suffering.
Essentially, this Supreme Court decision placed the Respondents' complaints, in the status known as "Failure to state a claim upon which relief could be granted" and had to be dismissed on their faces. The facts of the case were never elucidated either by discovery or trial, but the cases were dismissed by motion, as a matter of law, whereby even examining the facts in the most favorable light in favor of the Respondents, the relief they were seeking could not be granted.
As an example,  if the Utilization review nurse had negligently applied the discharge protocol for hemorrhoidectomy rather than  Total Abdominal Hysterectomy,  and if Calad had died from complications resulting from the treatment decision to treat her on an outpatient basis with discharge instructions after only 1 day of hospitalization,  the case would still have had to be dismissed;  the law does not recognize monetary damages for negligent actions in Managed Care "administration" of Employer Medical Benefit Plans but does acknowledge that state malpractice laws do apply to treating physicians deciding or administrating the course of a patient's care.
CIGNA and Aetna both pointed out in oral arguments what has been referred to in ERISA's judicial history as the  "Panoply"  of remedies that Calad and Davila might have evoked under ERISA to prevent the damage suffered, to include appeals of the adverse decisions, judicial  Injunction  to compel Utilization Review to approve treatment,  and a new Texas law that allowed for independent arbitration over Managed Care Utilization Review decisions based on Medical necessity.
Under the concepts of torts under Anglo-American Common Law, these points might best be described as a defense of contributory negligence. In other words, Ms Calad and Mr. Davila might have prevented the damage to their person for which they are allowed no monetary damages in court if they had properly enforced their ERISA or THCLA rights against CIGNA and Aetna to prevent the injury from happening. The fact that ERISA had failed to prevent the harm, however, and the fact that it was ruled by the Supreme Court that neither CIGNA nor Aetna could owe monetary damages for their contribution to the harm done, shows that there is a need for change, either in ERISA itself by Congress or by Supreme Court common law.
Looking forward
Perhaps future decisional law following this Supreme Court ruling might inform future laws to ensure that patients not simply  "have"  legal rights under ERISA to challenge  Managed Care  Utilization review  decisions, but to put the burden on the Managed Care entities themselves to make sure patients are aware of them and have the opportunity to invoke them before life,  safety,  or health-threatening medical treatment choices governed by Managed Care can cause irreparable damage or death for which ERISA provides no  Remedy.  Such law might be guided by the wording of the statute,  that a patient must be "afforded" the opportunity for full and fair review of benefit claim denial or adverse Utilization review decisions.
As in "Miranda", which involves a similar Fifth Amendment constitutional question of being deprived of Life, Liberty, or Property without Due process of law, "affording the opportunity" for appeal might be enforced not only by the existence of a such statutory rights but by ensuring that the patients are informed of those rights and are given the reasonable opportunity to invoke them.
The ERISA claims procedure laws detailed by the Secretary of Labor (29 CFR 2560.503-1) require written notice for any "Adverse Determination" such as a Utilization review decision not to extend an approved course of treatment, and must provide a reasonable opportunity for a claimant or a representative (in Calad's case, her treating physician) an opportunity to appeal the decision in a timeframe appropriate to the urgency of the situation—in Calad's case, prior to her discharge. These regulations also require that the claims procedure not "contain any provision, and are not administered in a way, that unduly inhibits or hampers the initiation or processing of claims for benefits; a provision or practice that requires payment of a fee or costs as a condition to making a claim or to appealing an adverse benefit determination would be considered to unduly inhibit the initiation and processing of claims for benefits." For example, requiring a patient to agree to pay for a potentially costly medical treatment up front out of pocket to preserve the right to challenge the adverse determination later in court, with no guarantee that the challenge would be successful, and with a high risk of incurring expensive legal costs as well, would be considered "hampering the initiation or processing of claims for benefits", for obvious reasons.
Unfortunately, the claims procedure laws are not always followed,  in part because the only recourse set forth by these laws for failure to provide such an appeal process is the right for the patient to consider the appeals process to be exhausted and bring a Civil action under ERISA.   Such an action might in theory be applied for patients like Calad if the patient had a lawyer prepared to file an emergency  ex parte  Motion  for a  Temporary restraining order  in US District Court,  perhaps even by phone to a  Magistrate,  to compel the Utilization review nurse to approve treatment to protect the patient from imminent danger to life or health that might occur from discharging the patient against medical advice.
As lower Courts are bound by the Precedents of higher Courts, as is the Supreme Court bound in large part to its own precedents, there has been great frustrations by the Courts in lawsuits brought by Plaintiffs who under state common law would be entitled to monetary relief for damages or death suffered as a result of Utilization review nurses breaching a Duty of care or the laws of the practice of Medicine by prescribing the treatment plan for a Diagnosis, as in Calad's case, as complex as "status post total abdominal hysterectomy with vaginal, bladder, and bowel repair", presumptively, before the surgery is even performed, as 1 day of inpatient care with 8 weeks of outpatient care, on the basis of a discharge protocol to be followed that hinges not on the Clinical judgment of the physician who performed the surgery but the single question, "were there any Complications of the procedure?"
This frustration was well stated by Justice Becker of the US Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit in his concurring opinion in Defelice v. Aetna, et al., a frustration succinctly summarized in his quote from a previous decision in "Andrews-Clarke v. Travelers Ins. Co.," (a Complaint by a widow for the death of her husband as a consequence of a Managed Care Utilization review decision that cut short her husband's physician's recommended in-hospital treatment plan) as follows:
Also, Supreme Court Justice Ginsburg, in her concurring opinion in Aetna and CIGNA, et. al in which Justice Breyer joined, expressed the sentiments held by many that either Congress or the Courts revisit the law as currently enforced by statute and precedent:
References
 Ruger, Theodore W., The Supreme Court Federalizes Managed Care Liability (2004) JOURNAL OF LAW, MEDINCE AND ETHICS
External links
 Section $1132, ERISA Civil Enforcement
 Pilot Life Insurance v. Dedeaux Supreme Court case
 Aetna Health Inc. ERISA preempts the THCLA by Kim Rankin
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:Aetna
"""

From "Afroyim v. Rusk" ==> """
thumb|right|upright|A 1961 letter from the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service reporting Beys Afroyim's loss of citizenship
Afroyim v. Rusk, 387 U.S. 253 (1967), was a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States, which ruled that citizens of the United States may not be deprived of their citizenship involuntarily.. Dionisopoulos (1970–71), p. 235. "In [Afroyim v. Rusk] the Court declared that American citizenship is an absolute constitutional right. Therefore, the Government of the United States may not forcibly deprive an American of his nationality." The U.S. government had attempted to revoke the citizenship of Beys Afroyim, a man born in Poland, because he had cast a vote in an Israeli election after becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen. The Supreme Court decided that Afroyim's right to retain his citizenship was guaranteed by the Citizenship Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution. In so doing, the Court struck down a federal law mandating loss of U.S. citizenship for voting in a foreign election—thereby overruling one of its own precedents, Perez v. Brownell (1958), in which it had upheld loss of citizenship under similar circumstances less than a decade earlier.
The Afroyim decision opened the way for a wider acceptance of dual (or multiple) citizenship in United States law.Spiro (2005), p. 147. "Plural citizenship ... may come to be the mark of globalization, as state-based allegiances today diminish in importance relative to other affiliations. The Supreme Court's 1967 decision in Afroyim v. Rusk supplies an early glimpse of the transition.... Afroyim opened the door to the maintenance of multiple active national ties. It is to Afroyim that one can trace the genesis of the late modern edition of American citizenship, a version less jealous of alternative attachments." The Bancroft Treaties—a series of agreements between the United States and other nations which had sought to limit dual citizenship following naturalization—were eventually abandoned after the Carter administration concluded that Afroyim and other Supreme Court decisions had rendered them unenforceable.
The impact of Afroyim v. Rusk was narrowed by a later case, Rogers v. Bellei (1971), in which the Court determined that the Fourteenth Amendment safeguarded citizenship only when a person was born or naturalized in the United States, and that Congress retained authority to regulate the citizenship status of a person who was born outside the United States to an American parent. However, the specific law at issue in Rogers v. Bellei—a requirement for a minimum period of U.S. residence that Bellei had failed to satisfy—was repealed by Congress in 1978.  As a consequence of revised policies adopted in 1990 by the United States Department of State, it is now (in the words of one expert) "virtually impossible to lose American citizenship without formally and expressly renouncing it."
 Background 
 Early history of United States citizenship law 
Citizenship in the United States has historically been acquired in one of three ways: by birth in the United States (jus soli, "right of the soil");"Acquisition of U.S. Citizenship by Birth in the United States". Foreign Affairs Manual, vol. 8 (8 FAM), sec. 301.1-1.a. United States Department of State. June 27, 2018. by birth outside the United States to an American parent (jus sanguinis, "right of the blood");U.S. citizenship via jus sanguinis was confirmed by Congress in the Naturalization Act of 1790—"An Act to establish an [sic] uniform Rule of Naturalization", 1st Cong., Sess. II, Chap. 3; 1 Stat. 103; March 26, 1790. or by immigration to the United States followed by naturalization.The Naturalization Act of 1790 provided that "any alien, being a free white person, who shall have resided within the limits and under the jurisdiction of the United States for the term of two years, may be admitted to become a citizen thereof".
In 1857, the Supreme Court held in Dred Scott v. SandfordDred Scott v. Sandford, . that African slaves, former slaves, and their descendants were not eligible to be citizens. After the Civil War (1861–65) and the resulting abolition of slavery in the United States, steps were taken to grant citizenship to the freed slaves. Congress first enacted the Civil Rights Act of 1866, which included a clause declaring "all persons born in the United States and not subject to any foreign power" to be citizens.Civil Rights Act of 1866 Even as the Civil Rights Act was being debated in Congress, its opponents argued that the citizenship provision was unconstitutional. In light of this concern, as well as to protect the new grant of citizenship for former slaves from being repealed by a later Congress,United States v. Wong Kim Ark, . "The same Congress, shortly afterwards, evidently thinking it unwise, and perhaps unsafe, to leave so important a declaration of rights to depend upon an ordinary act of legislation, which might be repealed by any subsequent Congress, framed the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution...." the drafters of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution included a Citizenship Clause, which would entrench in the Constitution (and thereby set beyond the future reach of Congress or the courts) a guarantee of citizenship stating that "All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States".  The Fourteenth Amendment—including the Citizenship Clause—was ratified by state legislatures and became a part of the Constitution in 1868.
 Loss of United States citizenship 
The Constitution does not specifically deal with loss of citizenship. An amendment proposed by Congress in 1810—the Titles of Nobility Amendment—would, if ratified, have provided that any citizen who accepted any "present, pension, office or emolument" from a foreign country, without the consent of Congress, would "cease to be a citizen of the United States"; however, this amendment was never ratified by a sufficient number of state legislatures and, as a result, never became a part of the Constitution.
thumb|left|Official record of Beys Afroyim's U.S. naturalization in 1926
In the Expatriation Act of 1868, congress declared that individuals born in the United States had an inherent right to expatriation (giving up of citizenship),Act of July 27, 1868, ch. 249, 15 Stat. 223. "... That any declaration, instruction, opinion, order, or decision of any officers of this government which denies, restricts, impairs, or questions the right of expatriation, is hereby declared inconsistent with the fundamental principles of this government." it has historically been accepted that certain actions could result in loss of citizenship. The possibility of this was noted by the Supreme Court in United States v. Wong Kim Ark, an 1898 case involving the citizenship of a man born in the United States to Chinese parents who were legally domiciled in the country. After ruling in this case that Wong was born a U.S. citizen despite his Chinese ancestry, the Court went on to state that his birthright citizenship "[had] not been lost or taken away by anything happening since his birth."Wong Kim Ark, 169 U.S. at 704. By making this statement, the Supreme Court affirmed that Wong had not done anything to result in the loss of United States citizenship, therefore acknowledging that there were actions that could result in the loss of citizenship. 
The Nationality Act of 1940Nationality Act of 1940, Public Law 76-853, 54 Stat. 1137.  provided for loss of citizenship based on foreign military or government service, when coupled with citizenship in that foreign country. This statute also mandated loss of citizenship for desertion from the U.S. armed forces, remaining outside the United States in order to evade military service during wartime, or voting in a foreign election.Spiro (2005), p. 150. The provision calling for loss of citizenship for foreign military service was held by the Supreme Court not to be enforceable without proof that said service had been voluntary, in a 1958 case (Nishikawa v. Dulles),Nishikawa v. Dulles, . and revocation of citizenship as a punishment for desertion was struck down that same year in another case (Trop v. Dulles).Trop v. Dulles, .
However, in yet another 1958 case (Perez v. Brownell),Perez v. Brownell, . the Supreme Court affirmed the provision revoking the citizenship of any American who had voted in an election in a foreign country, as a legitimate exercise (under the Constitution's Necessary and Proper Clause) of Congress' authority to regulate foreign affairs and avoid potentially embarrassing diplomatic situations.Spiro (2005), p. 151.Dionisopoulos (1970–71), p. 238.   Associate Justice Felix Frankfurter, the author of the opinion of the Court (supported by a 5–4 majority), wrote that:
In a dissenting opinion, Chief Justice Earl Warren argued that "Citizenship is man's basic right, for it is nothing less than the right to have rights" and that "a government of the people cannot take away their citizenship simply because one branch of that government can be said to have a conceivably rational basis for wanting to do so."Perez, 356 U.S. at 64–65.  While Warren was willing to allow for loss of citizenship as a result of foreign naturalization or other actions "by which [an American] manifests allegiance to a foreign state [which] may be so inconsistent with the retention of [U.S.] citizenship as to result in loss of that status",Perez, 356 U.S. at 68. he wrote that "In specifying that any act of voting in a foreign political election results in loss of citizenship, Congress has employed a classification so broad that it encompasses conduct that fails to show a voluntary abandonment of American citizenship."Perez, 356 U.S. at 76.Spiro (2005), pp. 151–152.
Two Supreme Court decisions after Perez called into question the principle that loss of citizenship could occur even without the affected individual's intent.  In Kennedy v. Mendoza-Martinez (1963),Kennedy v. Mendoza-Martinez, . the Court struck down a law revoking citizenship for remaining outside the United States in order to avoid conscription into the armed forces.  Associate Justice William J. Brennan (who had been in the majority in Perez) wrote a separate opinion concurring with the majority in Mendoza-Martinez and expressing reservations about Perez.  In Schneider v. Rusk (1964),Schneider v. Rusk, . where the Court invalidated a provision revoking the citizenship of naturalized citizens who returned to live permanently in their countries of origin, Brennan recused himself and did not participate in the decision of the case.
 Beys Afroyim 
thumb|right|A 1947 photo of Beys Afroyim and his infant son Amos
Beys Afroyim (born Ephraim Bernstein, 1893–1984) was an artist and active communist. Various sources state that he was born in either 1893Spiro (2005), p. 153., painting by Beys Afroyim, exhibited at the Museum of the City of New York. This source says Afroyim was born in 1893, in Riki , Poland. It also states that Afroyim's court case "hinged on his ability to convince the Court that he had never voted in Israel", a claim contradicted by the facts as laid out in the Supreme Court's opinion in Afroyim v. Rusk.The court opinions in Afroyim's case state that he was born in Poland in 1893.  Afroyim v. Rusk, 250 F. Supp. 686, 687; 361 F.2d 102, 103; 387 U.S. 253, 254. or 1898,Naturalization record of Ephraim Bernstein, also known as Beys Afroyim.  U.S. National Archives and Records Administration (via Ancestry.com).  Retrieved May 8, 2012. This source says Afroyim was born on March 15, 1898, in Riga, Russia, and became a U.S. citizen on June 14, 1926. A letter confirming Afroyim's loss of U.S. citizenship, dated January 13, 1961, accompanies the naturalization record. and either in Poland generally, specifically in the Polish town of Ryki, or in Riga, Latvia (then part of the Russian Empire). In 1912, Afroyim immigrated to the United States, and on June 14, 1926, he was naturalized as a U.S. citizen.Afroyim, 387 U.S. at 254.  He studied at the Art Institute of Chicago, as well as the National Academy of Design in New York City, and he was commissioned to paint portraits of George Bernard Shaw, Theodore Dreiser, and Arnold Schoenberg.  In 1949, Afroyim left the United States and settled in Israel, together with his wife and former student Soshana (an Austrian artist).
In 1960, following the breakdown of his marriage, Afroyim decided to return to the United States,Spiro (2005), p. 154. but the State Department refused to renew his U.S. passport, ruling that because Afroyim had voted in the 1951 Israeli legislative election, he had lost his citizenship under the provisions of the Nationality Act of 1940.Afroyim, 387 U.S. at 254. "In 1960, when [Afroyim] applied for renewal of his United States passport, the Department of State refused to grant it on the sole ground that he had lost his American citizenship by virtue of § 401(e) of the Nationality Act of 1940, which provides that a United States citizen shall 'lose' his citizenship if he votes 'in a political election in a foreign state.'" A letter certifying Afroyim's loss of citizenship was issued by the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) on January 13, 1961.
Afroyim challenged the revocation of his citizenship. Initially, he claimed that he had not in fact voted in Israel's 1951 election, but had entered the polling place solely in order to draw sketches of voters casting their ballots. Afroyim's initial challenge was rejected in administrative proceedings in 1965. He then sued in federal district court, with his lawyer agreeing to a stipulation that Afroyim had in fact voted in Israel, but arguing that the statute under which this action had resulted in his losing his citizenship was unconstitutional.Afroyim v. Rusk, 250 F. Supp. 686, 687 (S.D.N.Y. 1966). "Throughout the administrative proceedings plaintiff contended that he had never voted in an election of the State of Israel, but only entered the polling place to sketch the voters as they cast their ballots. Before this court, however, it is stipulated that on July 30, 1951, plaintiff voted in the elections for the Second Knesset, the Parliament of the State of Israel. And it is agreed that he did so voluntarily." A federal judge of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York rejected Afroyim's claim on February 25, 1966, concluding that "in the opinion of Congress voting in a foreign political election could import 'allegiance to another country' in some measure 'inconsistent with American citizenship'" and that the question of this law's validity had been settled by the Supreme Court's 1958 Perez decision.Afroyim, 387 U.S. at 253 .Afroyim, 250 F. Supp. at 690. "In my view the authority of Perez v. Brownell still stands and is controlling here. This conclusion is in full accord with the decisions of the Second Circuit in which the vitality of Perez was at least collaterally challenged."
Afroyim appealed the district court's ruling against him to the Second Circuit Court of Appeals, which upheld the lower court's reasoning and decision on May 24, 1966. Two of the three judges who heard Afroyim's appeal found the district court's analysis and affirmation of Perez to be "exhaustive and most penetrating". "We affirm the judgment [of the district court] on the authority of Perez v. Brownell.... The exposition by the [district court] of the present posture of the issues that were decided by the [Supreme] Court in Perez was exhaustive and most penetrating...." The third judge expressed serious reservations regarding the viability of Perez and suggested that Afroyim might have obtained a different result if he had framed his case differently, but decided to concur (albeit reluctantly) in the majority's ruling.Afroyim, 361 F.2d at 105–106. "I see no reason why an individual who performed the act of voting in a foreign election, after full disclosure of his American ties should be visited with such severe consequences as loss of citizenship and the deportation which will inevitably follow, without a showing that his voting somehow impeded or interfered with the conduct of this country's foreign affairs.... However, ... I concur reluctantly, as I have already indicated, in the result reached in the majority opinion."
 Arguments before the Supreme Court 
After losing his appeal to the Second Circuit,Spiro (2005), p. 155. Afroyim asked the Supreme Court to overrule the precedent it had established in Perez, strike down the foreign voting provision of the Nationality Act as unconstitutional, and decide that he was still a United States citizen. Afroyim's counsel argued that since "neither the Fourteenth Amendment nor any other provision of the Constitution expressly grants Congress the power to take away [U.S.] citizenship once it has been acquired ... the only way [Afroyim] could lose his citizenship was by his own voluntary renunciation of it." The Supreme Court agreed to consider Afroyim's case on October 24, 1966Afroyim v. Rusk, 385 U.S. 917 (1966). "Certiorari granted." and held oral arguments on February 20, 1967.
 thumb | left | upright | Hugo Black wrote the opinion of the Court in the Afroyim case.
The official respondent (defendant) in Afroyim's case on behalf of the U.S. government was Dean Rusk, the Secretary of State during the Kennedy and Johnson administrations (1961–1969).  The legal brief laying out Afroyim's arguments was written by Nanette Dembitz, general counsel of the New York Civil Liberties Union; the government's brief was written by United States Solicitor General (and future Supreme Court Associate Justice) Thurgood Marshall.Spiro (2005), p. 156.  The oral arguments in the case were presented by attorneys Edward Ennis—chairman of the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU)—for Afroyim, and Charles Gordon—general counsel for the INS—for the government.Spiro (2005), pp. 157–158.  Afroyim was in New York City at this time, having been granted a visitor's visa in 1965 while his case went through the courts.
Before heading the ACLU, Ennis had served as general counsel for the INS.  In his oral argument supporting Afroyim, Ennis asserted that Congress lacked the power to prescribe forfeiture of citizenship, and he sharply criticized the foreign-relations argument under which the Perez court had upheld loss of citizenship for voting in a foreign election—pointing out, for example, that when a referendum was held in 1935 on the status of the Saar (a region of Germany occupied after World War I by the United Kingdom and France), Americans had participated in the voting without raising any concerns within the State Department at the time.
Gordon did not make a good showing in the Afroyim oral arguments despite his skill and experience in the field of immigration law, according to a 2005 article on the Afroyim case by law professor Peter J. Spiro.  Gordon mentioned Israeli elections in 1955 and 1959 in which Afroyim had voted—facts which had not previously been presented to the Supreme Court in the attorneys' briefs or the written record of the case—and much of the remaining questioning from the justices involved criticism of Gordon for confusing matters through the last-minute introduction of this new material.
Afroyim's earlier stipulation that he had voted in the 1951 Israeli election—together with an accompanying concession by the government that this was the sole ground upon which it had acted to revoke Afroyim's citizenship—allowed the potential issue of diluted allegiance through dual citizenship to be sidestepped.  Indeed, in 1951 there was no Israeli nationality law; eligibility to vote in the election that year had been based on residence rather than any concept of citizenship.  Although Afroyim had later acquired Israeli citizenship and voted in at least two other elections in his new country, his lawyers were able to avoid discussing this matter and instead focus entirely on whether foreign voting was a sufficient cause for loss of one's U.S. citizenship.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court ruled in Afroyim's favor in a 5–4 decision issued on May 29, 1967. The opinion of the Court—written by Associate Justice Hugo Black, and joined by Chief Justice Warren and Associate Justices William O. Douglas and Abe Fortas—as well as Associate Justice Brennan, who had been part of the majority in Perez—was grounded in the reasoning Warren had used nine years earlier in his Perez dissent.Dionisopoulos (1970–71), p. 249.  "By the narrow margin of five to four the Court [in Afroyim] had repudiated the precedent of Perez, denied to Congress any power to expatriate an American and subscribed to a principle espoused by Warren in his dissenting opinion almost a decade earlier."Matteo (1997), p. 41.  "Nine years after Perez, Chief Justice Warren's dissent in that case became the basis of the majority opinion in the subjesequent judicial milestone, Afroyim v. Rusk. The court's majority now held that "Congress has no power under the Constitution to divest a person of his United States citizenship absent his voluntary renunciation thereof." Specifically repudiating Perez, the majority of the justices rejected the claim that Congress had any power to revoke citizenshipMatteo (1997), p. 41.  "Justice Black rejected the Perez holding that sovereignty carried with it the implied power of involuntary expatriation." and said that "no such power can be sustained as an implied attribute of sovereignty". Instead, quoting from the Citizenship Clause, Black wrote:
All persons born or naturalized in the United States ... are citizens of the United States...." There is no indication in these words of a fleeting citizenship, good at the moment it is acquired but subject to destruction by the Government at any time. Rather the Amendment can most reasonably be read as defining a citizenship which a citizen keeps unless he voluntarily relinquishes it. Once acquired, this Fourteenth Amendment citizenship was not to be shifted, canceled, or diluted at the will of the Federal Government, the States, or any other governmental unit.Afroyim, 387 U.S. at 262.
The Court found support for its position in the history of the unratified Titles of Nobility Amendment. The fact that this 1810 proposal had been framed as a constitutional amendment, rather than an ordinary act of Congress, was seen by the majority as showing that, even before the passage of the Fourteenth Amendment, Congress did not believe that it had the power to revoke anyone's citizenship.Afroyim, 387 U.S. at 259. The Court further noted that a proposed 1818 act of Congress would have provided a way for citizens to voluntarily relinquish their citizenship, but opponents had argued that Congress had no authority to provide for expatriation.
Afroyim's counsel had addressed only the foreign voting question and had carefully avoided any direct challenge to the idea that foreign naturalization might legitimately lead to loss of citizenship (a concept which Warren had been willing to accept in his Perez dissent).  Nevertheless, the Court's Afroyim ruling went beyond even Warren's earlier position—holding instead that "The very nature of our government makes it completely incongruous to have a rule of law under which a group of citizens temporarily in office can deprive another group of citizens of their citizenship."Spiro (2005), pp. 158–159.Afroyim, 387 U.S. at 268.
In sum Justice Black concluded:
In our country the people are sovereign and the Government cannot sever its relationship to the people by taking away their citizenship. Our Constitution governs us and we must never forget that our Constitution limits the Government to those powers specifically granted or those that are necessary and proper to carry out the specifically granted ones. The Constitution, of course, grants Congress no express power to strip people of their citizenship, whether, in the exercise of the implied power to regulate foreign affairs or in the exercise of any specifically granted power. [...] Citizenship is no light trifle to be jeopardized any moment Congress decides to do so under the name of one of its general or implied grants of power. In some instances, loss of citizenship can mean that a man is left without the protection of citizenship in any country in the world -- as a man without a country. Citizenship in this Nation is a part of a cooperative affair. Its citizenry is the country, and the country is its citizenry. The very nature of our free government makes it completely incongruous to have a rule of law under which a group of citizens temporarily in office can deprive another group of citizens of their citizenship. We hold that the Fourteenth Amendment was designed to, and does, protect every citizen of this Nation against a congressional forcible destruction of his citizenship, whatever his creed, color, or race. Our holding does no more than to give to this citizen that which is his own, a constitutional right to remain a citizen in a free country unless he voluntarily relinquishes that citizenship.Afroyim, 387 U.S. at 257 and 267-268.
 Dissent 
 thumb | right | upright | John Marshall Harlan II wrote the dissent in the Afroyim case.
The minority—in a dissent written by Associate Justice John Marshall Harlan II and joined by Associate Justices Tom C. Clark, Potter Stewart, and Byron White—argued that Perez had been correctly decided,Afroyim, 387 U.S. at 270. "[T]he available historical evidence is not only inadequate to support the Court's abandonment of Perez, but ... even seems to confirm Perez′ soundness." that nothing in the Constitution deprived Congress of the power to revoke a person's citizenship for good cause,Afroyim, 387 U.S. at 292. "To the contrary, [the Citizenship Clause] was expected, and should now be understood, to leave Congress at liberty to expatriate a citizen if the expatriation is an appropriate exercise of a power otherwise given to Congress by the Constitution, and if the methods and terms of expatriation adopted by Congress are consistent with the Constitution's other relevant commands." and that Congress was within its rights to decide that allowing Americans to vote in foreign elections ran contrary to the foreign policy interests of the nation and ought to result in loss of citizenship.Afroyim, 387 U.S. at 270. "There is no need here to rehearse Mr. Justice Frankfurter's opinion for the Court in Perez; it then proved and still proves to [our] satisfaction that § 401(e) is within the power of Congress." Harlan wrote:
Responding to the assertion that Congress did not have power to revoke a person's citizenship without his or her assent, Harlan predicted that "Until the Court indicates with greater precision what it means by 'assent', today's opinion will surely cause still greater confusion in this area of the law."Spiro (2005), p. 159.Afroyim, 387 U.S. at 269 n.1.
 Subsequent developments 
The Afroyim decision stated that no one with United States citizenship could be involuntarily deprived of that citizenship. Nevertheless, the Court distinguished a 1971 case, Rogers v. Bellei,Rogers v. Bellei, . holding in this newer case that individuals who had acquired citizenship via jus sanguinis, through birth outside the United States to an American parent or parents, could still risk loss of citizenship in various ways, since their citizenship (unlike Afroyim's citizenship) was the result of federal statutes rather than the Citizenship Clause.Matteo (1997), p. 44.  "The Court took a step back in 1971, when in Rogers v. Bellei it undercut Afroyim by holding that Congress had the power to denationalize children born abroad of an American parent. Such children, the Court concluded, were not Fourteenth Amendment citizens...." The statutory provision whereby Bellei lost his citizenship—a U.S. residency requirement which he had failed to satisfy in his youth—was repealed by Congress in 1978; the foreign voting provision, already without effect since Afroyim, was repealed at the same time.A bill to repeal certain sections of title III of the Immigration and Nationality Act, and for other purposes. Public Law 95-432; 92 Stat. 1046. October 10, 1978.
Although Afroyim appeared to rule out any involuntary revocation of a person's citizenship, the government continued for the most part to pursue loss-of-citizenship cases when an American had acted in a way believed to imply an intent to give up citizenship—especially when an American had become a naturalized citizen of another country.Spiro (2005), pp. 159–160.  In a 1980 case, however—Vance v. TerrazasVance v. Terrazas, .—the Supreme Court ruled that intent to relinquish citizenship needed to be proved by itself, and not simply inferred from an individual's having voluntarily performed an action designated by Congress as being incompatible with an intent to keep one's citizenship.Spiro (2005), pp. 161–162.Immigration and Nationality Act, sec. 349; 8 U.S.C. sec. 1481. The phrase "voluntarily performing any of the following acts with the intention of relinquishing United States nationality" was added in 1986, and various other changes have been made over time to the list of expatriating acts; see notes.
The concept of dual citizenship, which previously had been strongly opposed by the U.S. government, has become more accepted in the years since Afroyim. In 1980, the administration of President Jimmy Carter concluded that the Bancroft Treaties—a series of bilateral agreements, formulated between 1868 and 1937, which provided for automatic loss of citizenship upon foreign naturalization of a U.S. citizen—were no longer enforceable, due in part to Afroyim, and gave notice terminating these treaties."Naturalization Treaties".  7 FAM 1270, Appendix A.  United States Department of State.  Retrieved December 13, 2015.  "In the matter of Reid v. Covert, ... the U.S. Supreme Court established that provisions of treaties or executive agreements are unenforceable if they conflict with the Constitution....  [Schneider v. Rusk and Afroyim v. Rusk] strongly implied that if a case of involuntary loss of citizenship under one of the Bancroft treaties came before the Supreme Court, the expatriation provisions would be found unconstitutional."  In 1990, the State Department adopted new guidelines for evaluating potential loss-of-citizenship cases,67 Interpreter Releases 799 (July 23, 1990); 67 Interpreter Releases 1092 (October 1, 1990). under which the government now assumes in almost all situations that Americans do not in fact intend to give up their citizenship unless they explicitly indicate to U.S. officials that this is their intention.  As explained by Peter J. Spiro, "In the long run, Afroyims vision of an absolute right to retain citizenship has been largely, if quietly, vindicated. As a matter of practice, it is now virtually impossible to lose American citizenship without formally and expressly renouncing it."Spiro (2005), p. 163.
While acknowledging that "American citizenship enjoys strong protection against loss under Afroyim and Terrazas", retired journalist Henry S. Matteo suggested, "It would have been more equitable ... had the Supreme Court relied on the Eighth Amendment, which adds a moral tone as well as a firmer constitutional basis, than the Fourteenth."  Matteo also said, "Under Afroyim there is a lack of balance between rights and protections on one hand, and obligations and responsibilities on the other, all four elements of which have been an integral part of the concept of citizenship, as history shows."Matteo (1997), p. 111. Political scientist P. Allan Dionisopoulos wrote that "it is doubtful that any [Supreme Court decision] created a more complex problem for the United States than Afroyim v. Rusk", a decision which he believed had "since become a source of embarrassment for the United States in its relationships with the Arab world" because of the way it facilitated dual U.S.–Israeli citizenship and participation by Americans in Israel's armed forces.Dionisopoulos (1970–71), pp. 235–236.
After his Supreme Court victory, Afroyim divided his time between West Brighton (Staten Island, New York) and the Israeli city of Safed until his death on May 19, 1984, in West Brighton.Obituary of Beys Afroyim. Staten Island Advance. May 20, 1984.Spiro (2005), p. 165.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 387
 Reid v. Covert,Reid v. Covert, . a Supreme Court case holding that treaties cannot override the Constitution
 Notes 
 References 
 Dionisopoulos, P. Allan (1970–71).  "Afroyim v. Rusk: The Evolution, Uncertainty and Implications of a Constitutional Principle".  Minnesota Law Review 55''':235–257.
 Matteo, Henry S. (1997).  Denationalization v. "The Right to Have Rights": The Standard of Intent in Citizenship Loss.  University Press of America.  .
 Spiro, Peter J. (2005). "Afroyim: Vaunting Citizenship, Presaging Transnationality". In Martin, David A.; Schuck, Peter H. (2005). Immigration Stories''. Foundation Press. pp. 147–168. 
 External links 
 Summaries of the case at Oyez, Lawnix
Category:1967 in United States case law
Category:History of immigration to the United States
Category:United States Citizenship Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Denaturalization case law
"""

From "Agins v. City of Tiburon" ==> """
Agins v. City of Tiburon, 447 U.S. 255 (1980), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the test for determining whether a zoning ordinance or governmental regulation will be considered a taking is whether such action “substantially advances” a legitimate state interest.
The Court subsequently overruled this decision twenty-five years later in Lingle v. Chevron U.S.A. Inc., 554 U.S. 528 (2005). 
 Background 
California state law required the city to prepare a general plan governing both land use and the development of open space land.
After Dr and Ms Agins acquired  of unimproved property zoned one house per acre, the city announced that it intended to acquire it, and issued bonds to finance the taking. It filed an eminent domain action, but on the eve of trial abandoned it. Instead, it amended the zoning ordinance placing the subject land in a zone that permitted construction of one to five homes, the exact number being discretionary with the city. The owners contended that the applying for permit(s) to construct seriatim of one to five home would be economically infeasible and that the city intended to convert their land into open space by preventing its development. They sued seeking just compensation for a regulatory taking.
The owners alleged that their land had greater value than other land in California because of its spectacular views of San Francisco Bay, and the rezoning prevented economically feasible development, thereby completely destroying its value, and thus effecting its taking without just compensation in violation of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments.
The California Supreme Court refused to recognize the existence of a regulatory taking cause of action, and held that the only remedy available to the owner would be a petition for a writ of mandate seeking to invalidate the regulation on grounds of denial of substantive due process. 
 Court's decision 
The question in this case was whether the ordinances took Agins' property without just compensation.
The complaint framed the question as to whether a state court's decision to deny compensation for regulatory takings was constitutional, and whether a zoning ordinance that de facto forbade all development of their land effected a taking under the 5th and 14th Amendments. However, as noted, because the owners had not yet applied for a permit for development, the court found that the issue of whether an as-applied taking occurred, was not yet ripe for decision. Therefore, the only issue left was whether this zoning ordinance constituted a taking on its face. 
The Court held that a general zoning law can be a taking if the ordinance does not substantially advance a legitimate state interest or denies an owner economically viable use of his land. In spite of its finding of lack of ripeness, the U. S. Supreme Court affirmed the California Supreme Court's holding that the zoning ordinances did not on their face effect an uncompensated taking.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States land use case law
Category:1980 in United States case law
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:United States ripeness case law
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:Tiburon, California
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Zoning in the United States
Gideon Kanner and Michael M Berger, The Nasty, Brutish and Short Life of Agins v. City of Tiburon, 50 Urban Lawyer 1 (2020)
"""

From "Agostini v. Felton" ==> """
Agostini v. Felton, 521 U.S. 203 (1997), is a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States. In this case, the Court overruled its decision in Aguilar v. Felton (1985), now finding that it was not a violation of the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment for a state-sponsored education initiative to allow public school teachers to instruct at religious schools, so long as the material was secular and neutral in nature and no "excessive entanglement" between government and religion was apparent. This case is noteworthy in a broader sense as a sign of evolving judicial standards surrounding the First Amendment, and the changes that have occurred in modern Establishment Clause jurisprudence.
Background
In 1965, Congress enacted Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act with the goal of providing adequate education to all children in the United States, regardless of individual economic conditions. This service, abbreviated as Title I, distributed federal funds to state governments, which, in turn, disbursed the funds to local education agencies. This funding was to be put towards providing remedial education services for low-income students who were at significant risk of failing to meet state academic performance standards. By law, these education services were to be provided to eligible students, whether enrolled in public school or not. Further, the services offered to children attending private schools were to be "equitable in comparison" to the services offered to children attending public school. All educational services were to be of a secular, neutral, and non-ideological nature.
In 1966, the Board of Education of the City of New York ("Board") applied for Title I funding. In the eligible districts in New York City, 10% of schoolchildren attend private school, and of those 10%, 90% attended schools of a particular religious ideology. To prevent First Amendment complications, the Board arranged to bus private school attendees to public schools for after-school instruction. This plan failed, and another one was adopted, which failed as well. The Board then moved on to a plan whereby public school teachers would be permitted to provide instruction in the private school buildings themselves. A number of stipulations were attached to this, aimed at preventing a violation of the Establishment Clause, including mandatory surprise visits by state-employed supervisors and removal of all religious articles from the room to be used for Title I instruction. This plan was reviewed by the Supreme Court in Aguilar v. Felton, where it was deemed to create a constitutionally impermissible "entanglement" between government and religion. The District Court, on remand, issued an injunction, enjoining the Board from following a Title I plan that violated the decision.
After the Court's decision in Aguilar, the Board had to devise a new plan to provide Title I services without creating a conflict between Church and State. This plan involved spending over $100,000,000 in leasing property and vehicles to provide areas for public school teachers to instruct their students. This money, incurred annually over a series of years, had to be deducted from the Title 1 grant before the grant money was to be used for actual services provided, resulting in a net decrease in available funds for remedial education. In 1995, the Board, along with a group of parents of eligible parochial school attendees, filed motions in District Court, seeking an exemption from the Aguilar decision under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 60(b). This rule states, in part, that an exemption from a final judgment may be granted if it is found that it is, "no longer equitable that the judgment should have prospective application." They argued that cases decided by the Supreme Court between Aguilar and 1995 had eroded the meaning of Aguilar, and that it was no longer good law. The District Court appeared sympathetic, and said that they were pursuing the appropriate method of relief, but denied the motion, noting that Aguilar was still in effect and it was unable to offer the exemption the Board sought. The Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed the denial of the motion. The Supreme Court granted certiorari and heard arguments on April 15, 1997. Chief Corporation Counsel Paul Crotty argued on behalf of New York City, marking the last time that the city's chief attorney has appeared before the nation's highest court.
Arguments
The petitioners argument for relief revolved around three primary points.
 The tremendous costs involved with running their Title I program in accordance with Aguilar constituted a substantial change of fact. They argued that, because these costs were not expected to be so high at the start, it was now imprudent to force them to continue in this fashion. The respondents countered by saying that the costs of implementing the program were, in fact, known when Aguilar was decided, which would mean that no change in circumstances had occurred.
 Prevailing agreement in the judiciary had turned against Aguilar, with a majority of Justices having expressed their opinion that Aguilar should be reversed or, at least, reconsidered.
 Subsequent Establishment Clause rulings by the Supreme Court had undermined the legal basis upon which Aguilar was decided. The argument was that, if the case's decision had been so considerably weakened over the years, it was no longer good law and should be reversed.
Decision
On June 23, 1997, Justice O'Connor delivered the opinion of the court. The decision was generally divided along ideological lines, with Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justices Scalia, Thomas, and Kennedy joining the majority, and Justices Stevens, Souter, Ginsburg and Breyer dissenting.
The Court accepted the respondents' argument that there was no substantial change in factual circumstances. While there was obviously an increase in Board expenditures in maintaining their program, the Court noted that cost increases were not only predicted in Aguilar, they had been practically guaranteed. Furthermore, since the applicable case law had not changed since the Aguilar decision, there was nothing the Court could see as constituting a substantial change in factual circumstances.
On the second argument, the Court again sided with the respondents. It noted that, indeed, five of the Justices had advocated a reconsideration of Aguilar when deciding another case. However, the Court said, this did not necessarily mean there had been a change in their jurisprudence or reasoning, because Aguilar's propriety was not in question when those comments were made. The Court stated that the views of its members, outside of a judgment to this effect, did not constitute a change in Establishment Clause law.
The third argument is given the most examination by the Court. In order to determine if decisions subsequent to Aguilar have actually undermined it or the basis for its findings, the Court examines the cases and the changes in views since that decision was made. The Court notes that it has moved away from the idea that a public employee teaching in a parochial school will necessarily inculcate some of the religious messages inherent in their pervasively sectarian environment. It notes, for example, that in Zobrest v. Catalina Foothills School Dist. the Court ruled that it was permissible for a deaf student to have a state-sponsored interpreter attend his Catholic high school in the performance of her duties. In this vein, the Court concludes that to consider a public employee's presence in a religious school inappropriate in and of itself would put far too much emphasis on form over substance.
Another change in the Court's approach was that it no longer considered impermissible the use of government money to directly aid the educational functions of a religious school. As long as the money was given without government stipulations as to how it was spent, it was acceptable for such funding to be made available. Citing Witters v. Washington Dept. of Servs. for Blind, the Court noted that it was not impermissible for the government to give vocational grants, even if the grant would be used to train for some religious job in the future, as long as there was an intervening "genuinely independent and private" choice of where the money would be spent. The Court compared this with a government employee receiving his paycheck, noting that it was certainly acceptable for the government to pay this employee even if it were clear he was going to donate a large portion of it to a religious organization.
The idea of a public employee teaching in a religious school, the Court went on to say, was no longer commonly considered to foster a "symbolic union" between Church and State. Noting that the Dissent believed that, in fact, this did foster such a symbolic union, the Court countered by stating that it cannot be shown that such a symbolic union would vanish once the students and teachers were moved off campus. Taking that reasoning to its logical conclusion, it would forbid Title I entirely, as the union would be unavoidable. Further, the Court rejected the idea that Title I would be financing religious indoctrination if instruction could be conducted on religious campuses; Title I specifically notes that it is designed to "supplement, not supplant" the school's curriculum.
Applying these rationales to the Board's case, the Court determined that the program, previously found unconstitutional in Aguilar, was neither aiding nor inhibiting religion in an impermissible fashion. Reasoning that the aid was distributed according to secular criteria, and offered to all eligible students regardless of school choice, the system of distributing aid was neutral with respect to religion. The program as enacted by the Board did not give any incentive for anyone to alter their religious views.
The Court ultimately overruled Aguilar. It noted that, while stare decisis is an important doctrine, the Court is not prohibited by precedent to review changes in law or making alterations to previous decisions. It concluded that prevailing Establishment Clause law had changed significantly since Aguilar was decided, making Aguilar no longer good law. In summarizing its position, the Court notes:
In closing, the Court reversed the judgment of the Court of Appeals, remanding the case down to them, and giving the lower court instructions to vacate its injunction. Because Aguilar was no longer good law, and the plan constructed by the Board did not create an excessive entanglement with religion, the Court concluded that the Board was entitled to the relief it had sought; moreover, the relief was not simply based on a federal rule, the decision removed the need for the Board to seek the exemption at all.
Dissent
Justice Souter authored a dissent, in which Justices Stevens, Ginsburg and Breyer joined.
The dissent was somewhat formalistic in its objections to the majority finding. It stated that the principle of stare decisis was of too great weight to overrule a previous decision so easily, and that the case presented appeared to be more of a re-hearing of Aguilar than a new proceeding. The Dissent cited the Supreme Court's guidelines surrounding rehearings, accusing the Court of veiling its decision as a "rethinking" instead of a reversal of Aguilar. The Dissent summarized its own position, remarking:
In short, the Dissent felt that the ruling in this case was contrary to the integrity and stability of the Court, and did not comport with the apolitical nature of the judiciary.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 521
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:History of New York City
Category:1997 in United States case law
Category:1997 in New York (state)
Category:1997 in religion
Category:New York City Department of Education
Category:Religion and education
Category:1997 in education
Category:City of New York litigation
"""

From "Aguilar v. Felton" ==> """
Aguilar v. Felton, 473 U.S. 402 (1985), was a United States Supreme Court case holding that New York City's program that sent public school teachers into parochial schools to provide remedial education to disadvantaged children pursuant to Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 necessitated an excessive entanglement of church and state and violated the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Aguilar v. Felton was subsequently overruled by Agostini v. Felton, 521 U.S. 203 (1997).
References
 Further reading 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:1985 in religion
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:New York City Department of Education
Category:Religion and education
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1985 in education
Category:City of New York litigation
"""

From "Aguilar v. Texas" ==> """
Aguilar v. Texas, 378 U.S. 108 (1964), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court, which held that "[a]lthough an affidavit supporting a search warrant may be based on hearsay information and need not reflect the direct personal observations of the affiant, the magistrate must be informed of some of the underlying circumstances relied on by the person providing the information and some of the underlying circumstances from which the affiant concluded that the informant, whose identity was not disclosed, was credible or his information reliable." Along with Spinelli v. United States (1969), Aguilar established the Aguilar–Spinelli test, a judicial guideline for evaluating the validity of a search warrant based on information provided by a confidential informant or an anonymous tip. The test developed in this case was subsequently rejected and replaced in Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213 (1983).
 Background 
On or about January 1, 1960, two Houston Police Department officers placed Aguilar's residence under surveillance. On January 8, 1960, the officers applied for a warrant to search the premises. The officers believed Aguilar possessed narcotics intended for sale, and further alleged corroboration by "reliable information from a credible person". The police executed the search warrant and announced at the residence door that they were police with a warrant. After hearing commotion in the house the police forced entry, seized Aguilar, and recovered a bag of narcotics he attempted to flush down the drain.
At his trial in the state court, Aguilar objected to the inclusion of evidence obtained as a result of the search warrant. Aguilar argued that the affidavit backing the search warrant was "nothing more than hearsay." The state court held the affidavit sufficient enough to admit the evidence, leading to Aguilar's conviction for illegal possession of heroin. On appeal, the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals affirmed the conviction. Aguilar then petitioned the Supreme Court and his petition was granted.
 Majority Opinions 
Justice Goldberg delivered the opinion of the court which held that "[t]he standard of reasonableness for obtaining a search warrant is the same under the Fourth and the Fourteenth Amendments", citing The court also held that "[a]lthough an affidavit supporting a search warrant may be based on hearsay information and need not reflect the direct personal observations of the affiant, the magistrate must be informed of some of the underlying circumstances relied on by the person providing the information and some of the underlying circumstances from which the affiant concluded that the informant, whose identity was not disclosed, was credible or his information reliable", citing 
Justice Harlan concurred.
 Dissenting Opinions 
Justice Clark dissented, joined by Justice Black and Justice Stewart. The dissent argued that "[t]he Court holds the affidavit insufficient and sets aside the conviction on the basis of two cases, neither of which is controlling."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 378
Illinois v. Gates (1983)
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:Incorporation case law
"""

From "Ahrens v. Clark" ==> """
Ahrens v. Clark, 335 U.S. 188 (1948), was a United States Supreme Court case that denied a federal district court jurisdiction to issue a writ of habeas corpus if the person detained is not within the territorial jurisdiction of the court when the petition is filed. The 6–3 ruling was handed down on June 21, 1948, with the majority opinion written by Justice William O. Douglas and the dissent written by Justice Wiley Blount Rutledge.
The decision was substantially overturned in Braden v. 30th Judicial Circuit Court of Kentucky (1973), which held that territorial jurisdiction is derived from the location of the custodian, those responsible for the indictment, rather than the location of the detention.
Overview
The United States District Court for the District of Columbia had been petitioned by 120 German detainees being held on Ellis Island for a writ of habeas corpus to challenge in court their detention and imminent deportation. The deportation order had been issued by Attorney General Tom C. Clark, using wartime powers granted by President Harry Truman in the waning months of World War II. The detainees argued that the US Court for DC had jurisdiction because they were being held "subject to the custody and control" of the Attorney General. The government argued that their case should be dismissed because Ellis Island is outside of the territorial confines of the District of Columbia. The Supreme Court, the federal appeals courts, and the federal district courts had the power to grant writs of habeas corpus "within their respective jurisdictions"; the case hinged on whether the words "within their respective jurisdictions" implied a territorial limitation. The court held that they did.
Opinion
Dissent
Judge Wiley Blount Rutledge was concerned that the Court's decision was narrowly construing the great writ of habeas corpus.
He wrote:
Significance
The case was newly significant in the 21st century because the question of territorial jurisdiction arose during the U.S. War on Terror following the 9/11 attacks. The United States detained hundreds of foreign captives at a US Navy facility in Guantanamo Bay, which it held was outside the territorial jurisdiction of all federal district courts. Detainees petitioned the federal courts for habeas corpus challenges of their detention, and some cases reached the US Supreme Court.
Justice John Paul Stevens had clerked for Justice Wiley Rutledge during the term Ahrens v. Clark was decided. He helped draft Justice Rutledge's dissenting opinion in the case and knew his reasoning. He also knew of Braden v. 30th Judicial Circuit Court (1973), in which the Supreme Court held:
Justice Stevens used his background from the cases when drafting the majority opinion in Rasul v. Bush (2004). The Court held that the US courts had jurisdiction in the US Circuit Court for the District of Columbia over the officers of the executive branch who were the policymakers and ultimate custodians of the detainees and the facility at Guantanamo.
See also
 Hamdan v. Rumsfeld (2006)
 Boumediene v. Bush (2008)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 335
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Vinson Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:1948 in United States case law
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
"""

From "Aikens v. California" ==> """
Aikens v. California, 406 U.S. 813 (1972), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court where a petitioner (in the U.S. Supreme Court, the plaintiff (Aikens) is called the petitioner and the defendant (the State of California) is called the respondent) was appealing his conviction and death sentence.. After oral argument had been made on the case, but before the court decided on it, the Supreme Court of California in People v. Anderson, declared the death penalty unconstitutional under the state constitution.  This made his appeal unnecessary because the decision in Anderson
The Supreme Court would decide later that year, in Furman v. Georgia,. that the Death Penalty was under certain circumstances unconstitutional.  Aikens was originally one of four cases that were selected along with Furman, but when the Anderson case was decided by the California Supreme Court, Aikens became moot.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 406
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States death penalty case law
Category:Capital punishment in California
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:1972 in California
Category:Legal history of California
"""

From "Akamai Techs., Inc. v. Limelight Networks, Inc." ==> """
Akamai Technologies, Inc. v. Limelight Networks, Inc., 797 F.3d 1020 (Fed. Cir. 2015),Akamai Techs., Inc. v. Limelight Networks, Inc.,  is a 2015 en banc decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, on remand from a 2014 decision of the U.S. Supreme Court reversing a previous Federal Circuit decision in the case. This is the most recent in a string of decisions in the case that concern the proper legal standard for determining patent infringement liability when multiple actors are involved in carrying out the claimed infringement of a method patent and no single accused infringer has performed all of the steps (so-called divided infringement). In the 2015 remand decision, the Federal Circuit expanded the scope of vicarious liability in such cases, holding that one actor could be held liable for the acts of another actor "when an alleged infringer conditions participation in an activity or receipt of a benefit upon performance of a step or steps of a patented method and establishes the manner or timing of that performance." In addition, the court held that where multiple "actors form a joint enterprise, all can be charged with the acts of the other[s], rendering each liable for the steps performed by the other[s] as if each is a single actor."
 Background 
 The invention 
The named inventors in U.S. Pat. No. 6,108,703 are Professor Tom Leighton of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and his student Danny Lewin (now deceased), a PhD candidate at MIT. They assigned their rights in the patent to MIT, which granted an exclusive license to Akamai Technologies, Inc., a company that the inventors formed in 1998.See Company History: How Akamai got its start.
300px|thumb|right|Drawing of the patented system involved in Akamai v. Limelight
The patent claims a method of delivering electronic data using a “content delivery network,” or “CDN.” Proprietors of Internet Web sites, known as “content providers,” contract with Akamai to deliver their Web sites’ content to individual Internet users. The patent provides for the designation of certain components of a content provider's Web site (often large files, such as video or music files) to be stored on Akamai's servers and accessed from those servers by Internet users. The process of designating Web site components to be stored on Akamai's servers is known as “tagging.” By aggregating the data demands of multiple content providers with differing peak usage patterns and serving that content from multiple servers in multiple locations, Akamai is able to increase the speed with which Internet users access the content from Web sites.
The relevant claim of the patent provides as follows, where the italicized step can be performed by the customer rather than by the CDN operator (as it was by the defendant's customers involved in the lawsuit):
 The conduct of Limelight 
Limelight Networks, Inc., also operates a CDN and carries out several of the steps claimed in the patent. But instead of tagging those components of its customers’ Web sites that it intends to store on its servers (a step included in the asserted claim of the patent), Limelight requires its customers to do their own tagging. Akamai and MIT claim that Limelight “provides instructions and offers technical assistance” to its customers regarding how to tag, but the record is undisputed that Limelight does not itself tag the components to be stored on its servers. (See italicized part of claim 34, above.)
 Prior history 
In 2006, Akamai and MIT sued Limelight in the United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts, claiming patent infringement. The case was tried to a jury, which found that Limelight infringed the patent and it found Limelight liable for more than $40 million.
But while the case was still pending, the Federal Circuit decided a case in which it held that to find direct infringement a single party must perform every step of a claimed method or else must exercise "control or direction" over the entire process so that "every step is attributable to the controlling party." In that case the Federal Circuit rejected a claim that the defendant directly infringed the patent. The defendant performed some of the steps of the patented method, and its customers, to whom the defendant gave instructions on the use of the system, performed the remaining steps. The court held that the defendant in Muniauction was not liable for direct infringement because it did not exercise control or direction over its customers’ performance of those steps of the patent that the defendant itself did not perform. 532 F.3d at 1330. Limelight therefore moved that the court grant it judgment as a matter of law (JMOL), and the court agreed with it, because infringement of MIT's  patent required tagging and Limelight did not control or direct its customers’ tagging.
 2012 Federal Circuit Ruling 
A panel of the Federal Circuit affirmed the JMOL, explaining that a defendant that does not itself perform all of a patent's steps can be liable for direct infringement only when there is an agency relationship between the parties who perform the other method steps or when one party is contractually obligated to the other to perform the steps.Akamai Techs., Inc. v. Limelight Networks, Inc., 
But the Federal Circuit then granted en banc review and reversed. The en banc court found it unnecessary to consider direct infringement under 35 U.S.C. § 271(a) because it concluded that the evidence could support a judgment in Akamai's favor on a theory of induced infringement under 35 U.S.C. § 271(b). This was true, the court explained, because liability for induced infringement arises when a defendant carries out some steps constituting a method patent and encourages others to carry out the remaining steps—even if those who performed the remaining steps did not act as agents of, or under the direction or control of, the defendant, and therefore no one would be liable as a direct infringer.
 Supreme Court 
Limelight sought review in the Supreme Court, which reversed.Limelight Networks, Inc. v. Akamai Techs., Inc., , 134 S. Ct. 2111 (2014). It held that induced infringement cannot occur without direct infringement.See . The Supreme Court said, "The Federal Circuit’s analysis fundamentally misunderstands what it means to infringe a method patent."134 S. Ct. at 2117. The Court insisted that Akamai's view "would deprive § 271(b) of ascertainable standards." The Court explained:
In the course of its ruling, the Supreme Court stated:
The Court added that "on remand, the Federal Circuit will have the opportunity to revisit the §  271(a) question if it so chooses."134 S. Ct. at 2120.
 Remand 
After the 2014 Supreme Court reversal, the case returned to the Federal Circuit. In May 2015, a panel of the Federal Circuit once again addressed the jury verdict and found that Limelight is not liable for direct infringement.Akami Tech., Inc. v. Limelight Networks,  The court (2-1) reiterated the prior Federal Circuit rule as to divided infringement: there must be "a principal-agent relationship, a contractual relationship, or in circumstances in which parties work together in a joint enterprise functioning as a form of mutual agency."Akami Tech., 786 F.3d at 905. One judge dissented, arguing that the majority ruling "divorces patent law from mainstream legal principles by refusing to accept that § 271(a) includes joint tortfeasor liability" and it "creates a gaping hole in what for centuries has been recognized as an actionable form of infringement."
A panel of the Federal Circuit does not have the authority to overrule prior Federal Circuit law. For the court to overrule its prior case law, it must operate en banc.See Phillip M. Kannan, The Precedential Force of Panel Law, 76  755 (1993). Under the interpanel doctrine, "No panel can overrule the precedent established by any panel in the same circuit; all panels are bound by prior panel decisions in the same circuit." Id. at 755-56. In this case, after the panel decision was rendered, the Federal Circuit vacated the panel decision and set the case for rehearing en banc.
 2015 Federal Circuit Ruling 
The en banc court characterized the problem as determining, when "more than one actor is involved in practicing the steps" of a method claim of a patent, whether the acts of one actor are attributable to the other actor such that second one is to be held "responsible for the infringement." The court said that it would hold one entity responsible for another's performance of method steps in two sets of circumstances:
 "where that entity directs or controls others' performance", and
 "where the actors form a joint enterprise."
In past cases, the court noted that it had held that "an actor is liable for infringement under § 271(a) if it acts through an agent (applying traditional agency principles) or contracts with another to perform one or more steps of a claimed method." To those two circumstances, the court held that it would now add a third:
The court noted that this is copyright law's "vicarious liability" rule as stated in Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd.. Further, "Whether a single actor directed or controlled the acts of one or more third parties is a question of fact, reviewable on appeal for substantial evidence, when tried to a jury."
As for the joint enterprise  basis for liability, the court instructed that it would follow the rule of the Restatement (Second) of Torts § 491 cmt. b: "The law [...] considers that each is the agent or servant of the others, and that the act of any one within the scope of the enterprise is to be charged vicariously against the rest." This in turn calls for proof of four elements:
This too raises a question of fact, reviewable on appeal for substantial evidence, when tried to a jury.
Turning to the facts of the specific case before it, the court reversed the JMOL and reinstated the jury verdict. The court said that the jury had heard substantial evidence from which it could find that Limelight directed or controlled its customers' performance of each remaining method step that Limelight did not itself perform. such that all steps of the method are attributable to Limelight. For example, "Akamai presented substantial evidence demonstrating that Limelight conditions its customers' use of its content delivery network upon its customers' performance of" the "tagging" and "serving" steps of the patented process, and that "Limelight establishes the manner or timing of its customers' performance." The form contract that Limelight uses provides for the customer to do acts amounting to tagging and serving.
After further proceedings, the Federal Circuit remanded the case to the district court, for it to reinstate the 2008 jury verdict of infringement and the $40 million plus lost profits award.Dennis Crouch, Federal Circuit Finally Sends Akamai Back to District Court with Orders to Finish It,  (Nov. 16, 2015). Limelight announced its intention to appeal the judgment to the U.S. Supreme Court,Limelight Networks Announces Intent to File Appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States . and on January 26, 2016, filed a certiorari petition.Petition. The question presented is:
The Supreme Court denied certiorari on April 18, 2016.Limelight Networks, Inc. v. Akamai Techs., Inc., 
 The Massachusetts District Court's July 2016 Final Ruling 
On July 1, 2016, it was announced that the Massachusetts District Court entered the final judgment in the case, with Limelight paying $51M in total damages to Akamai (to be reflected in Limelight's 2016 Q2 earnings).
 Commentary 
 Professor Michael Dzwonczyk wrote that Akamai's patent claim "could easily have been rewritten as a single-actor method claim that would not require the performance of any step by a second actor," and provided a rewritten version.Michael Dzwonczyk Bulletproofing Method Claims for Post-Limelight Enforcement (Feb. 2014).
 Harold Wegner also analyzed the patent-claim "wordsmithing" and showed how the litigation problem could have been avoided.Harold Wegner, Akamai II: Direct Infringement Déjà Vu (Aug. 2014). His improved claims are at pp. 20-21.
 Professor Jason Rantanen pointed out an odd quirk in the new doctrine. He observes in the Patently-O blog that "a party could be liable for inducement where it induced another party who itself performed some of the steps and the remaining steps were attributable to the induced party (even if performed by another [third party])."Akamai v. Limelight: Federal Circuit Expands the Contours of Direct Infringement,  (Aug. 13, 2015).
 The PCK blog asserted:
 The Marathon Blog observes that the court's ruling that divided infringement now constitutes direct infringement, not induced or contributory infringement, makes litigation easier for patentees "since direct infringement does not have to meet the 'knowledge' and 'intent' requirements (as in induced infringement)."Appeals Court Defines “Direct Infringement” In a Way Favorable to Patent Owners ,  (Sept. 24, 2015).
 The University of Minnesota's Lawsciblog (Minn. J.L. Sci. & Tech.) opined that the case was important in providing a way for patentees to prevent "a possible way to dodge the direct infringement liability by inducing the consumers to perform some of actions of infringement." That is, the consumers could be held to be in a joint enterprise with the primary infringer, such as the party in Limelight's position.Tianxiang (“Max”) Zhou, Akamai Techs. v. Limelight Networks: An Expansion of the Scope of Patent Direct Infringement.  (Oct. 13, 2015).
 Beverly E Hjorth argues that the new divided-infringement rule of the Akamai case can usefully be asserted in the medical diagnostic field:
 Although Hjorth does not mention it, this is precisely the kind of patent unsuccessfully asserted in the Supreme Court's 2012 Mayo decision.. Moreover, the asserted claim in that case suffered from the very defect that the Federal Circuit's en banc Akamai decision seeks to remedy.That the asserted claim was uneforceable (at the time) because the method was carried out in part by a physician and in part by a diagnostic laboratory is discussed in Richard H. Stern,  Mayo v. Prometheus: No Patents on Conventional Implementations of Natural Principles and Fundamental Truths , [2012]  502, 511-12, along with ways to rewrite the claim to overcome its technical difficulties. Perhaps the claim asserted in the Mayo case could be considered a joint-enterprise claim under Akamai.As the preceding article explains, however, such diagnostic claims may nonetheless be patent ineligible under 35 U.S.C. § 101, a defect that Akamai cannot cure.
 Professor John Golden, writing in the New Private Law Blog, sees the case as presenting "a fundamental dilemma":
 Subsequent developments 
 Lilly v. Teva 
In Eli Lilly & Co. v. Teva Parenteral Meds., Inc.,Eli Lilly & Co. v. Teva Parenteral Meds., Inc., 126 F. Supp. 3d 1037 (S.D. Ind. 2015), affirmed,  the district court applied the Akamai ruling to find patent infringement. Lilly owns a patent on methods of administering a chemotherapy drug (brand name Alimta®, generic name pemetrexed disodium), followed or preceded by vitamin B12 and folic acid, which minimize the drug's toxic side effects. The defendants sought approval from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to market generic forms of the chemotherapy drug along with instructions to doctors and patients that they should follow or precede the administration of the chemotherapy drug as the patent prescribes. As the court noted, FDA regulations require that the product labeling for a proposed generic version of an existing drug, such as Altima, must instruct physicians to follow exactly the claimed regimen, since the generic drug must be distributed with identical labeling to that for the original drug.See Lilly at *4. See also 21 CFR 314.94(a)(8)(iv) (requiring that generic drugs have labeling that is "the same as the labeling approved for the reference listed drug").
Thus the doctor treating the patient would, in addition to administering the chemotherapy drug, administer the vitamin B12 by injection at times and dosages as specified in the claims of Lilly's patent. However, the patients would obtain the folic acid by prescription written by the physician and take it themselves, according to the physician's instructions. The physician would not himself hand the folic acid to the patient or "physically place the folic acid into the patient's mouth."
The district court stated that "for purposes of this case, the Court must apply this most current articulation of the law of divided infringement as stated by the Federal Circuit in its most recent ruling." The court added that "the factual circumstances are sufficiently analogous to those in Akamai to support a finding of direct infringement by physicians under § 271(a), and thus inducement of infringement by Defendants under § 271(b), under the legal standard recently set forth by the Federal Circuit."Lilly at *11. The court rejected the defense argument that the patients were intervening agents who kept the process steps from being fully attributable to the doctors:
Akamai states that "liability under § 271(a) can also be found when an alleged infringer conditions participation in an activity or receipt of a benefit upon performance of a step or steps of a patented method and establishes the manner or timing of that performance." Here, the labeling says:
Furthermore, the labeling requires instruction that "[i]f the patient fails to carry out this step, he or she would not receive the benefit of the patented method, i.e. a reduction of potentially life-threatening toxicities caused by pemetrexed." And the labeling has the physician tell the patient to take "400 to 1000 micrograms of folic acid for at least five days out of the seven days prior to and during pemetrexed administration—and the patient is required to do so to receive the full benefit of the treatment."Lilly at *15. This corresponds to what Akamai states is a basis for finding liability. Accordingly, the court found that under Akamai performance of the method steps by the patients would be attributable to the physician and would thus constitute direct infringement by the physician under § 271(a). Thus, use of the defendants’ products, who provided the necessary instructions, would result in the defendants' induced infringement of the physician, under § 271(b).
 Medgraph v. Medtronic 
In Medgraph, Inc. v. Medtronic, Inc. the Federal Circuit upheld a district court ruling that the new Akamai standard did not aid the patentee Medgraph in its suit because there was no "showing that Medtronic itself directly infringed the method claims or that it acted as a ‘mastermind’ by controlling or directing anyone else's direct infringement." Medgraph argued that it should prevail under the Federal Circuit's 2015 ruling that infringement could be found "when an alleged infringer conditions participation in an activity or receipt of a benefit upon performance of a step or steps of a patented method and establishes the manner or timing of that performance." But the Federal Circuit ruled that this theory did not apply because Medgraph could not show that the missing steps in its method for a doctor to diagnose a patient were actually performed by the patient and doctor. The accused infringer may have instructed users how to use the invention to infringe the patent, but it did not require that those steps be followed or necessarily receive some benefit upon their performance.
The Federal Circuit said, first, that there was no direct infringement under the new theory:
There was also no indirect infringement, because "indirect infringement is predicated on direct infringement," which was absent here.
 References 
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States patent case law
"""

From "Ake v. Oklahoma" ==> """
Ake v. Oklahoma, 470 U.S. 68 (1985), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment required the state to provide a psychiatric evaluation to be used on behalf of an indigent criminal defendant if he needed it..Greenhouse, Linda. Becoming Justice Blackmun. Times Books. 2005. Page 160.
 Background 
Glen Burton Ake was arrested and charged with murdering a couple and wounding their two children in 1979. At his arraignment, his bizarre behavior prompted the judge to order a psychiatric competency evaluation. This resulted in a report by the examining psychiatrist that Ake was delusional, and specifically that Ake "claims to be the 'sword of vengeance' of the Lord and that he will sit at the left hand of God in heaven." Ake was diagnosed as a probable paranoid schizophrenic, and a prolonged psychiatric evaluation was recommended to determine whether Ake was competent to stand trial.
Ake was then confined to a state hospital for several months, before he came to trial. Ake's attorney requested that the court appoint a psychiatrist to perform an evaluation specifically for the purpose of helping to adequately prepare and present an insanity defense. The court denied the request, holding that Ake had no right to such assistance. Ake was then tried and convicted of two counts of murder, and sentenced to death.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court, in an opinion by Justice Marshall, framed the question as one of "[m]eaningful access to justice", weighing the individual interest in the accuracy of a criminal proceeding against the burden imposed on the state, in light of "the probable value of the psychiatric assistance sought, and the risk of error in the proceeding if such assistance is not offered".
The Court found that both the individual and the state had a strong interest, but that "the State's interest in prevailing at trial - unlike that of a private litigant - is necessarily tempered by its interest in the fair and accurate adjudication of criminal cases." Requiring the state to make one psychiatrist available to indigent defendants was not an excessive financial burden, and the state could not assert the desire to press a strategic advantage at trial.
The Court reversed the lower court's judgment and remanded the matter for a new trial.
Chief Justice Burger wrote a brief concurring opinion, writing for himself that "Nothing in the Court's opinion reaches noncapital cases." Before the opinions were finalized, Burger had tried to persuade Marshall to limit his opinion to capital cases, but failed.
Post-Opinion
After a retrial, Ake was convicted and received two life sentences. His accomplice, Steven Keith Hatch, was executed in 1996 for the slayings even though he had waited in a car outside the family's home. According to People magazine, Hatch was inside the house. Leslie Brooks, who was 12 years old, testified that he raped her. Then Ake shot the family or four, the two children survived having watched their parents die. Ake died at a prison hospital in Oklahoma on April 23, 2011.
 References 
 External links 
 PsycLAW : Ake v. Oklahoma
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Al-Marri v. Spagone" ==> """
al-Marri v. Spagone, 555 U.S. 1220 (2009), was a legal case in which the United States Supreme Court had to decide whether individuals can be imprisoned indefinitely for suspected wrongdoing without being charged with a crime and tried before a jury. The case was dismissed as moot on March 6, 2009, by the application of the Acting Solicitor General to transfer petitioner from military custody to the custody of the Attorney General.Certiorari. Summary disposition Supreme Court
The Fourth Circuit had ruled that a United States resident cannot be held on suspicion of terrorist activities, but must be charged in a domestic court or released.
Background
The federal government arrested Ali Saleh Kahlah al-Marri on December 12, 2001, and indicted him on charges two years later on apparently unrelated charges of credit card fraud and assorted crimes of dishonesty.
On June 23, 2003, President George W. Bush's administration determined al-Marri to be an enemy combatant and ordered him transferred to the custody of the U.S. Department of Defense.Enemy Combatant Designation by President Bush. The federal government asserts he is a sleeper agent for the terrorist organization Al-Qaeda, sent to the United States to explore disruptions of the country's financial systems. This was said to justify his detention without trial in civilian courts. Since that time, he has been held at the naval brig in Charleston, South Carolina. He is the only known enemy combatant to be held in military custody on U.S. soil (others are being held at the Guantanamo Bay detention camp in Cuba).
Fourth Circuit decision
Judge Diana Gribbon Motz wrote the plurality opinion, which held that, as a legal resident of the United States who was originally detained in the United States, al-Marri could not be held in military custody as an enemy combatant. The court also held that the Military Commissions Act does not strip federal courts of jurisdiction to hear habeas corpus petitions from alleged enemy combatants arrested and detained within the borders of the United States. The court ordered the government to either charge al-Marri with a crime, initiate deportation proceedings, or release him.
Dissenting from the opinion, Judge Henry E. Hudson indicated that he believed Bush possessed the authority to detain alleged sleeper agents such as al-Marri, "the type of stealth warrior used by Al Qaeda".Complete decision on Findlaw.com, Hudson's Dissent, at pg. 86.
The decision of Judge Motz was subsequently set aside and the case was reheard en banc on August 22, 2007, by the entire Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals. In a plurality opinion issued on July 15, 2008, the court held that the president did have authority to hold Al-Marri in military custody, but that Al-Marri was entitled to a greater, but undefined, degree of due process in his habeas corpus petition than had been accorded by the court below.  The Supreme Court granted certiorari.
Shortly following his becoming president, President Barack Obama ordered Al-Marri transferred to civilian authorities, and the Supreme Court dismissed the case as moot on March 6, 2009. Al-Marri was subsequently prosecuted in civilian court and pleaded guilty. He had been imprisoned for eight years without charges.
See also
Habeas corpus
United States v. Munsingwear, Inc., 
References
External links
En Banc decision of the Fourth Circuit
Complete decision on Findlaw.com
Coverage from The New York Times
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:War on Terror captives' habeas corpus petitions
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Alabama Department of Revenue v. CSX Transportation, Inc." ==> """
Alabama Department of Revenue v. CSX Transportation, Inc., 575 U.S. 21 (2015), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that "the Eleventh Circuit properly concluded that CSX's competitors
are an appropriate comparison class for the Railroad Revitalization and Regulation Reform Act of 1976's subsection (b)(4) claim.". The Act prohibits states from imposing "another tax that discriminates against a rail carrier" and the Court found that the  Eleventh Circuit "erred in refusing to consider whether Alabama could justify its decision to exempt motor carriers from its sales and use taxes through its decision to subject motor carriers to a fuel excise tax."
 Opinion of the Court 
Associate Justice Antonin Scalia authored the Court's 7–2 decision.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 575
 References 
External links
 SCOTUSblog coverage
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:CSX Transportation
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:Rail transportation in Alabama
"""

From "Alabama Legislative Black Caucus v. Alabama" ==> """
Alabama Legislative Black Caucus v. Alabama, 575 U.S. 254 (2015), was a U.S. Supreme Court decision that overturned a previous decision by a federal district court upholding Alabama's 2012 redrawing of its electoral districts. The Alabama legislature had focused on reducing the difference in population between the districts to 1% or less, while keeping the same proportion of minority voters in each district. The Alabama Legislative Black Caucus and Alabama Democratic Conference challenged this on the grounds that it was an illegal racial gerrymander, banned under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. 
The case went before a three-judge panel in federal district court. The panel characterized the arguments of the Caucus and the Conference as challenging the Alabama redistricting as a whole, with the Conference additionally challenging four specific Senate districts: 7, 11, 22, and 26. The panel held that the Caucus had standing for its claim, but dismissed the Conference's claims regarding both the state as a whole and the four districts. The Court further held that race was not the predominant factor for the redistricting as a whole or for the four districts. Finally, the panel held that, even if it was wrong and race was the predominant factor for the redistricting, the districts should still survive strict scrutiny because the act creating them was narrowly tailored to achieve the compelling state interest of avoiding racial retrogression which would prevent minority voters from electing their candidate of choice.
The Supreme Court, in a 5-4 opinion written by Justice Stephen Breyer, overturned the District Court decision. It held that racial gerrymandering claims must be considered district-by-district, rather than by looking at the state as a whole. The court may consider statewide evidence in evaluating these claims, but the complaint and remedy must concern a particular district or subset of districts. The opinion also held that the Conference had standing to bring its claims. The Court further held that equaling population between the districts is assumed to be a goal of any redistricting effort, and that a finding that the legislature was trying to equal the district population is not sufficient to dismiss claims that the legislature improperly considered race when drawing district lines. Finally, the Court rejected Alabama's claim that Section Five of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 compelled them to maintain the same percentage of minority voters in each district. Section Five only bars legislative action that would diminish the ability of a minority group to elect their candidate of choice. The Court then vacated the previous holding of the District Court and remanded the case for further consideration.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:Alabama Legislature
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
Category:Legal history of Alabama
Category:Gerrymandering in the United States
Category:African-American history of Alabama
"""

From "Alabama v. Bozeman" ==> """
Alabama v. Bozeman, 533 U.S. 146 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court decision involving the prosecution of someone who was already serving a criminal sentence for a different crime in a different state.
 Background 
In circumstances where a state wants to get a person for prosecution who is held in another state, they would file a detainer. That is a legal document telling the other state where the person is imprisoned and to produce him for trial later on in the prosecuting state.. An interstate compact, which was joined by the Federal Government among almost all other states, set forth procedures as to how this process was to be done. The case concerned a specific provision which says that once the prisoner arrives in the receiving state, he must be tried within 120 days. Otherwise, the case must be dismissed.Bozeman, 533 U.S. at 149. The federal government sent Michael Bozeman to Alabama to face charges there. After court preliminaries, the next day he was returned to federal prison and then brought back to Alabama for trial. The trial judge rejected a petition to dismiss the charges for a violation of the Interstate Compact and a divided Alabama Supreme Court reversed.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Breyer explained the question as a simple issue of the exact language in the statute. He noted that it says that in circumstances like the present case, the indictment shall not be of any further force and it should be dismissed. Against pleas by Alabama that the question was technical and the violation small, Breyer replied that "[E]ven were we to assume for argument's sake that the Agreement exempts violations that...are de minimis...we could not say that the violation at issue here qualifies as trivial." The decision of the Alabama Supreme Court was affirmed, mandating a dismissal of the indictment against Bozeman in Alabama.
 See also 
 Interstate compact
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:2001 in Alabama
Category:Legal history of Alabama
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States criminal procedure case law
"""

From "Alabama v. Georgia" ==> """
State of Alabama v. State of Georgia, 64 U.S. (23 How.) 505 (1860), is a unanimous ruling by the Supreme Court of the United States which held that the true border between the states of Alabama and Georgia was the average water mark on the western bank of the Chattahoochee River. In coming to its conclusion, the Court defined what constituted the bed and bank of a river.Wisdom, The Law of Rivers and Watercourses, 1962, p. 9.Kalinoe, Water Law and Customary Water Rights in Papua New Guinea, 1999, p. 27-28. The case has had international repercussions as well. The Supreme Court's definition was adopted by courts in the United Kingdom in the case Hindson v. Ashby (1896) 65 LJ Ch. 515, 2 Ch. 27.
Background
In 1629, during European colonization of the Americas, King Charles I granted Sir Robert Heath a charter giving him title to Native American-occupied land from the northern boundary of what is modern-day Florida north to Albemarle Sound (31st latitude), extending from the Atlantic Ocean west to the Pacific Ocean.Chiorazzi and Most, Prestatehood Legal Materials: A Fifty-State Research Guide, Including New York City and the District of Columbia,  2006, p. 840. In 1663, Charles II of England revoked the Heath charter and issued a new charter to eight noblemen (the "Lords and Proprietors"). In 1665, this charter was amended to extend the land grant northward roughly to the current border of North Carolina and Virginia.Chiorazzi and Most, Prestatehood Legal Materials: A Fifty-State Research Guide, Including New York City and the District of Columbia,  2006, p. 840-841. In 1729, the Proprietors were forced to turn their charters over to George II of Great Britain, and North Carolina separated from South Carolina.Chiorazzi and Most, Prestatehood Legal Materials: A Fifty-State Research Guide, Including New York City and the District of Columbia,  2006, p. 841.
In 1732, George II granted James Oglethorpe and other settlers a charter to all South Carolina Colony land west of the Savannah River.Channing, A Students' History of the United States, 1898, p. 128-129. However, the charter was unclear as to whether the new colony covered all of South Carolina's western border, and South Carolina continued to dispute Georgia's claim over a strip of land about  wide.Lalor, "Territories," in Cyclopædia of Political Science, Political Economy, and of the Political History of the United States, 1886, p. 915. In order to help secure ratification of the Articles of Confederation, the new United States Congress passed legislation encouraging all states to give up their western claims so that new territories might be formed and transformed into states which might eventually be admitted to the union.Lalor, "Territories," in Cyclopædia of Political Science, Political Economy, and of the Political History of the United States, 1886, p. 916-917. In August 1787, South Carolina ceded the disputed strip of land to the state of Georgia.Lalor, "Territories," in Cyclopædia of Political Science, Political Economy, and of the Political History of the United States, 1886, p. 917.
In the Compact of 1802, Georgia ceded its sparsely settled western lands beyond the Chattahoochee River to the United States in exchange for a guarantee that the federal government would extinguish all Native American claims to land within the state's borders.Lalor, "Territories," in Cyclopædia of Political Science, Political Economy, and of the Political History of the United States, 1886, p. 391.Sturgis, Presidents From Washington Through Monroe: 1789–1825: Debating the Issues in Pro and Con Primary Documents, 2002, p. 109. The United States made good on its promise, removing the Cherokee nation to reservations in the new Mississippi Territory (a process which would not end until the completion of the Trail of Tears forcible removals in 1838). The Compact of 1802 specified that Georgia's western boundary would be as follows:State of Alabama v. State of Georgia, 64 U.S. 505.
In 1817, what is now the modern state of Mississippi was created from the western half of the Mississippi Territory, the remaining territory renamed the Alabama Territory.Chiorazzi and Most, Prestatehood Legal Materials: A Fifty-State Research Guide, Including New York City and the District of Columbia,  2006, p. 9. The territory became the modern state of Alabama in 1819.Chiorazzi and Most, Prestatehood Legal Materials: A Fifty-State Research Guide, Including New York City and the District of Columbia,  2006, p. 14-16.
The state of Alabama entered into a dispute with the state of Georgia over the specific meaning of the Compact of 1802.  Alabama argued that the contour of the land on the western bank of the Chattahoochee River was sometimes high bluffs and sometimes low, flat floodplains, and that the high-water mark sometimes marched as much as a half-mile inland to the west.State of Alabama v. State of Georgia, 64 U.S. 505, 506–507. Georgia answered that it did indeed claim these lands as its own, and that the Compact of 1802 did not cover the northernmost part of the border (which Georgia claimed it had obtained directly from the state of South Carolina in 1787 without first transferring title to the United States).State of Alabama v. State of Georgia, 64 U.S. 505, 509–510.
The State of Alabama submitted its case to the Supreme Court in December 1855.State of Alabama v. State of Georgia, 64 U.S. 505, 506. The State of Georgia submitted its reply in December 1858.State of Alabama v. State of Georgia, 64 U.S. 505, 508.
Decision
Associate Justice James Moore Wayne delivered the unanimous opinion of the court.
Justice Wayne emphasized the mutual nature of the Compact of 1802, and pointed out that Georgia admitted in the agreement that its western boundary extended north to the border with the state of Tennessee.State of Alabama v. State of Georgia, 64 U. S. 505, 511. This, then, made any argument over the South Carolina cession of 1787 moot.
Next, Justice Wayne argued that "The contract of cession must be interpreted by the words of it, according to their received meaning and use in the language in which it is written, as that can be collected from judicial opinions concerning the rights of private persons upon rivers, and the writings of publicists in reference to the settlement of controversies between nations and States as to their ownership and jurisdiction on the soil of rivers within their banks and beds."State of Alabama v. State of Georgia, 64 U. S. 505, 512–513. Citing scholarly sources from Europe, American case law (such as Handly's Lessee v. Anthony, 18 U. S. 374 (1820)), and other cessions between states and the United States, Justice Wayne concluded that the Compact of 1802 did not mean the low-water mark as claimed by Alabama.State of Alabama v. State of Georgia, 64 U. S. 505, 514–515.
However, Wayne concluded that this did not necessarily mean the high-water mark, as claimed by Georgia.  Rather, the Compact of 1802 specified the western bank, and the bank was different from the high-water mark.  Drawing on the sources cited, Wayne defined the bank as follows (emphasis in original):State of Alabama v. State of Georgia, 64 U. S. 505, 515.
The majority concluded, therefore, that only the average water level defined the bank, and that the boundary of Georgia should be so marked. The Court also reaffirmed that the Compact of 1802 gave both states free navigation of the river.
References
Bibliography
Channing, Edward. A Students' History of the United States. New York: Macmillan Co., 1898.
Chiorazzi, Michael and Most, Marguerite. Prestatehood Legal Materials: A Fifty-State Research Guide, Including New York City and the District of Columbia.  Florence, Ky.: Routledge, 2006.
Kalinoe, Lawrence Kuna. Water Law and Customary Water Rights in Papua New Guinea. Papua New Guinea: Law Faculty Publication Unit, 1999.
Lalor, John J. "Territories." In Cyclopædia of Political Science, Political Economy, and of the Political History of the United States. Chicago, A.H. Andrews & Co., 1886.
Sturgis, Amy H. Presidents From Washington Through Monroe: 1789–1825: Debating the Issues in Pro and Con Primary Documents. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 2002.
Wisdom, A.S. The Law of Rivers and Watercourses. London: Shaw, 1962.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
Category:1860 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court original jurisdiction cases
Category:Internal territorial disputes of the United States
Category:Legal history of Alabama
Category:Legal history of Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:1860 in Alabama
Category:1860 in Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:Chattahoochee River
"""

From "Alabama v. North Carolina" ==> """
Alabama v. North Carolina, 560 U.S. 330 (2010), was an original jurisdiction United States Supreme Court case. It arose from a disagreement between the state of North Carolina and the other members of the Southeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste Management Compact over the funding for a joint project. Eight states had formed the compact in 1983 to manage low-level radioactive waste in the southeastern United States.  In 1986, North Carolina was chosen as the location for the regional waste facility, and it asked the other states for funding to help with the project. The project stalled and was eventually shut down, despite North Carolina receiving $80 million from the other states. After the project's demise, the other states demanded their money back, but North Carolina refused to repay them, leading to this case.
 Background 
In 1980, Congress passed the Low Level Radioactive Waste Policy Act to authorize the creation of interstate agreements regarding the management of low-level radioactive waste. Accordingly, in 1983, North Carolina, along with the states of Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Mississippi, South Carolina, Tennessee, and Virginia, formed the Southeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste Management Compact to coordinate their management of low-level radioactive waste. It was run by a commission, which was tasked with choosing a State in which to construct a "regional disposal facility". In 1986, the commission chose North Carolina, thus requiring it to begin the process of seeking a licence for the construction of such a facility. Two years later, North Carolina asked the other states for monetary assistance with the project, which it received – by 1997, North Carolina had been paid more than $80 million. Yet, despite $34 million of North Carolina's own funds, it was unable to obtain the license in a timely fashion. In 1997, the commission told North Carolina that, without a plan for funding the rest of the licensing steps, it would be cut off; when it was, North Carolina began to shut down the project, claiming that it could not continue without additional funding.
In response, in June 1999, Florida and Tennessee asked that the commission levy monetary sanctions against North Carolina. North Carolina responded by attempting to leave the Compact entirely. It based this decision on a clause which declared that "any party state may withdraw from the compact by enacting a law repealing the compact, provided that if a regional facility is located within such state, such regional facility shall remain available to the region for four years after the date the commission receives verification in writing from the Governor of such party state of the rescission of the Compact".
The commission, in response to the complaint by Florida and Tennessee, demanded in December 1999 that, in addition to other monetary penalties, North Carolina repay approximately $80 million. The commission believed that, under article 7(F) of the original Compact, it had the power to level such monetary sanctions. However, North Carolina disagreed, and refused to comply with the commission's sanctions.
 Case history 
In 2003, the Supreme Court allowed Alabama, Florida, Tennessee, and Virginia (the only four remaining members of the Compact), and the commission to sue North Carolina under the Court's original jurisdiction. The plaintiffs requested "monetary and other relief, including a declaration that North Carolina is subject to sanctions and that the commission's sanctions resolution is valid and enforceable." The case was assigned to a special master, who filed two reports.
In January 2010, the Supreme Court heard oral arguments regarding the exceptions to the reports that were filed by both parties.
 Decision 
The Supreme Court overruled all of the states' objections to the Special Master's Reports. It held that the Compact did not give the commission the power to impose monetary sanctions against North Carolina; that the Court did not need to follow the commission's findings regarding North Carolina's supposed breach of its obligations; that North Carolina did not breach its obligations to take "appropriate steps" towards getting a license; and that North Carolina was allowed to withdraw from the Compact.
The Court remanded the remainder of the case back to the Special Master to further adjudicate the equitable claims raised by the petitioners.
 Subsequent history 
In January 2011, the case was dismissed by agreement of the parties.
References
External links
 Southeast Compact Commission website
 Compact (PDF, download only)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court original jurisdiction cases
Category:Radioactive waste
"""

From "Alabama v. Shelton" ==> """
Alabama v. Shelton, 535 U.S. 654 (2002), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld the Alabama Supreme Court's ruling that counsel (a lawyer) must be provided for the accused in order to impose a suspended prison sentence.
 Background 
Shelton was accused of third-degree  assault, which, in Alabama, is a misdemeanor and carries a maximum sentence of one year in prison and a $2,000 fine. The court repeatedly warned Shelton of the dangers of representing himself during the trial, yet failed to offer him counsel. He represented himself both in the local court, where he was convicted, and the Alabama Circuit Court, where he was also convicted. However, the Circuit Court gave Shelton a 30-day suspended sentence and 2 years' probation.
The Criminal Court of Appeals found that it was not compulsory to offer the defendant counsel for a suspended sentence because the sentence did not result in actual confinement.
The Supreme Court of Alabama stated that: (1) a defendant may not be sentenced to a term of imprisonment absent provision of counsel; and (2) for purposes of this rule, a suspended sentence constitutes a "term of imprisonment," even though incarceration is not immediate or inevitable.
 Opinion of the Court 
The United States Supreme Court affirmed the Supreme Court of Alabama's decision.
 See also 
 Further reading 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2002 in United States case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment appointment of counsel case law
Category:2002 in Alabama
Category:Legal history of Alabama
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation v. EPA" ==> """
Alaska Dept. of Environmental Conservation v. EPA, 540 U.S. 461 (2004), is a US Supreme Court case clarifying the scope of state environmental regulators and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). In a 5–4 decision, the Supreme Court found the EPA has authority to overrule state agency decisions under the Clean Air Act that a company is using the "best available controlling technology" to prevent pollution.Alaska Dept. of Environmental Conservation v. EPA, .
Background
The Clean Air Act requires state agencies to determine optimal methods of preventing air quality degradation in areas that meet national clean air standards.. The Act regulates air quality and establishes National Ambient Air Quality Standards in every state to prevent public health issues. The Act prohibits construction of major air polluting facilities that are not equipped with "the best available control technology" (BACT)..
In 1998, Teck Cominco Alaska, requested a permit to build an additional generator and to modify an existing generator at its mines in order to expand zinc extraction. In May 1999, the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation (ADEC) issued the permit, and a technical report concluded that "Low NOx" technology was BACT and identified "selective catalytic reduction" (SCR) as the best control technology. The EPA opposed the permit and objected that the ADEC had identified SCR as the best available control technology but failed to require it as BACT.
The ADEC issued a second report reinforcing the original findings but conceded the lack of cost data from Teck Cominco made it impossible to evaluate the impact of SCR on the mine's profitability. The EPA issued orders to ADEC under §§113(a)(5) and 167 of the Act that prohibited the ADEC from issuing permits to Teck Cominco without documenting why SCR was not BACT.
The ADEC appealed the EPA's orders to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals and argued that the EPA did not have the right to interfere with the state agency's decision. The Ninth Circuit sided with EPA, and ADEC appealed.
Issues
Under the Clean Air Act, can the EPA block construction of a new major pollutant emitting facility permitted by a state environmental regulator when the EPA finds the state environmental regulator's determination to be unreasonable? What standard of review applies to such actions?
Majority opinion
The Supreme Court held in its majority opinion that the Clean Air Act authorized the EPA to bar the construction of the polluting facility in Alaska. The EPA correctly interpreted that the Clean Air Act gave the authority to review state authorities' BACT determinations.The court found such authority in  and .
Since the Act does not specify a standard for judicial review, the Supreme Court applied "the familiar default standard of the Administrative Procedure Act,." of whether the EPA's action was "arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law." It found that although EPA's orders were explained with "less than ideal clarity,". the EPA's comments and orders were not arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of discretion.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Kennedy wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justices Rehnquist, Scalia, and Thomas, and found that Alaska's procedures were in full compliance with the Clean Air Act and the EPA's accompanying regulations that it promulgated. The EPA's action to overturn ADEC's decision was based on nothing more than its substantive disagreement with Alaska's discretionary judgment and exceeded its powers by setting aside Alaska's BACT determination.
See also
 Clean Air Act
 Environmental Protection Agency
References
External links
Category:1999 in Alaska
Category:2004 in Alaska
Category:2004 in the environment
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:Environment of Alaska
Category:Mining in Alaska
Category:Pollution in the United States
Category:United States waste law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Zinc mining in the United States
Category:United States Environmental Protection Agency
"""

From "Alaska v. Native Village of Venetie Tribal Government" ==> """
Alaska v. Native Village of Venetie Tribal Government, 522 U.S. 520 (1998), was a United States Supreme Court case. The local tribal council in Venetie, Alaska, wanted to collect tax from non-tribal members doing business on tribal lands. The Supreme Court granted certiorari on appeal from the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, which had ruled in the tribe's favor, saying they occupied Indian Country.
The Court decided unanimously that the land was not the tribe's land subject to the tribal tax, even though it was owned by the tribe, because it was not part of a Native American reservation. Because all but one reservation in Alaska (the Annette Island reservation of the Tsimshian) had been eliminated by the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act of 1971, the decision had the practical effect of prohibiting almost all Indian tribes in Alaska from collecting taxes for activities conducted on tribal land. Taxing authority is reserved as a right of the states and federal government.
The State of Alaska, the petitioner, was represented by John G. Roberts, who later became the Chief Justice of the United States. The respondent was represented by Heather Kendall-Miller, an attorney of Athabascan descent.
External links
Category:1996 in Alaska
Category:1997 in Alaska
Category:1998 in Alaska
Category:1998 in United States case law
Category:Alaska Natives and United States law
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:United States Native American tax case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Yukon–Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska
"""

From "Albertson v. Subversive Activities Control Board" ==> """
Albertson v. Subversive Activities Control Board, 382 U.S. 70 (1965), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States ruled on November 15, 1965, that persons (in this case, William Albertson) believed to be members of the Communist Party of the United States of America could not be required to register as party members with the Subversive Activities Control Board because the information which party members were required to submit could form the basis of their prosecution for being party members, which is a crime, and therefore deprived them of their self-incrimination rights under the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
 See also 
 Communist Party v. Subversive Activities Control Board,  and 
 United States v. Sullivan, 
 William Albertson
 External links 
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1965 in United States case law
Category:Communist Party USA litigation
"""

From "Albrecht v. Herald Co." ==> """
Albrecht v. Herald Co., 390 U.S. 145 (1968), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court, which reaffirmed the law (as it then was) that fixing a maximum price was illegal per se. This rule was reversed in 1997 by State Oil Co. v. Khan, which held that maximum price-setting was not inherently anti-competitive and not always a violation of antitrust law, and should therefore be evaluated for legality under the rule of reason rather than a per se rule.
Albrecht drew heavy criticism by economists who asserted that maximum price fixing actually increases consumer welfare, which they considered to be a primary goal of antitrust.
 Background 
Lester J. Albrecht, an independent newspaper carrier, bought from Herald Publishing Company at wholesale and sold at retail copies of Herald's morning newspaper, the St. Louis Globe-Democrat, under an exclusive territory arrangement terminable if a carrier exceeded the maximum retail price advertised by Albrecht. When Albrecht exceeded that price, Herald Co. protested to him and then informed Albrecht's subscribers that it would itself deliver the paper at the lower price. Herald Co. engaged an agency (Milne) to solicit petitioner's customers. About 300 of Albrecht's 1200 subscribers switched to direct delivery by Herald.
Herald Co. later turned these customers over, without cost, to another carrier (Kroner), who was aware of Herald's purpose and knew that he might have to return the route if Albrecht discontinued his pricing practice. Herald Co. told Albrecht that he could have his customers back if he adhered to the suggested price. Albrecht filed a treble-damage complaint which, as later amended, charged a combination in restraint of trade in violation of section 1 of the Sherman Antitrust Act, among Herald, Albrecht's customers, Milne, and Kroner. Albrecht's appointment as carrier was terminated and Herald required sale of his route. Albrecht made the sale at a price found to be lower than it would have been but for the conduct of Herald Co.
The jury found for Herald Co. Albrecht moved for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict, asserting that, under United States v. Parke, Davis & Co.,362 U. S. 29 (1960). and like cases, the undisputed facts showed a combination to fix resale prices, which was per se illegal under § 1 of the Sherman Act. The district court denied the motion.390 U.S. at 148.
Ruling of Eighth Circuit
The court of appeals affirmed. It held that there could be no violation of § 1 of the Sherman Act, which requires concerted action, because Herald's action was unilateral. Herald was entitled to refuse to deal with Albrecht because he violated his contract requiring him to observe Herald's maximum price. Herald was entitled to engage in competition with Albrecht because he was not entitled to exclusivity after violating the contract.390 U.S. at 149.
Ruling of Supreme Court
The Supreme Court reversed in an opinion by Justice White wrote for the Court; Justice Douglas concurred. Justices Harlan and Stewart dissented.
Majority opinion
The Court decided two principal points, one of which was later overruled. First, the conduct was not unilateral but rather was concerted. Second, later overruled by Khan, maximum price-fixing was illegal per se.
The combination
Based on the Parke Davis case, there was a combination that Herald put together. In Parke Davis the "combination with retailers arose because their acquiescence in the suggested prices was secured by threats of termination; the combination with wholesalers arose because they cooperated in terminating price-cutting retailers." By the same token, "there can be no doubt that a combination arose between respondent, Milne, and Kroner to force petitioner to conform to the advertised retail price." Herald:
hired Milne to solicit customers away from petitioner in order to get petitioner to reduce his price. It was through the efforts of Milne, as well as because of respondent's letter to petitioner's customers, that about 300 customers were obtained for Kroner. Milne's purpose was undoubtedly to earn its fee, but it was aware that the aim of the solicitation campaign was to force petitioner to lower his price. Kroner knew that respondent was giving him the customer list as part of a program to get petitioner to conform to the advertised price, and he knew that he might have to return the customers if petitioner ultimately complied with respondent's demands. He undertook to deliver papers at the suggested price, and materially aided in the accomplishment of respondent's plan. Given the uncontradicted facts recited by the Court of Appeals, there was a combination within the meaning of § 1 between respondent, Milne, and Kroner, and the Court of Appeals erred in holding to the contrary.390 U.S. at 150.
Justice White pointed out other possible combinations that Albrecht might properly have argued existed. First, he could have claimed a combination between Herald and himself, at least "as of the day he unwillingly complied" with Herald's advertised price. Second, "he might successfully have claimed that respondent [Herald] had combined with other carriers because the firmly enforced price policy applied to all carriers, most of whom acquiesced in it." A third possible combination was between Herald and Albrecht's customers.390 U.S. at 150 n.6.
The price fix
Price-fixing agreements and combinations are illegal per se, including ones to fix maximum prices. In Kiefer-Stewart Co. v. Seagram & Sons,340 U. S. 211 (1951). the Court pointed out, liquor distributors combined to set maximum resale prices. The court of appeals perceived no restraint of trade, but the Supreme Court reversed. It held "that agreements to fix maximum prices 'no less than those to fix minimum prices, cripple the freedom of traders, and thereby restrain their ability to sell in accordance with their own judgment.'" The Court said that it agreed with the Kiefer-Stewart decision:
Maximum and minimum price-fixing may have different consequences in many situations. But schemes to fix maximum prices, by substituting the perhaps erroneous judgment of a seller for the forces of the competitive market, may severely intrude upon the ability of buyers to compete and survive in that market. Competition, even in a single product, is not cast in a single mold. Maximum prices may be fixed too low for the dealer to furnish services essential to the value which goods have for the consumer or to furnish services and conveniences which consumers desire and for which they are willing to pay. Maximum price-fixing may channel distribution through a few large or specifically advantaged dealers who otherwise would be subject to significant non-price competition. Moreover, if the actual price charged under a maximum price scheme is nearly always the fixed maximum price, which is increasingly likely as the maximum price approaches the actual cost of the dealer, the scheme tends to acquire all the attributes of an arrangement fixing minimum prices. It is our view, therefore, that the combination formed by the respondent in this case to force petitioner to maintain a specified price for the resale of the newspapers which he had purchased from respondent constituted, without more, an illegal restraint of trade under § 1 of the Sherman Act.390 U.S. at 152-53.
Concurring opinion
Justice Douglas agreed that the court of appeals erred, but considered that "this is a 'rule of reason' case."390 U.S. at 154.
Harlan dissent
Justice Harlan considered maximum price-fixing beneficial to the public:
Other things being equal, a manufacturer would like to restrict those distributing his product to the lowest feasible profit margin, for, in this way, he achieves the lowest overall price to the public and the largest volume. When a manufacturer dictates a minimum resale price, he is responding to the interest of his [retailer] customers, who may treat his product better if they have a secure high margin of profits. When the same manufacturer dictates a price ceiling, however, he is acting directly in his own interest, and there is no room for the inference that he is merely a mechanism for accomplishing anticompetitive purposes of his customers.390 U.S. at 157-58.
Justice Harlan also disagreed that one who merely acquiesces engages in concerted action within the meaning of § 1 of the Sherman Act.390 U.S. at 160-62.
Stewart dissent
Justice Stewart considered that Herald was justified in fixing maximum prices to its ultimate customers, the consuming public, because that was a necessary defensive measure in the face of the territorial monopoly granted the distributors. By not permitting this—" The Court today stands the Sherman Act on its head."390 U.S. at 169-70.
 Judgment 
The Supreme Court held that Herald Co. acted unlawfully by requiring retailers to sell newspapers at a particular price.
 Economic background 
A newspaper's profits are determined by its circulation  and the number of advertisements  it sells. Like in every circulation industry, circulation depends upon the price of a copy, as well as the amount of advertising: . Similarly, the demand for advertising space is determined by . In other words: the higher the circulation, the higher the demand for advertising space. The profit-maxizing newspaper monopolist therefore sets his copy price as:
where  is the cost per copy,  is the marginal cost of advertisement,  is the traditional price elasticity of demand, and  captures the feedback effect of lower copy prices inducing more advertising and vice versa. Most important is the term , which captures the marginal advertising profit from selling additional advertising due to increased circulation. The newspaper monopolist's optimal price is therefore lower than for traditional monopolists in non-circulation industries.
 See also 
Kiefer-Stewart Co. v. Seagram & Sons, Inc. (1951)
 References 
 Further reading 
  Cited by the Supreme Court in State Oil Co. v. Khan (1997).
 External links 
Category:1968 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:Mass media in St. Louis
"""

From "Alden v. Maine" ==> """
Alden v. Maine, 527 U.S. 706 (1999), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States about whether the United States Congress may use its Article I powers to abrogate a state's sovereign immunity from suits in its own courts, thereby allowing citizens to sue a state in state court without the state's consent.
 Background 
In 1992, probation officers employed by the State of Maine filed a suit against their employer in United States District Court for the District of Maine. The probation officers alleged violations of the overtime provisions laid out in the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), a federal statute, and requested liquidated damages and compensation. The federal court dismissed the suit by stating that the Eleventh Amendment gives the states sovereign immunity from suit in federal court. After the dismissal, the probation officers filed the same action in Maine state court. The state court also dismissed the case based on sovereign immunity. The case was then appealed to the Maine appellate courts and then to the Supreme Court of the United States.
 Decision 
In a 5–4 ruling, the Court concluded that Article I of the Constitution does not provide Congress with the ability to subject nonconsenting states to private suits for damages in its own courts. In addition, the Court held that since Maine was not a consenting party in the suit, the ruling of the Supreme Court of Maine was upheld.
Writing for the Court, Justice Anthony Kennedy stated that the Constitution provides immunity for nonconsenting states from suits filed by citizens of that state or citizens of any other state and noted that such immunity is often referred to as "Eleventh Amendment Immunity." Such immunity, the Court continued, is necessary to maintain state sovereignty, which lies at the heart of federalism. However, "sovereign immunity derives not from the Eleventh Amendment but from the federal structure of the original Constitution itself."
After discussing the Eleventh Amendment, the Court turned to the question of whether Congress has the authority, under Article I of the Constitution, to subject nonconsenting states to private suits in their own courts. The majority ruled that Congress has no such authority, under the original Constitution, to abrogate states' sovereign immunity:
However, Congress may abrogate sovereign immunity when the suit is to enforce a statute protecting Fourteenth Amendment rights: 
The majority stated that the Supremacy Clause of the Constitution applies only to pieces of legislation that fit within its design. Therefore, any law passed by Congress pursuant to Article I that seeks to subject states to suit would violate the original Constitution. However, Congress may abrogate state sovereign immunity to pass legislation that enforces the Fourteenth Amendment, as in Fitzpatrick v. Bitzer (1976).
 Dissent 
Justice David Souter's dissent argued that the concept of sovereign immunity had been misapplied by the majority. Souter continued by noting that the idea of sovereign immunity was unclear during the period of the Constitution's ratification. In addition, he argued, the Founding Framers would certainly have not expected the idea to remain static over numerous years. In addition, Souter argued that the FLSA was national in scope and so did not violate the principle of federalism, as was argued by the majority.
Souter also argued that the claim the FLSA was unconstitutional was spurious. Such thinking, he argued, could be reached only based upon the misguided notion of sovereign immunity and notion of federalism that the majority had used in reaching its decision:
 Analysis 
Alden represents an extension of the Court's 1996 ruling in Seminole Tribe v. Florida, which held that Congress cannot use its powers under Article I of the Constitution to subject unconsenting states to suit in federal court. Alden held also that Congress cannot use its Article I powers to subject unconsenting states to suit in state court. Later, in Central Virginia Community College v. Katz (2006), the Court would narrow the scope of its previous sovereign immunity rulings and hold that Congress could use the Bankruptcy Clause of Article I to abrogate state sovereign immunity.
 Sources 
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:Legal history of Maine
Category:1999 in United States case law
Category:1999 in Maine
"""

From "Alexander v. Gardner-Denver Co." ==> """
Alexander v. Gardner-Denver Co., 415 U.S. 36 (1974), is a US labor law case, concerning arbitration with collective agreements for labor rights.
Facts
Mr Harrell Alexander, Sr., an employee at the Gardner-Denver Co. and member of the United Steelworkers filed a grievance claiming he had been wrongfully terminated for race discrimination under the Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The arbitrator held that he was terminated for poor work performance.
The District Court granted summary judgment to the employer, based on the grievance procedure. The Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit upheld the District Court's ruling.
Judgment
The Supreme Court held that the case should have been re-evaluated afresh.
Arbitral procedures, while well suited to the resolution of contractual disputes, make arbitration a comparatively inappropriate forum for the final resolution of rights created by Title VII. This conclusion rests first on the special role of the arbitrator, whose task is to effectuate the intent of the parties rather than the requirements of enacted legislation. Where the collective-bargaining agreement conflicts with Title VII, the arbitrator must follow the agreement. To be sure, the tension between contractual and statutory objectives may be mitigated where a collective-bargaining agreement contains provisions facially similar to those of Title VII. But other facts may still render arbitral processes comparatively inferior to judicial processes in the protection of Title VII rights. Among these is the fact that the specialized competence of arbitrators pertains primarily to the law of the shop, not the law of the land. United Steelworkers of America v. Warrior & Gulf Navigation Co., 363 U.S. 574, 581—583, 80 S.Ct. 1347, 1352—1353, 4 L.Ed.2d 1409 (1960).See also   Significantly, a substantial proportion of labor arbitrators are not lawyers. See  This is not to suggest, of course, that arbitrators do not possess a high degree of competence with respect to the vital role in implementing the federal policy favoring arbitration of labor disputes. Parties usually choose an arbitrator because they trust his knowledge and judgment concerning the demands and norms of industrial relations. On the other hand, the resolution of statutory or constitutional issues is a primary responsibility of courts, and judicial construction has proved especially necessary with respect to Title VII, whose broad language frequently can be given meaning only by reference to public law concepts.
Moreover, the factfinding process in arbitration usually is not equivalent to judicial factfinding. The record of the arbitration proceedings is not as complete; the usual rules of evidence do not apply; and rights and procedures common to civil trials, such as discovery, compulsory process, cross-examination, and testimony under oath, are often severely limited or unavailable. See Bernhardt v. Polygraphic Co., 350 U.S. 198, 203, 76 S.Ct. 273, 276, 100 L.Ed. 199 (1956); Wilko v. Swan, 346 U.S., at 435—437, 74 S.Ct., at 186 188. And as this Court has recognized, '(a)rbitrators have no obligation to the court to give their reasons for an award.' United Steelworkers of America v. Enterprise Wheel & Car Corp., 363 U.S., at 598, 80 S.Ct., at 1361. Indeed, it is the informality of arbitral procedure that enables it to function as an efficient, inexpensive, and expeditious means for dispute resolution. This same characteristic, however, makes arbitration a less appropriate forum for final resolution of Title VII issues than the federal courts.
... the federal policy favoring arbitration of labor disputes and the federal policy against discriminatory employment practices can best be accommodated by permitting an employee to pursue fully both his remedy under the grievance arbitration clause of a collective-bargaining agreement and his cause of action under Title VII. The federal court should consider the employee’s claim de novo. The arbitral decision may be admitted as evidence and accorded such weight as the court deems appropriate.
See also
United States labor law
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1974 in United States case law
Category:Ingersoll Rand
Category:United States arbitration case law
Category:United Steelworkers litigation
"""

From "Alexander v. Holmes County Board of Education" ==> """
Alexander v. Holmes County Board of Education, 396 U.S. 19 (1969), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ordered immediate desegregation of public schools in the American South. It followed 15 years of delays to integrate by most Southern school boards after the Court's ruling in Brown v. Board of Education (1954) that segregated public schools were unconstitutional.
 Background 
Justice Felix Frankfurter demanded that the opinion in 1955's Brown v. Board of Education II order desegregation with "all deliberate speed".
The South took it as an excuse to emphasize "deliberate" over "speed" and conducted resistance to desegregating schools, in some jurisdictions closing public schools altogether.
For fifteen years, schools in the South remained segregated.
In 1968, freedom of choice plans had been condemned by the Supreme Court in Green v. County School Board of New Kent County.
 Case 
 Holmes County 
Beatrice Alexander, mother of children, sued the Holmes County, Mississippi School District, arguing the District made no meaningful attempt to integrate its schools, basing her opinion on the small number of black pupils in mainly White schools.
 Procedural history 
Early in the summer of 1969, the federal appeals court had asked the US Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW) to submit desegregation plans for thirty-three school districts in Mississippi including Holmes County School District, so HEW could order them implemented at the beginning of the school year.
HEW was responsible for drawing up desegregation plans, as mandated by the 1964 Civil Rights Act, and had submitted the plans on time.
At the last minute, however, both HEW and the Justice Department asked Judge William Harold Cox for extensions until December 1, claiming that the plans would result in confusion and setbacks. This was the first time the federal government had supported a desegregation delay in the federal courts. The Fifth Circuit granted the delay, and no specific date for implementing the desegregation plans was set.
Justice Hugo Black, the supervisory Justice for the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals, and senior Associate Justice of the Supreme Court, considered this delay to be Nixon's payoff to the South, after its electoral support had helped him win the presidential election, and as part of his "Southern Strategy" of appealing to conservative whites.
The NAACP Legal Defense Fund contacted Black to contest the delay in desegregation.  On September 3, Black received a memo from the Justice Department – Solicitor General Griswold was urging Black to permit the Mississippi delay.  Black reluctantly permitted the delay as supervisory Justice, but invited the NAACP Legal Defense Fund to bring the case to the Supreme Court as soon as possible.
The case was brought as Alexander v. Holmes County Board of Education.
 Issue at question 
The desegregation orders of Brown I and Brown II had not been followed for more than a decade, and schools in the South were desegregating slowly if at all. During lower court battles over segregation, school districts would remain segregated until all appeals were exhausted.
The petitioners and others suing the Holmes County Board of Education in Mississippi for failure to desegregate, were represented by Jack Greenberg. They asked the Court to order the original HEW plans to be implemented, and proposed that the Court shift the burden of proof, making desegregation the main objective of plans.
 Internal Court deliberations 
New Chief Justice Warren Burger, appointed by President Nixon, did not at first think that the requested delay was unreasonable.
Senior Associate Justice Hugo Black, an Alabamian himself, thought that allowing any delay was a signal to the South to further delay desegregation; he suggested a short, simple order mandating immediate integration, with no mention of debate over plans or delay. He also threatened to dissent from any opinion mentioning the word "plan," which would shatter a much-desired unanimous Court opinion.
Justice William O. Douglas supported Black.
Justice Harlan did not support any notion of "immediate desegregation", but he did support overturning the Fifth Circuit's delay.
Justices Stewart, White, and Brennan were all initially put off by Black's demands for immediate desegregation.
Justice Thurgood Marshall, the Court's only African American, suggested an implementation deadline of January, the beginning of the next school semester.
A majority of justices agreed on three elements:
 reversing the appeals court's decisions to grant a delay in the submission of plans
 keeping the Court of Appeals in control
 excluding the federal district court from a role due to its years of allowing stalling.
Warren Burger, along with Justices White and Harlan, drafted an early opinion with no "outside" deadline, but the court's three most liberal justices – Brennan, Marshall, and Douglas – rejected that draft, knowing it would be unacceptable to Justice Black.
The basic Court breakdown was four in favor of immediate desegregation and no full Court opinion (Black, Douglas, Brennan, and Marshall), and another four wanting a more practical, less absolute opinion.
Justice William J. Brennan, Jr.'s draft, made with the help of justices Douglas and Marshall, and later presented to Justice Black, ordered immediate desegregation. It later was adopted as the Court's final opinion, with some edits by Harlan and Burger.
 Opinion of the Court 
The final opinion was a two-page per curiam that reflected the initial demands of Justice Black.
The Court wrote, "The obligation of every school district is to terminate dual school systems at once and to operate now and hereafter only unitary schools."
The previously set pace of "all deliberate speed" was no longer permissible.
 Subsequent developments 
The decision was announced on October 29.
 Political reactions 
Republican Senator Strom Thurmond of South Carolina decried the decision, while praising President Richard Nixon for having "stood with the South in this case" while former Alabama Governor George Wallace said the new Burger court was "no better than the Warren Court," and called the Justices "limousine hypocrites." Sam Ervin filed an amendment to the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which failed, stating freedom of choice was the standard for integration.
The decision came as a surprise to the Nixon administration, which had previously referred to those calling for immediate integration as an "extreme group."
In Mississippi, Governor John Bell Williams promised the establishment of a private school system, but advised against violence. This position was pushed by Jimmy Swan while William K. Scarborough advocated nullification. Demonstrations against this decision were held. To the opposite of this, a group of Protestant, Catholic and Jewish clerics backed integration. In order to smooth the transition, Federal agents were sent.
Ted Kennedy expressed satisfaction to the ruling while Hugh Scott wanted to raise the funding of the HEW to give them the resources needed to implement Alexander.
Some districts tried to set up single-sex education in their schools.
 Effects in Holmes County 
The Supreme Court's effort to integrate the Holmes County School District was unsuccessful.
In 1968 there were 771 white students in the county school system.  Desegregation occurred in 1969, and that year the white student population decreased to 228.  In 1970 no white students were enrolled. Over 99% of students attending public schools in Holmes County are black. White students attended East Holmes Academy and Central Holmes Christian School, privately controlled segregation academies.
 Citations 
 Notes 
 References 
 Bibliography 
 Further reading 
 External links 
Category:African-American history of Mississippi
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States school desegregation case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:1969 in United States case law
Category:1969 in Mississippi
Category:Education in Holmes County, Mississippi
Category:Education segregation in Mississippi
Category:Legal history of Mississippi
"""

From "Alexander v. Sandoval" ==> """
Alexander v. Sandoval, 532 U.S. 275 (2001), was a Supreme Court of the United States decision that a regulation enacted under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 196442 U.S.C. §§ 2000-d to 2000d-7. did not include a private right of action to allow private lawsuits based on evidence of disparate impact..
 Background 
In 1990, Alabama added an amendment to its state constitution to make English the state's official language. Thereafter, James Alexander, Director of the Alabama Department of Public Safety, ordered that the test for Alabama driver's license test to be given only in English.
Plaintiff Martha Sandoval sued Alexander and other defendants in the United States District Court for the Middle District of Alabama and claimed that the English-only test policy was discriminatory.
Sandoval sued under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Two sections of Title VI would prove important to her lawsuit. The first was section 601, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of "race, color, or national origin" by programs or agencies that receive federal funding, such as the Alabama Department of Public Safety.. The other was section 602, which authorizes federal agencies "to effectuate the provisions of [section 601]... by issuing rules, regulations or orders of general applicability.".
In her lawsuit, Sandoval invoked a regulation that the US Department of Justice had promulgated under section 602.  The regulation prohibited agencies and programs receiving federal funding from taking actions that had a disparate impact on persons of a certain race, color, or nationality.28 C.F.R. § 42.104(b)(2) (2000). She sought to enjoin Alabama's policy of giving the tests for driver's licenses in English only.  She argued that the policy had a disparate impact on those born outside the United States because it denied non-English-speakers, who are disproportionately born outside the US, the opportunity to obtain driver's licenses.See 
The state defendants, however, argued that the regulation under which Sandoval was suing them did not include what is called an "implied private right of action," a cause of action not expressly created by a statute or regulation but one that a court has interpreted the statute or regulation to create implicitly.
The district court agreed with Sandoval that she had a private right of action and agreed that Alabama's policy was discriminatory under Title VI. The court therefore enjoined the policy.
The state defendants then appealed to United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit. It first held that the regulation under which Sandoval sued allowed a private litigant to enforce its provisions and then affirmed the district court's ruling on the merits. The Supreme Court granted certiorari on "only the question [of] whether there [was] a private cause of action to enforce the regulation."Alexander, 532 U.S. at 279.
 Decision 
The Court's opinion, written by Justice Scalia, began by describing the assumptions under which the Court would decide the case.
First of all, "it is clear" that section 601 of title VI contained an implied private right of action. The Court held that Cannon v. University of Chicago was controlling. Cannon held that Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, which is identical to Title VI but applies to gender-based discrimination, contained an implied private right of action.Alexander, 532 U.S. at 280 ("The reasoning of [Cannon] embraced the existence of a private right to enforce Title VI as well [as Title IX]."). Under Cannon, section 601 of Title VI also contained a private right of action.
Then, the Court noted that "it is beyond dispute" and that "no party disagrees" that section 601 prohibits only intentional discrimination but does not prohibit activities with a disparate impact on certain races, colors, or nationalities.Alexander, 532 U.S. at 280.
Finally, the Court said it would assume for purposes of deciding the case that regulations promulgated under section 602 of Title VI may validly prohibit actions that have a disparate impact on certain races, colors, or national origins.Alexander, 532 U.S. at 281.
The Court then turned to the question that was at issue in the case: whether the disparate-impact regulation that Sandoval invoked created an implied private right of action. The Court rejected the argument, put forward both by Sandoval and by Justice Stevens's dissenting opinion, that because Cannon involved disparate impact, Cannon held that Title IX and, by extension Title VI, create a private right of action to enjoin policies that create a disparate impact. Both Sandoval and Justice Stevens relied on a footnote in Cannon, which stated that the effect of the policies that the Cannon plaintiff challenged was "to exclude women from consideration."The disputed footnote from Cannon reads in pertinent part: 
441 U.S. at 680 n.2. The Court responded that Cannon was decided on the assumption that the University of Chicago had engaged in intentional discrimination, and hence the holding of case applied only to intentional discrimination. The Court asserted that "this Court is bound by holdings, not language."Alexander, 532 U.S. at 282. Therefore, from the majority's point of view, the holding of Cannon did not include the footnote.
The Court also rejected the argument that Guardians Association v. Civil Service Commission, a case the Court decided in 1983, dictated the outcome of Sandoval.  The Court noted that although five Justices in Guardians had agreed that disparate-impact regulations promulgated under Title VI were valid, a majority of the Justices had not decided that those regulations were enforceable by private plaintiffs.Alexander, 532 U.S. at 283.
The Court then examined section 602, the section of Title VI under which the disparate-impact regulation was promulgated, to determine whether it created an implied private right of action. It began by noting that certain "rights-creating" language that was present in section 601 and Cannon relied on for its holding, was absent from section 602.Alexander, 532 U.S. at 288-89. The Court pointed out that section 602, by specifying that the federal government could cut off funding to a program which violated regulations, expressly provided for "one method of enforcing" those regulations.Alexander, 532 U.S. at 289-90. It concluded that this "express provision of one method" of enforcement "suggests that Congress intended to preclude others," such as a private right of action.Alexander, 532 U.S. at 290. It, therefore, held that Sandoval had no private right of action under the disparate-impact regulation.
 Dissent 
In his dissent, Justice Stevens explained the Cannon decision as follows:
In providing a shorthand description of her claim in the text of the opinion, we ambiguously stated that she had alleged that she was denied admission "because she is a woman," but we appended a lengthy footnote setting forth the details of her disparate impact claim. Other than the shorthand description of her claim, there is not a word in the text of the opinion even suggesting that she had made the improbable allegation that the University of Chicago and Northwestern University had intentionally discriminated against women. In the context of the entire opinion (including both its analysis and its uncontested description of the facts of the case), that single ambiguous phrase provides no basis for limiting the case’s holding to incidents of intentional discrimination. If anything, the fact that the phrase "because she is a woman" encompasses both intentional and disparate impact claims should have made it clear that the reasoning in the opinion was equally applicable to both types of claims. In any event, the holding of the case certainly applied to the disparate impact claim that was described in detail in footnote 1 of the opinion.Alexander, 532 U.S. at 298 (Stevens, J., dissenting).
His response to the majority's account of the relation between sections 601 and 602 was as follows:
Beyond its flawed structural analysis of Title VI and an evident antipathy toward implied rights of action, the majority offers little affirmative support for its conclusion that Congress did not intend to create a private remedy for violations of the Title VI regulations. The Court offers essentially two reasons for its position. First, it attaches significance to the fact that the "rights-creating" language in § 601 that defines the classes protected by the statute is not repeated in § 602. But, of course, there was no reason to put that language in § 602 because it is perfectly obvious that the regulations authorized by § 602 must be designed to protect precisely the same people protected by § 601. Moreover, it is self-evident that, linguistic niceties notwithstanding, any statutory provision whose stated purpose is to “effectuate” the eradication of racial and ethnic discrimination has as its "focus" those individuals who, absent such legislation, would be subject to discrimination.
Second, the Court repeats the argument advanced and rejected in Cannon that the express provision of a fund cut-off remedy "suggests that Congress intended to preclude others."Alexander, 532 U.S. at 315-16 (Stevens, J., dissenting).
 See also 
 Implied cause of action
 References 
 Further reading 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Implied statutory cause of action case law
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:Language case law
"""

From "Ali v. Federal Bureau of Prisons" ==> """
Ali v. Federal Bureau of Prisons, 552 U.S. 214 (2008), was a United States Supreme Court case, upholding the United States's sovereign immunity against tort claims brought when "any law enforcement officer" loses a person's property.
Background
Abdus-Shahid M. S. Ali, a federal prisoner in Atlanta, Georgia, was transferred to a prison in Inez, Kentucky. His personal property, packed into two duffel bags, was shipped separately. Upon inspecting his property after arrival at the new prison, he said that $177 worth of property was missing from the bags. Ali filed an administrative claim; relief was denied because Ali had signed a receipt form. Ali  filed a lawsuit against the Federal Bureau of Prisons.
The case turned on the grammar of part of the Federal Tort Claims Act (FTCA), a 1946 law that waives sovereign immunity in some cases so that the federal government may be sued for certain torts. The FTCA states that the waiver of immunity does not apply to claims arising from the detention of property by "any officer of customs or excise or any other law enforcement officer."  Ali argued that this text had been intended to encompass only law enforcement officers concerned with customs or excise laws.  The Bureau of Prisons argued that the word "any" should be interpreted broadly.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court ruled against Ali in a 5–4 decision.  Justice Clarence Thomas wrote, "The phrase 'any other law enforcement officer' suggests a broad meaning," and compared the phrasing to the phrasing of other laws, with and without the word "any."
In his dissent, Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote that the majority was using "wooden reliance" on the single word any without considering the rest of the paragraph of the FTCA, and added, "If Congress had intended to give sweeping immunity to all federal law enforcement officials from liability for the detention of property, it would not have dropped this phrase onto the end of the statutory clause so as to appear there as something of an afterthought."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:United States federal sovereign immunity case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Alice Corp. v. CLS Bank International" ==> """
Alice Corp. v. CLS Bank International, 573 U.S. 208 (2014), was a 2014 United States Supreme CourtAlice Corp. Pty. Ltd. v. CLS Bank Int'l, . decision about patent eligibility.Since about 2000, the US Supreme Court and lower federal courts have tended to use the term "patent eligibility" rather than the terms "patentable subject matter" or "statutory subject matter" to describe the kinds of thing that can be patented, if novel and otherwise meeting the requirements for patent applications, in contrast to the kinds of thing, such as ideas, laws of nature, and mathematical principles, on which patents may not be granted. Recent Supreme Court opinions use the term "patent eligible" (and its converse "patent ineligible") almost exclusively in this connection. The opinion in the Alice case discussed in this article is an example illustrating the point. In current US usage, the term "patentability" is reserved to describe failure to meet other requirements for a patent grant, such as not being obvious over the prior art, satisfying the enablement requirement, and the like. The issue in the case was whether certain patent claims for a computer-implemented, electronic escrow service covered abstract ideas, which would make the claims ineligible for patent protection. The patents were held to be invalid because the claims were drawn to an abstract idea, and implementing those claims on a computer was not enough to transform that abstract idea into  patentable subject matter.
Although the Alice opinion did not mention software as such, the case was widely considered as a decision on software patents or patents on software for business methods."By clarifying that the addition of a generic computer was not enough for § 101 patentability, Alice has had a significant impact on software patents. In the wake of Alice, the Federal Circuit and numerous district courts have wrestled with the issue of whether various software patents disclose the "inventive concept" required for patentability." Netflix, Inc. v. Rovi Corp., - F. Supp. 3d -, -, 2015 WL 4345069, at *5 (N.D. Cal. July 15, 2015). Alice and the 2010 Supreme Court decision of Bilski v. Kappos, another case involving software for a business method (which also did not opine on software as suchDennis Crouch, Bilski v.Kappos: Business methods out, Software still patentable, Patently O, (Jun. 28, 2010)), were the most recent Supreme Court cases on the patent eligibility of software-related inventions since Diamond v. Diehr in 1981.Jones Day, Commentary: Alice Corp. v. CLS Bank, Jones Day, (Jun. 2014)
 Background 
Alice Corporation ("Alice") owned four patents on electronic methods and computer programs for financial-trading systems. These financial-trading systems described how two parties could settle their exchange through a third party to reduce "settlement risk"—the risk that one party will perform while the other will not. Alice alleged that CLS Bank International and CLS Services Ltd. (collectively "CLS Bank") began to use similar technology in 2002.  Alice accused CLS Bank of infringement of Alice's patents,Citation missing and when the parties did not resolve the issue, CLS Bank filed suit against Alice in 2007, seeking a declaratory judgment that the claims at issue were invalid.Alice Corp. Pty. Ltd. v. CLS Bank Intern., 134 S. Ct. 2347, 2353, 189 L. Ed. 2d 296 (2014). Alice counterclaimed, alleging infringement.
The relevant claims are in these patents:
 US patent 5,970,479 filed 1992, issued 1999 (available at the USPTO site and )
 US patent 6,912,510 filed 2000, issued 2005 (available at the USPTO site and )
 US patent 7,149,720 filed 2002, issued 2006 (available at the USPTO site and )
 US patent 7,725,375 filed 2005, issued 2010 (available at the USPTO site and )
 Rulings in lower courts
District court
In 2007, CLS Bank sued Alice in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia seeking a declaratory judgment that Alice's patents were invalid and unenforceable and that CLS Bank had not infringed them. Alice countersued CLS Bank for infringement of the patents. After the court had allowed initial, limited discovery on the questions of CLS Bank's operations and its relationship to the allegedly infringing CLS Bank system, the court ruled on the parties' cross-motions for summary judgment. It declared each of Alice's patents invalid because the claims concerned abstract ideas, which are not eligible for patent protection under 35 U.S.C. § 101.CLS Bank Int'l v. Alice Corp. Pty. Ltd., 768 F. Supp. 2d 221 (D.D.C. 2011) at Casetext site
The court stated that a method "directed to an abstract idea of employing an intermediary to facilitate simultaneous exchange of obligations in order to minimize risk" is a "basic business or financial concept," and that a "computer system merely 'configured' to implement an abstract method is no more patentable than an abstract method that is simply 'electronically' implemented."CLS Bank Int'l v. Alice Corp. Pty. Ltd., 768 F. Supp. 2d 221, 242-255 (D.D.C. 2011) at Casetext site In so holding, the district court relied on Bilski v. Kappos. as precedent, in which  the Supreme Court held that Bilski's claims to business methods for hedging against the risk of price fluctuations in commodities markets were not patent-eligible because they claimed and preempted (i.e., monopolized) the abstract idea of hedging against risk.
Federal Circuit
thumb|right|The judges of the Federal Circuit in 2012.
Alice appealed the decision to the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit. A panel of the appeals court decided by 2-1 in July 2012 to reverse the lower court's decision. But the members of the Federal Circuit vacated that decision and set the case for reargument en banc. It ordered that the parties (and any amici curiae who cared to brief the matter) address the following questions:
 what test should the court adopt to determine whether a computer-implemented invention is a patent-ineligible abstract idea; 
 whether the presence of a computer in a claim could ever make patent-ineligible subject matter patentable; and
 whether method, system, and media claims should be considered equivalent under § 101.
A very fractured panel of ten judges of the Federal Circuit issued seven different opinions, with no single opinion supported by a majority on all points. Seven of the ten judges upheld the district court's decision that Alice's method claims and computer-readable-medium claims were not patent-eligible, but they did so for different reasons. Five of the ten judges upheld the district court's decision that Alice's computer-systems claims were not patent-eligible, and five judges disagreed. The panel as a whole did not agree on a single standard to determine whether a computer-implemented invention is a patent-ineligible abstract idea.CLS Bank Int'l v. Alice Corp. Pty. Ltd., 717 F.3d 1269 (Fed. Cir. 2013).
Plurality opinion
In the leading, five-member, plurality opinion written by Judge Lourie, joined by Judges Dyk, Prost, Reyna, and Wallach, the court stated a test that focused on first identifying the abstract idea or fundamental concept applied by the claim and then determining whether the claim would preempt the abstract idea.717 F.3d at 1282. The analysis involved making four steps:
 determine whether the claimed invention fits within one of the four classes in the statute: process, machine, manufacture, or composition of matter;
 determine whether the claim poses a risk of "preempting an abstract idea";
 identify the idea supposedly at risk of preemption by defining "whatever fundamental concept appears wrapped up in the claim";
 in a final step called "inventive concept" analysis, determine whether there is genuine, human contribution to the claimed subject matter. The "balance of the claim," or the human contribution, must "contain[] additional substantive limitations that narrow, confine, or otherwise tie down the claim so that, in practical terms, it does not cover the full abstract idea itself."
The last part of the Federal Circuit plurality analysis "considers whether steps combined with a natural law or abstract idea are so insignificant, conventional, or routine as to yield a claim that effectively covers the natural law or abstract idea itself."717 F.3d at 1282-83. In making this determination, the plurality opinion pointed to four questions to ask:
whether it is necessary to every practical use of the abstract idea and therefore is not truly limiting;
whether it "amount[s] to more than well-understood, routine, conventional activity previously engaged in by researchers in the field";
whether it consists of "token or trivial limitations," such as insignificant post-solution activity; and
whether it is a field-of-use limitation where "the claim as written still effectively preempts all uses of a fundamental concept within the stated field."
717 F.3d at 1283-84. The Supreme Court would later adopt a similar principle. In the Supreme Court's opinion, the Court combined the first three steps into one identification step, resulting in a two-step analysis.
Four-judge opinion
Chief Judge Rader and Circuit Judges Linn, Moore, and O'Malley filed an opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part. Their patent-eligibility analysis focused on whether the claim, as a whole, was limited to an application of an abstract idea, or was merely a recitation of the abstract idea. They would have held Alice's system claims patent eligible because they were limited to a computer-implemented application.717 F.3d at 1292-313.
Judge Rader's "reflections"
Judge Rader also filed "additional reflections" to the ruling (not joined by any other judges) expressing his view of the patent statute as allowing very broad patentability under § 101, and his understanding that natural laws are restricted to "universal constants created, if at all, only by God, Vishnu, or Allah." Referencing Einstein, he stated that "even gravity is not a natural law."717 F.3d at 1333-36.
Opinions supporting patent eligibility of all claims
Judge Newman concurred in part and dissented in part, calling for the Federal Circuit to clarify the interpretation of § 101. She would have held all of Alice's claims patent eligible.
Judges Linn and O'Malley dissented, arguing that all claims were patent eligible. They called for legislative, rather than judicial, action to address the "proliferation and aggressive enforcement of low quality software patents" cited in the many amicus curiae briefs and suggested new laws to limit the term of software patents or limit the scope of such patents.717 F.3d at 1327-33.
 Supreme Court 
Amicus curiae participation
The keen interest of the software industry and patent professionals in the issue was illustrated by many companies and groups filing 52 amicus curiae briefs urging the Supreme Court to decide the issue of software patent eligibility. Those amici included the Electronic Frontier Foundation, Software Freedom Law Center, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Intellectual Property Law Association of Chicago, Accenture Global Services. and the USPTO itself for the United States.Docket File No. 13-298, at supremecourt.gov, viewed Jan 8, 2014 Nearly all such briefs argued that the patents should be invalidated. They disagreed, however, as to the proper reasoning.
 A brief prepared by Google, Amazon and other companies argued that the patent was on an abstract idea, which actually harms innovation, and that the real innovation lies in detailing out a working system.
 Microsoft, Adobe and Hewlett-Packard argued it was nothing more than an unpatentable business method (per Bilski v. Kappos) and merely saying to perform it with a computer does not change this fact.
 Free Software Foundation and others argued that no software should be patented unless it passes machine-or-transformation test, as this blocks both innovation and scientific collaboration.
 IBM disagreed with the "abstract ideas" reasoning and argued that the patent should instead be struck down for being too obvious.
 Finally, a consortium of retailer and manufacturers, including Dillard's and Hasbro, simply asked for a clear rule.
Supreme Court opinions
thumb|200px|right|The majority opinion was written by  Clarence Thomas.
The Court unanimously invalidated the patent, in an opinion by Justice Clarence Thomas.
Majority opinion
Relying on Mayo v. Prometheus, the court found that an abstract idea could not be patented just because it is implemented on a computer. In Alice, a software implementation of an escrow arrangement was not patent eligible because it is an implementation of an abstract idea.  Escrow is not a patentable invention, and merely using a computer system to manage escrow debts does not rise to the level needed for a patent. Under Alice, the "Mayo framework" should be used in all cases in which the Court has to decide whether a claim is patent-eligible.134 S. Ct. at  2355 ("In [Mayo] we set forth a framework for distinguishing patents that claim laws of nature, natural phenomena, and abstract ideas from those that claim patent-eligible applications of those concepts.").
The Court began by recognizing that the patents cover what amounts to a computerized escrow arrangement.134 S. Ct. at 2352. The Court held that Mayo explained how to address the problem of determining whether a patent claimed a patent-ineligible abstract idea or instead a potentially patentable practical implementation of an idea.134 S. Ct. at  2355 ("In [Mayo] we set forth a framework for distinguishing patents that claim laws of nature, natural phenomena, and abstract ideas from those that claim patent-eligible applications of those concepts.") This requires using a "two-step" analysis.134 S. Ct. at 2355.
In the first Mayo step, the court must determine whether the patent claim under examination contains an abstract idea, such as an algorithm, method of computation, or other general principle.134 S. Ct. at 2355 ("First, we determine whether the claims at issue are directed to one of those patent-ineligible concepts."). If not, the claim is potentially patentable, subject to the other requirements of the patent code. If the answer is affirmative, the court must proceed to the next step.134 S. Ct. at 2355 ("If so, we then ask, '[w]hat else is there in the claims before us?'").
In the second step of analysis, the court must determine whether the patent adds to the idea "something extra" that embodies an "inventive concept."<ref>134 S. Ct. at 2355 ("We have described step two of this analysis as a search for an '"inventive concept—i.e., an element or combination of elements that is 'sufficient to ensure that the patent in practice amounts to significantly more than a patent upon the [ineligible concept] itself.'").</ref>
If there is no addition of an inventive element to the underlying abstract idea, the court should find the patent invalid under § 101. This means that the implementation of the idea must not be generic, conventional, or obvious, if it is to qualify for a patent.134 S. Ct. at 2357 ("Because the claims at issue are directed to the abstract idea of intermediated settlement, we turn to the second step in Mayos framework. We conclude that the method claims, which merely require generic computer implementation, fail to transform that abstract idea into a patent-eligible invention."). Ordinary and customary use of a general-purpose digital computer is insufficient, the Court said—"merely requir[ing] generic computer implementation fail[s] to transform [an] abstract idea into a patent-eligible invention."134 S. Ct. at 2357.
The ruling continued with these points:
 A mere instruction to implement an abstract idea on a computer "cannot impart patent eligibility."134 S. Ct. at 2358.
 "[T]he mere recitation of a generic computer cannot transform a patent-ineligible abstract idea into a patent-eligible invention."
 "Stating an abstract idea 'while adding the words "apply it"' is not enough for patent eligibility."
 "Nor is limiting the use of an abstract idea to a particular technological environment."
Concurring opinion
thumb|150px|right|Sonia Sotomayor in robe, 2009
Three justices joined in a concurring opinion (per Justice Sotomayor) that essentially reiterated now-retired Justice Stevens's argument in Bilski, on historical grounds, that business methods were categorically outside the patent system. But because they too agreed that the claimed subject matter was an abstract idea, they joined the main opinion also.134 S. Ct. at 2360.
 Reception 
According to The Washington Post:
[W]hile the court struck down what was universally said to be a bad patent, it didn't do much to say what kinds of software should be patentable. In other words, the court decided the most basic conflict in the case, but more or less declined to offer guidance for other, future cases.
The Electronic Frontier Foundation said that the Supreme Court:
reaffirmed that merely adding "a generic computer to perform generic computer functions" does not make an otherwise abstract idea patentable. This statement (and the opinion itself) makes clear that an abstract idea along with a computer doing what a computer normally does is not something our patent system was designed to protect. Admittedly, the Supreme Court did not offer the clearest guidance on when a patent claims merely an abstract idea, but it did offer guidance that should help to invalidate some of the more egregious software patents out there.
The Software Freedom Law Center said the Supreme Court:
took one more step towards the abolition of patents on software inventions. Upholding its previous positions, the Court held that abstract ideas and algorithms are unpatentable. It also emphasized that one cannot patent "an instruction to apply [an] abstract idea ... using some un-specified, generic computer.""
The Coalition for Patent Fairness, which advocates for patent reform legislation, said:
[N]either the ruling—nor any single act by the court or the executive branch—can do what is needed to make the business model of being a patent troll unprofitable and unattractive."
Some commentators expressed disappointment with the opinion because it did not define more comprehensively the boundaries between abstract ideas and patent-eligible implementations of ideas. They were particularly critical of Justice Thomas's statement—
In any event, we need not labor to delimit the precise contours of the "abstract ideas" category in this case. It is enough to recognize that there is no meaningful distinction between the concept of risk hedging in Bilski and the concept of intermediated settlement at issue here. Both are squarely within the realm of 'abstract ideas' as we have used that term."Alice, 134 S. Ct. at 2357 (2014).
For example, Robert Merges said, "To say we did not get an answer is to miss the depth of the non-answer we did get."Robert Merges. Go ask Alice—what can you patent after Alice v. CLS Bank? June 20, 2014. SCOTUSblog. John Duffy remarked, "[T]he Supreme Court has been remarkably resistant to providing clear guidance in this area, and this case continues that trend."John Duffy. The uncertain expansion of judge-made exceptions to patentability. June 20, 2014. SCOTUSblog.
Richard H. Stern defended the opinion as "the expectable price of unanimity in a nine-member tribunal," arguing that the "greater sensed legitimacy and precedential stability" of a unanimous opinion "outbalanced" the shortcomings of a lack of clear guidance as to details. This commentator also asserted that "it is sensible to make narrow, incremental rulings as to software patent eligibility, because at present we are not so well informed that we can speak with confidence in very broad terms."Richard H. Stern, Alice v CLS Bank: US Business Method and Software Patents Marching towards Oblivion?, [2014]  619, 629.
Gene Quinn, a patent-lawyer advocate of patenting software, opined that "In what can only be described as an intellectually bankrupt opinion, the Supreme Court never once used the word "software" in its decision. This is breathtaking given that the Supreme Court decision in Alice will render many hundreds of thousands of software patents completely useless." He also opined that "In years to come this decision will be ridiculed for many legitimate reasons."Gene Quinn, SCOTUS Rules Alice Software Claims Patent Ineligible (June 19, 2014).
Subsequent developments
Despite the Court's avoidance of mention of software in the opinion, the Alice decision has had a dramatic effect on the validity of so-called software patents and business-method patents.See Software patents after Alice. Since Alice, these patents have suffered a very high mortality rate.For a listing of decisions, as of May 2015, see Steven Callahan, Alice: The Death of Software-Related Patents?,  (May 1, 2015). The author states: "[S]ince Alice, of the 76 decisions dealing with Alice challenges, 57 have invalidated patents; only 16 have upheld them on the merits (3 additional decisions rejected Alice challenges for procedural reasons). Excluding the procedural decisions, that is a 78% win rate for defendants challenging patents under Alice in court. (Of course, numerous patents have also fallen victim to Alice challenges before the Patent Trial and Appeal Board.)"See also Robert Sachs, "#AliceStorm In June: A Deeper Dive into Court Trends, and New Data On Alice inside the USPTO" ,  (July 2, 2015) ("For example, the 73.1% invalidity rate [after Alice] in the federal courts breaks down into 70.2% (66 of 96) in the district courts and a stunning 92.9% in the Federal Circuit (13 for 14)."). Hundreds of patents have been invalidated under §101 of the U.S. patent laws in Federal District Courts. Applying Alice, district court judges have found many of these claims to be patent-ineligible abstract ideas.Ars Technica, These three 2016 cases gave new life to software patents
Federal Circuit Judge William Curtis Bryson explained the high mortality rate when sitting by designation as a trial judge in the Loyalty v. American Airlines case:Loyalty Conversion Sys. Corp. v. American Airlines, Inc.
In short, such patents, although frequently dressed up in the argot of invention, simply describe a problem, announce purely functional steps that purport to solve the problem, and recite standard computer operations to perform some of those steps. The principal flaw in these patents is that they do not contain an "inventive concept" that solves practical problems and ensures that the patent is directed to something "significantly more than" the ineligible abstract idea itself. See CLS Bank, 134 S. Ct. at 2355, 2357; Mayo, 132 S. Ct. at 1294. As such, they represent little more than functional descriptions of objectives, rather than inventive solutions. In addition, because they describe the claimed methods in functional terms, they preempt any subsequent specific solutions to the problem at issue. See CLS Bank, 134 S. Ct. at 2354; Mayo, 132 S. Ct. at 1301-02. It is for those reasons that the Supreme Court has characterized such patents as claiming "abstract ideas" and has held that they are not directed to patentable subject matter. 
Patent issuance statistics from the PTO show a significant drop in the number of business method patents (PTO class 705) issued in the months following the Alice decision. A graph available here shows that the PTO issued fewer than half the number after Alice that it had issued per month during the period prior to Alice. At the same time, the issuance of other types of software patents rose. (According to the graph, before Alice approximately 10% of software patents issued were business method patents, but afterwards that dropped in half, to 5%.)See generally James Besen. What the Courts Did to Curb Patent Trolling—for Now,  (Dec. 1, 2014).
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 573
 Software patents under United States patent law
 Mayo Collaborative Servs. v. Prometheus Labs., Inc., a 2012 Supreme Court decision related to health care patent law
 DDR Holdings v. Hotels.com, 773 F.3d 1245 (Fed. Cir. 2014), the first post-Alice Federal Circuit decision to uphold the validity of computer-implemented patent claims (applying the two-step framework)
 Enfish, LLC v. Microsoft Corp., 822 F.3d 1327 (Fed. Cir. 2016), post-Alice Federal Circuit decision upholding patent claims to a logical model for a computer database.
 Amdocs (Israel) Ltd. v. Openet Telecom, Inc., 841 F.3d 1288 (Fed. Cir. 2016), post-Alice'' Federal Circuit decision holding computer software-based patent claims eligible.
 References 
 Further reading 
External links
 Alice Corporation patent page, including links to judicial orders and opinions, and amicus and party briefs
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States patent case law
Category:Software patent case law
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Allen v. United States (1896)" ==> """
Allen v. United States, 164 U.S. 492 (1896), was a United States Supreme Court case that, amongst other things, approved the use of a jury instruction intended to prevent a hung jury by encouraging jurors in the minority to reconsider. The Court affirmed Alexander Allen's murder conviction, having vacated his two prior convictions for the same crime.Allen v. United States, ; Allen v. United States, .
Such an instruction became known as an Allen charge and is given when, after deliberation, a jury reports that it is deadlocked and unable to decide on a verdict. Because it is used to dislodge jurors from entrenched positions, the Allen charge is sometimes referred to as the "dynamite charge" or the "hammer charge."
Allen is based upon the Supreme Court's supervisory power over the federal courts. Thus, it is not binding on state courts. Approximately half of US states prohibit Allen charges on state law grounds.See, e.g.,  (noting California's rejection of Allen).
 Background 
Allen's three trials had been presided over by Judge Isaac Parker of the United States District Court for the Western District of Arkansas.
 Opinion 
The relevant portion of Allen held:
The seventeenth and eighteenth assignments were taken to instructions given to the jury after the main charge was delivered, and when the jury had returned to the court, apparently for further instructions. These instructions were quite lengthy, and were, in substance, that in a large proportion of cases absolute certainty could not be expected; that, although the verdict must be the verdict of each individual juror, and not a mere acquiescence in the conclusion of his fellows, yet they should examine the question submitted with candor, and with a proper regard and deference to the opinions of each other; that it was their duty to decide the case if they could conscientiously do so; that they should listen, with a disposition to be convinced, to each other's arguments; that, if much the larger number were for conviction, a dissenting juror should consider whether his doubt was a reasonable one which made no impression upon the minds of so many men, equally honest, equally intelligent with himself. If, upon the other hand, the majority were for acquittal, the minority ought to ask themselves whether they might not reasonably doubt the correctness of a judgment which was not concurred in by the majority. These instructions were taken literally from a charge in a criminal case which was approved of by the supreme court of Massachusetts and by the supreme court of Connecticut.
While, undoubtedly, the verdict of the jury should represent the opinion of each individual juror, it by no means follows that opinions may not be changed by conference in the jury room. The very object of the jury system is to secure unanimity by a comparison of views, and by arguments among the jurors themselves. It certainly cannot be the law that each juror should not listen with deference to the arguments, and with a distrust of his own judgment, if he finds a large majority of the jury taking a different view of the case from what he does himself. It cannot be that each juror should go to the jury room with a blind determination that the verdict shall represent his opinion of the case at that moment, or that he should close his ears to the arguments of men who are equally honest and intelligent as himself. There was no error in these instructions.Allen v. United States,  (citations omitted).
Text of Allen charge
Text of the Allen charge as approved for use in the United States district courts of the Fifth Circuit:
Members of the Jury:
I'm going to ask that you continue your deliberations in an effort to reach agreement upon a verdict and dispose of this case; and I have a few additional comments I would like for you to consider as you do so.
This is an important case. The trial has been expensive in time, effort, money and emotional strain to both the defense and the prosecution. If you should fail to agree upon a verdict, the case will be left open and may have to be tried again. Obviously, another trial would only serve to increase the cost to both sides, and there is no reason to believe that the case can be tried again by either side any better or more exhaustively than it has been tried before you.
Any future jury must be selected in the same manner and from the same source as you were chosen, and there is no reason to believe that the case could ever be submitted to twelve men and women more conscientious, more impartial, or more competent to decide it, or that more or clearer evidence could be produced.
If a substantial majority of your number are in favor of a conviction, those of you who disagree should reconsider whether your doubt is a reasonable one since it appears to make no effective impression upon the minds of the others. On the other hand, if a majority or even a lesser number of you are in favor of an acquittal, the rest of you should ask yourselves again, and most thoughtfully, whether you should accept the weight and sufficiency of evidence which fails to convince your fellow jurors beyond a reasonable doubt.
Remember at all times that no juror is expected to give up an honest belief he or she may have as to the weight or effect of the evidence; but, after full deliberation and consideration of the evidence in the case, it is your duty to agree upon a verdict if you can do so.
You must also remember that if the evidence in the case fails to establish guilt beyond a reasonable doubt the Defendant should have your unanimous verdict of Not Guilty.
You may be as leisurely in your deliberations as the occasion may require and should take all the time which you may feel is necessary.
I will ask now that you retire once again and continue your deliberations with these additional comments in mind to be applied, of course, in conjunction with all of the other instructions I have previously given to you.5th Circuit Pattern Criminal Jury Instructions, 1.45.
In state courts
Allen charges have been rejected, in whole or in part, by at least twenty-three states. Twenty-two states have rejected the charge by judicial decision: 
See also
 Black direction (Australian law), Black v The Queen (1993); 179 CLR 44
 Notes 
 Further reading 
 Mark M. Lanier & Cloud Miller III, The Allen Charge: Expedient Justice or Coercion?, 25 Am. J. Crim. Justice 31 (2000).
External links
Category:Allen charge case law
Category:1896 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Allen v. Cooper" ==> """
REDIRECTCopyright_Remedy_Clarification_Act#Allen_v._Cooper
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Allen v. Milligan" ==> """
Allen v. Milligan (Dockets 21–1086, 21–1087) is a pending United States Supreme Court case related to redistricting under the Voting Rights Act of 1965.
 Background 
Alabama's congressional districts have had roughly the same configuration since 1993, with one majority-minority district out of its seven total districts. Data from the 2020 United States Census showed that while the state did not gain or lose any representation at the federal level, the racial diversity in the state had increased, with the portion of white residents having fallen from 68% to 64% over the prior ten years, while Alabama's Black population grew by 3.8 percent over the same period. In November 2021, the Alabama Legislature modified the existing districts to account for shifts in population. Soon after, multiple groups of plaintiffs sued, asserting the districts violated Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 and the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The plaintiffs sought the creation of an additional majority-minority district. Two suits (Singleton and Milligan) were assigned to a three-judge district court consisting of Judges Stanley Marcus, Terry F. Moorer, and Anna M. Manasco, and the third suit (Caster) was assigned to just Manasco. On January 24, 2022, the district courts in each of the cases enjoined the districts, holding they violated the VRA. The courts did not decide the constitutional issue, applying the doctrine of constitutional avoidance. Alabama appealed the following day to the Supreme Court in Milligan and the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit in Caster.
 Supreme Court 
The Supreme Court stayed the district court's injunctions in an order issued on February 7, 2022. The order stated that there was probable jurisdiction from the district court's order in Milligan, and granted certiorari before judgment in Caster. Justice Elena Kagan, joined by Justices Stephen Breyer and Sonia Sotomayor dissented, stating "Today’s decision is one more in a disconcertingly long line of cases in which this Court uses its shadow docket to signal or make changes in the law, without anything approaching full briefing and argument." Chief Justice John Roberts also wrote a dissent to the order to grant a stay, but agreed the Court should review the case.
In response to Kagan's dissent, Justice Brett Kavanaugh wrote a concurrence, joined by Justice Samuel Alito, stating that under Purcell v. Gonzalez, courts should not enjoin enforcement of election-related laws or regulations so close to the election. Again in response, Kagan noted that Alabama "enacted the current map in less than a week and can move quickly again if it wants to", and that their "primary is still four months away, while the general election is nearly nine months away." By contrast, Purcell was decided only 15 days before the 2006 election.
 Related cases 
On June 28, 2022, the Supreme Court of the United States granted certiorari and stay to the case Ardoin v. Robinson. This case involved the redistricting of Louisiana, where the Republican Controlled legislature of Louisiana assigned 1 majority black district out of 6 congressional districts despite having a black population of 30%. The Supreme Court granted review in this case but stated that it would hold this case in abeyance pending the decision in Allen.
 References 
Category:2023 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Allen v. State Bd. of Elections" ==> """
Allen v. State Board of Elections, 393 U.S. 544 (1969), was a United States Supreme Court case where the Court ruled by a 7–2https://www.oyez.org/cases/1968/3  majority that the Voting Rights Act of 1965 authorizes private suits of action.
Background
The Voting Rights Act of 1965 covered all of Mississippi and Virginia because of those states’ long history of voting discrimination against African-Americans, as well as poor whites, during the Jim Crow era. Following the Act, black and poor white voter registration in both states increased enormously.See e.g. Mickey, Robert; Paths Out of Dixie: The Democratization of Authoritarian Enclaves in America's Deep South, 1944-1972; p. 273 
However, during the 1966 elections, Virginia refused to count some handwritten write-in votes, whilst at the same time in Mississippi a lawsuit was filed against the state's election board for at-large election of county supervisors, and in eleven of the state's eighty-two counties, appointing all superintendents of education. Mississippi also changed the process for independent candidates running in general elections. Both these were challenged as violations of the Voting Rights Act in the respective District Courts. In Mississippi, the District Court ordered the relevant candidates to be placed on the 1966 general election ballot, but dismissed the remaining claims completely. In Virginia, the District Court ruled that requirements for write-in votes to be in the voter's own handwriting was not unconstitutional, and that the requirements for write-in votes were not a violation of the Voting Rights Act as they were not a “test” or “device”.
Case opinion
Following the judgment of the two District Courts, there were multiple attempts to appeal to higher courts in 1967 and 1968, but attempts to have the case heard in the circuit courts failed and it was the 1968 Supreme Court term before any appeal was actually heard. By this time the two cases, almost three years old when heard in the Supreme Court, had been combined into one.
Majority opinion
In a 7—2 decision by Chief Justice Earl Warren, the Court reversed both District Courts, stating that preclearance provisions of the Voting Rights Act were applicable to all changes altering the election laws of covered states, and that no person could be deprived of the ballot for failing to comply with a new provision in a covered jurisdiction, even if they do not effect qualifications for accessing the ballot.
Aftermath
Following Allen, elections for the Richmond City Council would be suspended between 1971 and 1976 as a result of annexation of overwhelmingly white parts of Chesterfield County by the city.Hayter, Julian Maxwell; ‘From Intent to Effect: Richmond, Virginia, and the Protracted Struggle for Voting Rights, 1965-1977’; Journal of Policy History, Vol. 26, Iss. 4, (October 2014), pp. 534-567. The District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia made this decision because these annexations were viewed as reducing black voting power regardless of the actual motive behind them.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 393
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1969 in United States case law
Category:1969 in Mississippi
Category:1969 in Virginia
"""

From "Allen v. Wright" ==> """
Allen v. Wright, 468 U.S. 737 (1984), was a United States Supreme Court case that determined that citizens do not have standing to sue a federal government agency based on the influence that the agency's determinations might have on third parties.
 Background 
thumb|left|Pastor W. Wayne Allen, founder of the all white Briarcrest Christian School, was the intervener / defendant.
The Internal Revenue Service denies tax-exempt status under the Internal Revenue Code to racially discriminatory private schools, and has established guidelines and procedures for determining whether a particular school is in fact racially nondiscriminatory. As a consequence, those private schools deemed by the IRS to be racially discriminatory are not eligible to receive tax deductible charitable contributions.
Plaintiffs/respondents, parents of African-American children in seven states where public schools had recently been desegregated, brought a nationwide class action lawsuit against the Internal Revenue Service in federal district court, contending that IRS guidelines and procedures for determining whether private schools were racially discriminatory, and subsequent denial of tax exempt status to such schools, were insufficient. Federal law prohibited tax-exempt status to private schools that discriminate on the basis of race, but the parents contended that the standards the IRS used to determine if a school was discriminating were not capable of identifying all of the discriminating private schools. White parents were therefore able to avoid integration by sending their children to the private schools and deducting charitable contributions to the institution, thereby making it harder for black children to attend integrated schools. The plaintiffs sued the IRS and W. Wayne Allen was granted permission to intervene as the defendant in his official capacity as the chairman of the board of Briarcrest Christian School, a segregation academy founded in 1973 in response to the desegregation of Memphis city schools.
Respondents also alleged that many racially segregated private schools (segregation academies) were created or expanded in respondents' communities at the time the public schools were undergoing desegregation, and had received tax exemptions despite the IRS policy and guidelines; and that these unlawful tax exemptions harmed respondents in that they constituted tangible financial aid for racially segregated educational institutions, and encouraged the organization and expansion of institutions that provided segregated educational opportunities for white students avoiding attendance in the public schools. Respondents did not allege that their children had ever applied or would ever apply for admission to any private school. Respondents sought declaratory and injunctive relief. The District Court dismissed the complaint on the ground that respondents lacked standing to bring the suit and the Court of Appeals reversed. The United States Supreme Court granted cert.
Two injuries were alleged:
 Direct harm by government financial aid (through allowing tax deductions for donations) to discriminatory schools. This was argued to be a stigmatic injury because of the appearance of government approval for discrimination against Black people.
 Tax exemptions for discriminatory schools impaired the ability of Black people to force desegregation of public schools, because white parents would simply withdraw their children from public schools and place them in discriminatory private schools.
 Issue 
The Court framed the issue as whether the plaintiffs had standing to bring the lawsuit.
 Result 
The Court said that the plaintiffs had no standing to bring this suit:
In essence the question of standing is whether the litigant is entitled to have the court decide the merits of the dispute or of particular issues. Standing doctrine embraces... the general prohibition on a litigant's raising another person's legal rights, the rule barring adjudication of generalized grievances more appropriately addressed in the representative branches, and the requirement that a plaintiff's complaint fall within the zone of interests protected by the law invoked. The requirement of standing, however, has a core component derived directly from the Constitution. A plaintiff must allege personal injury fairly traceable to defendant’s allegedly unlawful conduct and likely to be redressed by the requested relief.
The court found that the asserted right to hold the government to the law is not enough by itself to create standing to sue. Nor is discrimination enough unless the plaintiff is personally denied equal treatment by the government.
Here, the link between IRS standards and school discrimination was too tenuous. The Court concluded that the doctrine of the separation of powers dictated this result, because otherwise the courts could always be called upon to restructure the Executive branch.
 Dissents 
Justice Brennan wrote a dissenting opinion complaining that the use of separation of powers is a truism. He opined that the injury of the children's opportunities was enough to grant standing to sue.
Justice Stevens wrote that the allegation really is that the government is subsidizing white flight, which is sufficient to allow standing – the harm (lack of desegregated schools) was traceable to government conduct. Stevens also asserted that standing has nothing to do with separation of powers.
 See also 
 Montgomery Academy One of the southern private schools named in the lawsuit and ruling.
References
 External links 
 Official Website of the United States Internal Revenue Service
 Case Brief for Allen v. Wright at Lawnix.com
Category:School segregation in the United States
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States standing case law
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:African-American history of Tennessee
"""

From "Alleyne v. United States" ==> """
Alleyne v. United States, 570 U.S. 99 (2013), was a United States Supreme Court case that decided that, in line with Apprendi v. New Jersey (2000), all facts that increase a mandatory minimum sentence must be submitted to and found true by a jury (not merely determined to be true by a judge's discretion). The majority opinion was written by Justice Clarence Thomas, joined by Justices Ginsburg, Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan..
Summary of findings
In the original trial, the defendant (Alleyne) was convicted of using or carrying a firearm in a violent crime, which carried a mandatory minimum penalty of five years' imprisonment. However, the mandatory minimum would rise to seven years if the accused were found to have "brandished" the firearm during the crime, and to ten years if he had fired it. In the original trial, the judge (not the jury) determined that Alleyne had probably brandished the firearm during the robbery, which caused the mandatory minimum sentence to rise to seven years (which was the sentence imposed).
The Supreme Court found that the question of whether or not the accused had brandished his weapon during the robbery was not merely a "sentencing factor," which the judge could unilaterally decide, but an "ingredient of the offense," which must be assessed and decided upon by the jury. The Court also expressly overruled Harris v. United States (2002), which had reached a contrary ruling.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 570
Southern Union Co. v. United States (2012)
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Sixth Amendment sentencing case law
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:2013 in United States case law
"""

From "Allgeyer v. Louisiana" ==> """
Allgeyer v. Louisiana, 165 U.S. 578 (1897), was a landmark case of the Supreme Court of the United States in which a unanimous bench struck down a Louisiana statute for violating an individual's liberty of contract.. It was the first case in which the Supreme Court interpreted the word liberty in the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to mean economic liberty. The decision marked the beginning of the Lochner eraSee . during which the Supreme Court struck many state regulations for infringing on an individual's right to contract. The Lochner era lasted 40 years and ended when West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish was decided in 1937..
Statute
In 1894, the Louisiana legislature passed a statute, "An act to prevent persons, corporations or firms from dealing with marine insurance companies that have not complied with law." The ostensible purpose of the statute was to prevent fraud by requiring state citizens and corporations to abstain from business with out-of-state marine insurance companies. Compliance with the statute required all out-of-state insurance companies to have an appointed agent within the state. The text of the statute read:
That any person, firm or corporation who shall fill up, sign or issue in this State any certificate of insurance under an open marine policy, or who in any manner whatever does any act in this State to effect, for himself or for another, insurance on property, then in this State, in any marine insurance company which has not complied in all respects with the laws of this State, shall be subject to a fine of one thousand dollars, for each offense, which shall be sued for in any competent court by the attorney general for the use and benefit of the charity hospitals in New Orleans and in Shreveport.Allgeyer, 165 U.S. at 579.
Case
On October 27, 1894, E. Allgeyer & Co. dispatched mail from New Orleans to the Atlantic Mutual Insurance Company in New York City to insure an international shipment of cotton, at the time in Louisiana, under an open policy that Allgeyer had with the insurance company.
On December 21, 1894, the State of Louisiana filed a petition in Orleans Parish court alleging Allgeyer had violated the statute in three counts and sought a cumulative fine of $3,000 (). Instead of offering an argument of innocence, Allgeyer challenged the statute on grounds for violating the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the US Constitution.
The case went to trial, and the parish court entered a judgment for Allgeyer.
The Louisiana Supreme Court reversed the decision on appeal for one count and found that the other two counts were not proved. As a result, Allgeyer was fined $1,000 ().
Issue
May a state prohibit a party within its jurisdiction from insuring property within the state through an out-of-state insurance company, which has no appointed agent within the state, if the insurance contract is made outside the state?
Attorneys for Allgeyer claimed that the statute violated both the Louisiana and the US Constitutions. They reasoned that liberty in the Due Process Clause entitled citizens to be free from arbitrary restrictions. In particular, the attorneys claimed the following:
 The statute deprived Allgeyer of property without due process
 The statute violated Allgeyer's right to equal protection
 The action prosecuted fell outside the jurisdiction of Louisiana, making the statute inapplicable.
 The insurance contracts and all business which transpired under them were under the jurisdiction of New York and so were lawfully made under that jurisdiction.
 Allgeyer had the right to perform all acts necessary to execute the contracts in Louisiana.
Decision
A unanimous court held for Allgeyer. Associate Justice Rufus Peckham authored the opinion of the court that the statute violated the Fourteenth Amendment.
The 'liberty' mentioned in [the Fourteenth] amendment means not only the right of the citizen to be free from the mere physical restraint of his person, as by incarceration, but the term is deemed to embrace the right of the citizen to be free in the enjoyment of all his faculties, to be free to use them in all lawful ways, to live and work where he will, to earn his livelihood by any lawful calling, to pursue any livelihood or avocation, and for that purpose to enter into all contracts which may be proper, necessary, and essential to his carrying out to a successful conclusion the purposes above mentioned.Allgeyer, 165 U.S. at 589 (emphasis added).
Justice Peckham then defined liberty by using the dissent of Associate Justice Joseph P. Bradley from the Slaughter-House Cases. However, Peckham did not give any indication of the limits of permissible inroads of state police power upon the right. He left such determinations to be made by future courts over "each case as it arises."
See also
 Slaughter-House Cases, 
 Munn v. Illinois, 
 Mugler v. Kansas, 
 Lochner v. New York, 
References
External links
Category:1897 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Louisiana
Category:United States corporate case law
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:1897 in Louisiana
"""

From "Allison Engine Co. v. United States ex rel. Sanders" ==> """
Allison Engine Co. v. United States ex rel. Sanders, 553 U.S. 662 (2008), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States holding that plaintiffs under the False Claims Act must prove that the false claim was made with the specific intent of inducing the government to pay or approve payment of a false or fraudulent claim, rather than merely defrauding a contractor.. Congress overruled this decision with the Fraud Enforcement and Recovery Act of 2009.Fraud Enforcement and Recovery Act of 2009, .
 Background 
In 1985, Bath Iron Works and Ingalls Shipbuilding began construction on a new fleet of destroyers for the United States Navy.  Allison Engine was subcontracted to build generator sets for these ships, and General Tool Company was hired by Allison to assemble the system. The terms of the contracts required that the work meet strict Navy specifications. Two former employees of General Tool, Roger L. Sanders and Roger L. Thacker, filed suit in the Southern District of Ohio under the False Claims Act, alleging that Allison, General Tool, and other subcontractors had knowingly submitted invoices to the shipyards for work which did not meet the Navy requirements, and that the contractors had issued false certificates of compliance with those specifications. Sanders and Thacker, as qui tam relators, would be entitled to a portion of the government's recovery from the contractors if they prevailed in the suit.
The False Claims Act provided:
At trial, the plaintiffs introduced as evidence the alleged false invoices, but did not provide evidence of false invoices from the shipyards to the Navy. The contractor defendants moved for judgment on the grounds that the plaintiffs had not introduced any evidence of any false claims made to the Federal government. The trial court, interpreting the language of the False Claims Act, agreed and entered judgment in favor of the defendants. On appeal, the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed the trial court, deciding that it was sufficient for the plaintiffs to prove that a false claim would be paid with government money, even if it was not paid directly by the government.
 Case 
The Supreme Court granted certiorari to consider what the appropriate standard for cases under §3729(a)(2) of the False Claims Act should be, and to resolve a conflict among the circuit courts. The D.C. Circuit had already decided a similar case, United States ex rel. Totten v. Bombardier Corp., finding (contrary to the Sixth Circuit) that intent for the false claim to be paid by the government was an essential element of §3729(a)(2). In their briefs to the Supreme Court, the petitioners argued that a §3729(a)(2) action must include the element of presentment: that the false claim must be made directly to the government. The government, as respondent, argued by contrast that the words "paid or approved by the Government" in the statute should be read to include any payment made with government money, however indirectly.
Writing for a unanimous court, Justice Samuel Alito notes that, "[w]hile §3729(a)(1) requires a plaintiff to prove that the defendant "present[ed]" a false or fraudulent claim to the Government, the concept of presentment is not mentioned in §3729(a)(2)."  He concludes:
The Court also considered a conspiracy claim under §3729(a)(3), and concluded that the language of that clause was sufficiently similar to clause (a)(2) that the same principle should apply. The judgment of the Sixth Circuit was vacated and the case remanded for further consideration.
 Subsequent developments 
The Fraud Enforcement and Recovery Act of 2009, Pub.L. 111-21, restates the False Claims Act, replacing §3729(a)(2) with a reading closer to that advocated by the government in Allison Engine:
This has the effect of reversing the Supreme Court's decision by eliminating the specific language on which Allison Engine was decided, and thereby cease "allowing subcontractors and non-governmental entities to escape responsibility for proven frauds".
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2008 in United States case law
"""

From "Allstate Insurance Co. v. Hague" ==> """
Allstate Insurance Co. v. Hague, 449 U.S. 302 (1981), was a conflict of laws case decided by the United States Supreme Court.
Facts
The testator, Ralph Hague, was a Wisconsin resident who worked in Minnesota. While riding his motorcycle in Wisconsin near the Minnesota border, he was hit and killed by a car driven by another Wisconsin resident. Hague's wife moved to Minnesota and was appointed administrator of his estate there. Hague had three insurance policies worth $15,000 each. The Allstate Insurance Company refused to pay on more than one of these, and Hague's wife filed a lawsuit in Minnesota against the insurance company.
Under Wisconsin law, a testator who held multiple insurance policies could only collect on one of them, but under Minnesota law, a testator could 'stack' the policies, and collect the full $45,000. The Minnesota trial court chose to apply Minnesota law based on public policy. The Minnesota Supreme Court agreed and also concluded that this was the better law. The defendant, Allstate appealed to the United States Supreme Court.
Issue
The Court was confronted with the question of whether the application of Minnesota law was a violation of either Fourteenth Amendment due process, or the Full Faith and Credit clause of the United States Constitution.
Opinion
A plurality opinion by Justice Brennan, joined by three other justices, held that both the Fourth Amendment and the Full Faith and Credit clause are satisfied so long as there are sufficient aggregate contacts. The plurality opinion found three important contacts:
Testator worked in Minnesota (commuted into Minnesota, had certain rights guaranteed there, Minnesota employer lost Testator's services)
Defendant does business in Minnesota, was familiar with Minnesota laws, and knew it could be sued there.
Testator's wife moved to Minnesota and was named administrator there, with nothing suggesting the move was forum shopping.
In a concurring opinion, Justice Stevens says there is no Full Faith and Credit violation unless application of forum law threatens national unity, and no Fourteenth Amendment due process violation unless application of the chosen law is totally arbitrary or fundamentally unfair.
Stevens proposed that the mere interpretation of a contract by one law or another will not threaten unity, alleviating any Full Faith and Credit Clause problem. The defendant did business in Minnesota, and knew that stacking was the majority rule, and there was no contract provision addressing stacking or forum coverage. Therefore, there was no Fourteenth Amendment due process problem. The testator's employment and post-accident move were completely irrelevant to the outcome.
Stevens further proposed that application of the law of the forum state can never be totally arbitrary because the court's familiarity with own law will make such a choice presumptively valid. Minnesota courts were wrong on application of choice-of-law, but it is not the function of the United States Supreme Court to deal with that.
Justice Powell dissented. Powell proposed that the forum state court's decision to apply its own law was valid unless there no significant contacts. He identified two policies driving :
 contacts can not be so slight and casual as to make application of forum law fundamentally unfair, touchstone is the reasonable expectations of the parties
 forum state must have a legit interest in the outcome of the litigation (even if citing public policy) – ergo, litigation must deal with thing that affect persons in the state or happened in the state.
Powell did not disagree with first prong because Defendant did business in Minnesota, and could be sued anywhere; but did not think application of Minnesota law furthers legit state interest. Powell also agreed that the post-accident move was irrelevant, and giving it weight would encourage forum shopping; also irrelevant that this insurer did business here because this insurer did business everywhere. The testator's employment in Minnesota was irrelevant to the facts of this case, where neither the policy, nor the accident, nor the stacking question had anything to do with Testator's work.
Justice Potter Stewart did not participate in the case, resulting in a 4-1-3 split.
Aftermath
The opinion enunciated the test for determining whether a "significant aggregation of contacts" existed, sufficient that "applying local law would not be fundamentally unfair", and "demonstrated how minimal this requirement is in practice".New York University School of Law, Fundamentals of American Law (1996), p. 190.
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1981 in United States case law
"""

From "Almeida-Sanchez v. United States" ==> """
Almeida-Sanchez v. United States, 413 U.S. 266 (1973), was a United States Supreme Court case holding that the search of an automobile by the United States Border Patrol without a warrant or probable cause violates the Fourth Amendment.. The vehicle was stopped and searched for illegal aliens twenty-five miles () from the Mexican border. The Court approached the search from four views: automobile search, administrative inspection, heavily regulated industry inspection, and border search. As to the validity of the search under the automobile exception, the Court found no justification for the search under the Carroll doctrine. because there was no probable cause. As to the validity of the search under various administrative inspection doctrines, the Court found that the officers lacked an area warrant. As to the validity of the heavily regulated industry inspection, the Court found that the doctrine is not applicable to traveling on a state highway.  As to the validity of a border search, the Court found that the site of the stop and the entirety of the road on which the stop occurred was too far from the border to be considered a border search.
 Background 
Condrado Almeida-Sanchez was a Mexican citizen who held a valid American work permit.  Shortly after midnight, Border Patrol officers stopped Almeida-Sanchez and thoroughly searched his vehicle. The officers stopped Almeida-Sanchez on California Highway 78 at a point twenty-five air miles north of the Mexican border.  Highway 78 ran East to West and did not connect to the border.  At the time, Border Patrol efforts to identify individuals who have recently entered the United States without authorization included the following: permanent checkpoints, temporary checkpoints, and roving patrols.  Almeida-Sanchez was stopped by a roving patrol.  The Border Patrol officers did not have a warrant to stop Almeida-Sanchez, and the United States conceded that the officers did not have probable cause or reasonable suspicion to justify the stop or the subsequent vehicle search.Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 267-68.
In searching behind and under the back seat of the vehicle, the officers found marijuana and arrested Almeida-Sanchez.  Almeida-Sanchez moved to suppress the marijuana because the officers found it through an unconstitutional search, violating the Fourth Amendment.  The United States argued that the Immigration and Nationality Act Section 287(a)(3) authorizes warrantless searches of vehicles within a reasonable distance of the land border.  The United States further noted that regulations adopted by the Attorney General define this distance to be within 100 miles.Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 268.
The District Court for the Southern District of California denied Almeida-Sanchez's motion to suppress.  The evidence of the marijuana was admitted and he was convicted of knowingly receiving, concealing and facilitating the transportation of a large quantity of unlawfully imported marijuana.  He was sentenced to five years in prison. Almeida-Sanchez appealed his conviction arguing that the search of his car violated the Fourth Amendment.  The Ninth Circuit upheld his conviction.  Almeida-Sanchez appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States.  The Supreme Court reversed.
 Supreme Court Opinion 
 Justice Stewart's majority 
Justice Stewart delivered the opinion of the Court. The Supreme Court held that the roving patrol's warrantless search of Almeida-Sanchez's car without probable cause or Almeida-Sanchez's consent violated the Fourth Amendment right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures. Although there are exceptions to the requirement to get a warrant, the Court held that none of the exceptions applied in this case.Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 272-75.
First, the Carroll exception did not apply here.  In Carroll v. United States, the Court permitted a warrantless search of a vehicle because officers risked losing evidence if the car left their jurisdiction while they try to secure a warrant.  But the officers in Carroll still had probable cause to stop the vehicle and to search it.  In this case, the United States conceded that the Border Patrol officers did not have probable cause to stop Almeida-Sanchez or to search his vehicle. The Court wrote that “the Carroll doctrine does not declare a field day for the police in searching automobiles. Automobile or no automobile, there must be probable cause for the search.”  Because the United States admitted that the officers did not have probable cause, the Court held that the Carroll exception was not applicable.Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 269-70.
Second, the administrative search doctrine did not apply to this case.  In Camara v. Municipal Court, the Supreme Court permitted administrative inspections to enforce health and welfare regulations where the inspector did not have probable cause to inspect a particular dwelling.. The Court required inspectors performing administrative searches to obtain either consent or an area warrant describing the physical and demographic characteristics of the area to be searched.  Here, Border Patrol did not have an area warrant that authorized stopping Almeida-Sanchez and searching his vehicle.  The officials who stopped Almeida-Sanchez exercised “unfettered discretion.” The Court found that the officers' discretion was not sufficiently circumscribed by an area warrant to be a constitutionally permissible administrative search.Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 270.
Third, the doctrine permitting administrative inspection of heavily regulated industries without warrants or probable cause did not apply to this case.  In Colonnade Catering Corp. v. United States, the Court upheld warrantless inspections of a company for its liquor sales and manufacturing.. In United States v. Biswell, the Court upheld a warrantless inspection of a gun retailer.. For each of these, the Court noted that the businesses operated in heavily regulated industries with well-established licensing and compliance requirements.  Entering into these industries entails knowledge that business records will be subject to inspection, which limits the owner's justifiable expectation of privacy. Because Almeida-Sanchez was not engaged in a heavily regulated business, this exception did not apply to the search of his vehicle. The Court further noted that in Colonnade and Biswell inspectors also had specific knowledge that the businesses did actually sell liquor and guns, respectively. In Almeida-Sanchez's case, the officers did not even have suspicion that a border crossing occurred.Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 270-71.
After finding that no warrant exceptions applied here, the Court considered validity of Section 287(a)(3) of the Immigration and Nationality ActSee . and its associated regulations authorizing warrantless searches of vehicles within 100 miles of the land border.See .  The Court did not declare the provision unconstitutional, but adopted an interpretation of the statute that would not authorize warrantless stops and searches like the one in Almeida-Sanchez's case.Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 272.  In determining whether a warrantless, suspicionless stop is permitted under INA Section 287(a)(3), courts must consider context.  Congress has the right to exclude individuals from entering the United States. Incident to this power, Congress may require searches of each individual seeking entry into the United States, as well as her vehicle. This also applies to functional equivalents, like disembarking from an international flight in airports far from the land border. In the context here, where the roving patrol stopped Almeida-Sanchez over twenty miles from the land border on a road that does not lead to the border, the stop and search was not a functional equivalent of a border search.Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 273.  The stop and search were therefore not permitted under the Court's interpretation of the statute.
 Justice Powell's concurrence 
Justice Powell agreed with the Court that the Border Patrol's stop and search of Almeida-Sanchez was not a border search or a functional equivalent that would eliminate the requirement for a warrant and/or probable cause.Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 275-76 (Powell, J., concurring).  Justice Powell also explains the government interest in having roving patrols: many individuals enter the United States unlawfully, avoiding designated points of entry, and meet with someone who will transport them in a vehicle.  Justice Powell accepts that roving patrols are the only feasible way of apprehending someone who enters the United States this way.Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 276.
Justice Powell discusses the administrative search exception to a particularized warrant and writes that he finds the roving patrols to fit in the doctrine. Like in Camara, roving patrols lack particularized suspicion but often have general suspicion that a particular route is used to transport individuals who are in the United States without authorization. Also like in Camara, this use of roving patrols is not to enforce the criminal law, but is administrative in nature—to apprehend and remove individuals present without authorization. And in this case, although not a border search itself, the roving patrols perform searches incidental to protecting the land border. Vehicles are important tools in transporting individuals present without authorization.  Justice Powell points out lower court approval of the searches, lack of reasonable alternatives to roving patrols, and the modest intrusion on individual interests of searching a vehicle.  These considerations direct his finding that under limited circumstances, there could be a constitutionally adequate equivalent of probable cause to permit roving patrol searches in border areas.Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 277-79.
Justice Powell then makes similar findings to the Majority and notes that there is no exception to the warrant requirement in this case.  Because the exceptions do not apply, Justice Powell notes that Border Patrol officers needed consent or a warrant to search Almeida-Sanchez's vehicle as they did.Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 279-282.  Justice Powell goes on to note that this warrant requirement might be solved by getting an area warrant.  He notes that this would bring the searches within the administrative search doctrine.Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 283. Justice Powell specifically finds that area warrants likely will not frustrate the purpose of the searches. He also notes that it would not be infeasible for Border Patrol to get area warrants before commencing a roving patrol.  Here, no area warrant meant the search of Almeida-Sanchez's vehicle was unconstitutional and his conviction must be reversed.Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 285.
Justice Powell concludes his opinion by proposing relevant factors to consider in evaluating whether there is probable cause (or a functional equivalent) for a roving patrol.  His test intends to balance an individual's interest in her Fourth Amendment rights with legitimate governmental interests.Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 284-85.
 Justice White's dissent 
Justice White wrote the dissent, which Chief Justice Burger, Justice Blackmun, and Justice Rehnquist joined.  The dissenters would have held that neither probable cause nor a warrant was necessary in this case because the proper Fourth Amendment standard is reasonableness.Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 288 (White, J., dissenting).
Justice White notes the special context in this case due to the stop's proximity to the border. He notes that many cases permit unfettered searches at the border and at fixed checkpoints near the border. Justice White then discusses cases in which something less than probable cause justified a search, noting that the search was still reasonable and lawful under the Fourth Amendment.Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 288-89. Next, Justice White discusses the heavily regulated industry cases cited in the Majority. He notes that inspectors conducting the searches in those cases had neither a warrant nor probable cause but that the searches were lawful because they were reasonable.Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 290.
Justice White then notes that reasonableness should be interpreted broadly where there is a federal statute permitting the challenged conduct.Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 290-91.  He writes that this respects “the considered judgment of Congress that proper enforcement of the immigration laws requires random searches of vehicles without warrant or probable cause within a reasonable distance of the international borders of the country.”Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 291.  This is rooted in Congress's power to exclude, and Justice White finds that there should be deference to Congress's choice of enforcement mechanisms.
Justice White then notes that INA Section 287(a)(3) only permits these warrantless, suspicionless searches for finding people.  They do not permit warrantless, suspicionless searches of one's person or for contraband.Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 294. This is a limited invasion into a person's privacy interests.
Finding that the border is a zone and not a line, Justice White concludes that after balancing the government interest with the interests of the individual, the search of Almeida-Sanchez's vehicle was reasonable. Justice White then cites circuit court opinions affirming the constitutionality of similar searches.Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 295-98.  He would hold that both stopping the vehicle and searching it was reasonable and that INA Section 287(a)(3) was validly applied.Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 299.
 Subsequent developments regarding roving patrols and border searches 
In the years immediately following Almeida-Sanchez, the Supreme Court decided a series of cases regarding the implications of its holding.  These cases further clarified the powers of law enforcement to search for undocumented people at and near the Mexican border.
United States v. Brignoni-Ponce (ethnicity alone is not sufficient for reasonable suspicion to justify a search for undocumented immigrants).
United States v. Ortiz (traffic checkpoints removed from the border do not permit Border Patrol officers to search the vehicle for undocumented immigrants without suspicion or a warrant).
United States v. Martinez-Fuerte (warrantless, suspicionless searches at border checkpoints are permissible).
Further reading
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1973 in United States case law
"""

From "Almendarez-Torres v. United States" ==> """
Almendarez-Torres v. United States, 523 U.S. 224 (1998), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court which confirmed that a sentencing enhancement based on a prior conviction was not subject to the Sixth Amendment requirement for a jury to determine the fact beyond a reasonable doubt.
Facts
In September 1995, Hugo Almendarez-Torres was indicted for being an alien "found in" the United States without the "permission and consent of the Attorney General" after being deported, in violation of . He pleaded guilty and, at the plea hearing, admitted that he had been deported, that he had unlawfully returned to the United States, and that the earlier deportation had followed three convictions for aggravated felonies.
At the sentencing hearing, Almendarez-Torres pointed out that the Sixth Amendment required that all the elements of a crime be spelled out in the indictment. The indictment in this case did not mention the earlier convictions for aggravated felonies.  As a result, the maximum sentence for which he was eligible was two years in prison.  The district court rejected this argument and sentenced him to 85 months in prison.  The Fifth Circuit affirmed the conviction and sentence.
Majority opinion
The statute at issue.  The statute that defines the crime under which Almendarez-Torres was convicted reads:
§ 1326.  Reentry of deported alien; criminal penalties for reentry of certain deported aliens.
(a) Subject to subsection (b) of this section, any alien who—
(1) has been... deported... and thereafter
(2) enters... or at any time is found in the United States [without the consent of the Attorney General],
shall be fined under title 18, or imprisoned not more than 2 years, or both.
(b) Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, in the case of any alien described in such subsection—
(1) whose deportation was subsequent to a conviction for commission of [certain misdemeanors] or a felony [other than an aggravated felony], such alien shall be fined under title 18, or imprisoned not more than 10 years or both, or
(2) whose deportation was subsequent to a conviction for an aggravated felony, such alien shall be fined under title 18, imprisoned not more than 20 years, or both.
The Court had to decide whether subsection (b)(2), the provision that allowed the district court to impose the 85-month sentence in this case, was a separate crime or merely a penalty provision.  If it defined a separate crime, then the Government's failure to include it in the indictment meant that the conviction and sentence had to be set aside.  If it merely defined a penalty provision, then the conviction and sentence could stand.
Subsection (b)(2) is a penalty provision.  According to the Court, it was "reasonably clear" that subsection (b)(2) defines a penalty provision.  First, the provision entailed recidivism, which "is as typical a sentencing factor as one might imagine."  Recidivism provisions had almost always been interpreted as penalty enhancements, not separate crimes.  Second, Congress usually uses the words at the beginning of subsection (a), "subject to subsection (b)," and at the beginning of subsection (b), "notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section," to define heightened penalty provisions, not separate crimes.  Finally, forcing the government to prove at trial that the defendant had previously been convicted of a crime risks making trials inherently unfair insofar as the jury, faced with such evidence, would be more inclined to convict the defendant on the basis of those prior convictions alone rather than the evidence that he is guilty of the presently charged crime.
The recidivism exception to the Sixth Amendment.  The Court also held that the Sixth Amendment does not require courts to treat recidivism as an element of the crime irrespective of the intent of Congress.  True, the Court had held that all "elements" of the crime must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt, but it had also held that the state could place the burden of proving some sentencing factors on the defendant.  But recidivism was not like an element of a crime, or most other sentencing factors, because it could neither be presumed nor proved.  Indeed, recidivism is one of the oldest and most common reasons for enhancing a criminal's punishment.  Because of this historical pedigree, the Court could not find support in its modern precedents for the idea that it must be proved by the prosecution beyond a reasonable doubt.  True, a few states had such a requirement on their own, but those states had never rested this requirement on a federal constitutional guarantee.  Nor does the fact that the increased punishment available is significant by itself trigger a constitutional requirement that it be proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
Dissenting opinion
Reading the text of subsections (a) and (b), Justice Scalia concluded that the recidivism provisions of subsections (b)(1) and (2) were additional elements of separate crimes.  This conclusion had two premises.  First, the two subsections had parallel language that was nearly identical.  Second, concluding that Congress had intended for subsection (b) to define separate crimes would have allowed the Court to avoid deciding the constitutional question of whether the Sixth Amendment required the Court to construe subsection (b) in that way regardless of Congress's intent.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 523
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
External links
Category:1998 in United States case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment sentencing case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Altitude Express, Inc. v. Zarda" ==> """
Altitude Express, Inc. v. Zarda, 590 U.S. ___ (2020), is a landmark United States Supreme Court civil rights case which ruled that under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 employees could not be discriminated against on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity.
The case involved Donald Zarda, a skydiving instructor for Altitude Express who had told a female customer of his gay identity to make her more comfortable being attached to him during a skydive. She and her boyfriend later expressed their objections to Altitude, leading to Zarda's dismissal on the claim of misconduct. Zarda filed suit in 2014 on the basis of employment discrimination, and though Zarda died in a parachuting accident that year, his family continued the legal battle.
The District Court ruled in favor of Altitude Express in Zarda v. Altitude Express, and this ruling was affirmed by a 3-0 ruling of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. However, the Second Circuit agreed to rehear the case en banc, and then ruled in a 10-3 decision that Title VII does protect employees from discrimination based on sexual orientation, adding to a circuit split. The Supreme Court accepted Altitude Express's petition and consolidated the case alongside Bostock v. Clayton County, Georgia, a similar case of sexual orientation discrimination from the Eleventh Circuit but which ruled that Title VII did not cover such discrimination. Oral arguments were heard on October 8, 2019 alongside the case R.G. & G.R. Harris Funeral Homes Inc. v. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission which dealt with Title VII and employment protections for transgender people.  The Court ruled in a 6–3 decision for Bostock, covering all three cases, on June 15, 2020, that Title VII protections do apply to gay and transgender persons.
Background
In 2010, Donald Zarda was fired from his skydiving job at Altitude Express. He had told a customer he was gay to make her more comfortable with being strapped together. The woman's boyfriend later complained to the company that Zarda had inappropriately touched her, and Zarda was fired as a result.
In October 2010, the press first reported that Zarda had brought his firing to court and was suing Altitude Express. Altitude Express (in Long Island, New York) claimed Zarda had been fired for alleged "inappropriate behavior in the workplace", with Zarda's lawyer arguing the customer had been homophobic and the firing was due to Zarda's sexual orientation. In the case, Altitude argued that Zarda had touched the client inappropriately, backing up the customer's claims. Zarda's family argued that he had no motive to do such a thing, which was consistent with his job and inconsistent with his sexual orientation, the real motive for his firing. Zarda alleged he was fired for failing to conform to the "straight male macho stereotype". Zarda died on October 3, 2014, in Switzerland in a BASE jumping accident and the case was continued by his family.
District and Appeals Court
Zarda's case was initially heard in United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York in 2014. While the case was in progress, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) issued a non-binding memo in 2015 that it would treat sexual orientation as covered by Title VII; this aligned with a prior non-binding memo from the Department of Justice (DOJ) that it would also treat sexual orientation as protected under Title VII should such cases be presented to them. Despite these federal memos, the District Court summarily ruled in favor of Altitude Express.
Zarda's estate appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. During this case, Donald Trump became president in 2017. Trump took steps to undo many actions previously established by the prior president Barack Obama, including instructing the DOJ to reverse its decision on Title VII protections for sexual orientation. In its new memo, the DOJ asserted that while significant cultural shifts had occurred since the passage of the Civil Rights Act, Congress had not amended the law in any way, and thus rejected that Title VII protected against sexual orientation discrimination as the DOJ had "substantial and unique interest" to follow the letter of the law. No such change was made from the EEOC's stance, putting these two agencies at odds with each other. The three-judge panel at the Second Circuit affirmed the District Court's ruling in April 2017, agreeing that sexual orientation was not covered by Title VII, but commented in the opinion that there were "tensions" around how such cases were being handled by the courts.
Zarda's estate sought an en banc hearing before the full Second District court, which was granted. In July 2017, the DOJ unexpectedly interceded in the case, arguing in a friend of the court brief that Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act of 1964 did not explicitly cover sexual-orientation discrimination in the workplace. Both the DOJ and the EEOC filed opposing amicus briefs. The DOJ explained its position to the Second Circuit. The brief argued that the law does not define "sex," and that the common "ordinary" usage protected being biologically female or male. The American Bar Association announced that it disagreed with the DOJ's stance, arguing to protect gay rights. The DOJ argued as well that employers were free "to regulate employees’ off-the-job sexual behavior" and could discriminate for promiscuity, adultery, or sexual orientation. The EEOC reiterated arguments it had "pioneered" in a case in 2015 that informed the Seventh Circuit opinion on the Hively v. Ivy Tech case in 2017. A number of opinions were published on the case.
After the oral argument was made on September 26, 2017, the opinion was issued on February 26, 2018. The full court reversed the prior rulings on a 10–3 vote, and asserted that Title VII prohibits sexual orientation employment discrimination under the category of sex. The court ruled that "because sexual orientation is a function of sex and sex is a protected characteristic under Title VII, it follows that sexual orientation is also protected." The ruling did not focus on the merits of Zarda's case specifically, but whether sexual orientation was protected as a function of sex, and in effect protected gay workers under the Civil Rights Act. In effect, the conclusion held that Zarda's estate could bring Title VII claims against Altitude Express, as the law encompassed discrimination based on sexual orientation. In the ruling, the 2nd Circuit confirmed that its conclusion was the result and continuation of the Supreme Court's 1989 prohibition on gender stereotyping in Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, as well Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Services in 1998 that protected both genders from discrimination.
Supreme Court
Prior to the en banc ruling from the Second Circuit, it had been expected for the case to be on track for the Supreme Court. Zarda's legal representative Gregory Antollino argued that, "If you discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation, you necessarily take into account the sex of the employee. You can't take the 'sex' out of "sexual orientation."
In May 2018, the Advocate reported that Altitude Express had appealed the February decision by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. Altitude Express filed a petition for the Supreme Court to hear the case again, arguing, according to the Advocate, that "expanding the law to cover discrimination based on sexual orientation should be done by legislators, not the judiciary." The petition argued that sexual orientation discrimination did "not amount to discrimination based on gender stereotyping, which some courts have ruled is a type of sex discrimination."  In the February ruling, whether sexual orientation discrimination occurred in the case had not been addressed, only the legality of such discrimination. The petition also did not seek to address the merits of the Zarda case specifically, only focusing on whether Title VII applied as a valid type of discrimination. Altitude Express was represented by Saul Zabell of Zabell & Associates. In the petition, Zabell argued that the decision made by the 7th and 2nd Circuits "departed from more than 50 years of established precedent" in that it ruled on the scope of protection for LGBT employees under Title VII. To "resolve the circuit split," the petition called for the Supreme Court to step in. There was no guarantee the court would grant the petition. Donald Zarda's estate, represented by lawyer Gregory Antollino, opposed the Supreme Court review, with Antollino stating that he thought more "circuits need to weigh in" before the Supreme Court involvement and citing other pending cases. It was noted that between the different circuits, the courts were split on the matter of sexual orientation discrimination.
The Supreme Court granted cert to the petition in April 2019 under the case name Altitude Express, Inc. v Zarda (Docket #17-1623). The case was consolidated with another petition, Bostock v. Clayton County, Georgia (Docket #17-1618), in which a gay employee in the county's child welfare service program was fired for his sexual orientation. In this case, the Eleventh Circuit ruled in favor of the county, that previous case law out of the Fifth Circuit allowed for dismissal of employees due to sexual orientation. The Court's granting of cert was announced alongside another related case to be heard by the court R.G. & G.R. Harris Funeral Homes Inc. v. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, related to whether Title VII protections included transgender individuals. 
Altitude Express, Bostock and Harris were heard during October 8, 2019 oral arguments.  In oral arguments the Court's more conservative Justices argued that because Congress had not included sexual orientation at the time of the Civil Rights Act, nor had updated the law to include it since, they feared creating law outside Congress's authority. Arguments also centered on how the word "sex" in Title VII could be interpreted to include sexual orientation, and not strictly gender.
 Decision 
See also
 List of LGBT-related cases in the United States Supreme Court
References
External links
  Biskupic, Joan (July 28, 2020): EXCLUSIVE: Anger, leaks and tensions at the Supreme Court during the LGBTQ rights case. A background article written by CNN's legal analyst & Supreme Court biographer Joan Biskupic who details the decision-making process leading to the landmark court decision in Altitude Express, Inc. v. Zarda. Archived from the original on November 13, 2020. Retrieved on November 24, 2020.
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit cases
Category:United States LGBT rights case law
Category:2020 in LGBT history
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Altria Group, Inc. v. Good" ==> """
Altria Group v. Good, 555 U.S. 70 (2008), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a state law prohibiting deceptive tobacco advertising was not preempted by a federal law regulating cigarette advertising.
 Background 
The lawsuit claimed that Altria's marketing of "light" and "low tar" cigarettes constituted fraudulent misrepresentations under the Maine Unfair Trade Practices Act (MUTPA) Me. Rev. Stat. Ann., Tit. 5, §207 (Supp. 2008).The MUTPA provides, as relevant, that "[u]nfair methods of competition and unfair or deceptive acts or practices in the conduct of any trade or commerce are declared unlawful." §207. In construing that section, courts are to "be guided by the interpretations given by the Federal Trade Commission and the Federal Courts to Section 45(a)(1) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 45(a)(1)), as from time to time amended." §207(1). because it deceived smokers into thinking the products are safer than regular cigarettes.
The District Court granted summary judgment in favor of Altria, finding the state-law claim pre-empted by the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act, 15 U.S.C. §1334(b) (Federal Labeling Act).  The First Circuit reversed, holding that the Labeling Act neither expressly nor impliedly pre-empted respondents' fraud claim.
The Court's decision was therefore meant to answer the following question: Does federal preemption of the Maine Unfair Trade Practices Act hinge on the express or implied nature of the allegedly fraudulent misrepresentations?
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice John Paul Stevens, writing for a 5-4 Court, held that neither the Labeling Act's pre-emption provision, nor the Federal Trade Commission's actions in this field, expressly or impliedly preempt claims related to "smoking and health" under the Maine statute. Pp. 5–20.
Adopting the reasoning it used in Cipollone v. Liggett Group, Inc., the Court found that claims based on a common law legal duty ("predicate-duty" approach, e.g. a manufacturer's duty not to misrepresent its products), were not preempted simply because they related to cigarette manufacturers and the labeling of its products.
(a) Congress may indicate preemptive intent through a statute's express language or through its structure and purpose.  See Jones v. Rath Packing Co., 430 U. S. 519 . When the text of an express preemption clause is susceptible of more than one plausible reading, courts ordinarily "accept the reading that disfavors preemption." Bates v. Dow Agrosciences LLC,   544 U. S. 431 . The Labeling Act's stated purposes are to inform the public of the health risks of smoking while protecting commerce and the economy from the ill effects of nonuniform requirements to the extent consistent with the first goal. Although fidelity to these purposes does not demand the preemption of state fraud rules, the principal question here is whether that result is nevertheless required by 15 U. S. C. §1334(b), which provides that "[n]o requirement or prohibition based on smoking and health shall be imposed under State law with respect to the advertising or promotion of any cigarettes the packages of which are labeled in conformity with the provisions of this chapter." Pp. 5–9.
(b) Respondents' claim is not expressly pre-empted by §1334(b).  As determined in Cipollone v. Liggett Group, Inc., 505 U. S. 504, and Lorillard Tobacco Co. v. Reilly, 533 U. S. 525, the phrase "based on smoking and health" modifies the state-law rule at issue rather than a particular application of that rule. The Cipollone plurality concluded that "the phrase 'based on smoking and health' fairly but narrowly construed" did not preempt the Cipollone plaintiff's common-law claim that cigarette manufacturers had fraudulently misrepresented and concealed a material fact, because the claim alleged a violation of a duty not to deceive—a duty that is not "based on" smoking and health. 505 U. S., at 528–529. Respondents here also allege a violation of the duty not to deceive as codified in the MUTPA, which, like the common-law duty in Cipollone, has nothing to do with smoking and health. Respondents' claim is not analogous to the "warning neutralization" claim found to be preempted in Cipollone.  Reilly is consistent with Cipollone's analysis.  This Court disagrees with petitioners' alternative argument that the express pre-emption framework of Cipollone and Reilly should be rejected. American Airlines, Inc. v. Wolens, 513 U. S. 219, and Riegel v. Medtronic, Inc., 552 U. S. ___, are distinguished.  Pp. 9–16.
(c) Various Federal Trade Commission decisions with respect to statements of tar and nicotine content do not impliedly preempt state deceptive practices rules like the MUTPA. Pp. 17–20.
 Dissent 
Justice Clarence Thomas disagreed with the majority's adoption of the "predicate-duty" approach from Cipollone, arguing it was confusing and unworkable. Rather, he argued that the Court should adopt a clear test that expressly preempts any state law claim that "imposes an obligation...because of the effect of smoking upon health."
 See also 
 Cipollone v. Liggett Group, Inc. (1992)
 References 
External links
 Scotus Wiki, Altria v. Good (contains briefs, summaries, and other resources)
 Case Briefs
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States federal preemption law
Category:2008 in United States case law
Category:United States tobacco case law
Category:Altria Group
Category:Philip Morris litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Altvater v. Freeman" ==> """
Altvater v. Freeman, 319 U.S. 359 (1943), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States which held that, although a licensee had maintained payments of royalties, a Declaratory Judgment Act claim of invalidity of the licensed patent still presented a justiciable case or controversy.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 319
MedImmune, Inc. v. Genentech, Inc., 
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States patent case law
Category:1943 in United States case law
"""

From "Alvarez v. Smith" ==> """
Alvarez v. Smith, 558 U.S. 87 (2009), was a United States Supreme Court decision on seizure of property by the Chicago Police Department, however the case was declared moot by the Court as the parties agreed that there was no longer contention over the property seized..
 Background 
Under the Illinois Drug Asset Forfeiture Procedure Act (DAFPA) moveable personal property used in a drug crime is subject to forfeiture and allows the police to seize property without a warrant. In addition it allows the state to keep the property for five months before judicial proceedings begin.
The respondents, all who had had property seized under the law, sued claiming that the State had failed to provide a speedy hearing to reclaim property thus violating Due Process. The District Court for the Northern District of Illinois dismissed the cases based on Seventh Circuit precedent. Respondents appealed to the Seventh Court of Appeals on the grounds that Mathews v. Eldridge. requires a hearing before the seizure of real property.
The Appeals Court overruled its precedent and held that DAFPA did not provide the adequate mechanisms for owners to challenge the seizure of their property. The Court reasoned that the length of time (97 to 187 days maximum) was too long. The Seventh Circuit remanded the case back to the District Court and ordered it to devise a mechanism by which an owner can contest the seizure of his property.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court declined to answer the question. In oral argument the court learned that the parties no longer disputed ownership of the property in question. Therefore, the majority opinion, written by Justice Breyer, declared the case moot and vacated the judgment of the Seventh Circuit.
Justice Stevens filled a separate opinion, agreeing with Parts I and II of the Majority (which declared the case moot) however opposed Part III which declared the judgment of the Appeals Court vacated. Stevens believed judgments should not be vacated when "the party seeking relief from judgment below caused the mootness by voluntary action,"Alvarez, 558 U.S. at 98 (Stevens, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). citing U.S. Bancorp Mortgage Co. v. Bonner Mall Partnership..
 References 
External links
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Chicago Police Department
"""

From "Am. Express Co. v. Italian Colors Rest." ==> """
Am. Express Co. v. Italian Colors Rest., 570 U.S. 228 (2013), ("Italian Colors") is a United States Supreme Court case decided in 2013..The Supreme Court 2012 Term: Leading Cases: Section II: Federal Jurisdiction and Procedure, 127  268, 278 (2013).
 Background 
An agreement between petitioners, American Express and a subsidiary, and respondents, merchants who accept American Express cards, require[d] all of their disputes to be resolved by arbitration and provide[d] that there “shall be no right or authority for any Claims to be arbitrated on a class action basis.” Respondents nonetheless filed a class action, claiming that petitioners violated section 1 of the Sherman Act and seeking treble damages for the class under §4 of the Clayton Act. Petitioners moved to compel individual arbitration under the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA), but respondents countered that the cost of expert analysis necessary to prove the antitrust claims would greatly exceed the maximum recovery for an individual plaintiff. The District Court granted the motion and dismissed the lawsuits. The Second Circuit reversed and remanded, holding that because of the prohibitive costs respondents would face if they had to arbitrate, the class-action waiver was unenforceable and arbitration could not proceed. The Circuit stood by its reversal when this Court remanded in light of Stolt-Nielsen S. A. v. AnimalFeeds International Corp., which held that a party may not be compelled to submit to class arbitration absent an agreement to do so..
 Issue 
Is American Express Company's arbitration clause prohibiting class action suits enforceable, even though it would compel arbitration of antitrust claims?
 Holding 
The prohibitively high cost of arbitration is not a sufficient reason for a court to overrule an arbitration clause that forbids class action suits. Federal law does not guarantee that a claim will be resolved affordably. The fact that it can be more expensive to litigate individual arbitrations than they are worth does not negate the right to pursue a statutory remedy. Therefore, no exception to the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA) can be applied.
 Dissent 
Justice Kagan, with whom Justice Ginsburg and Justice Breyer joined, wrote in her dissent that:
The purpose of the FAA is to resolve disputes and facilitate compensation of injuries. By barring any means of sharing or shrinking arbitration costs, the arbitration clause in the American Express form contract functions to confer immunity from potentially meritorious federal claims, which runs counter to the purpose of the FAA (“No rational actor would bring a claim worth tens of thousands of dollars if doing so meant incurring costs in the hundreds of thousands”). The contract also violates the Sherman Act by depriving parties of a chance to challenge allegedly monopolistic conduct.
 Significance 
This case, combined with AT&T Mobility LLC v. Concepcion,. has led to a fear that businesses will adopt arbitration en masse, which will effectively prohibit effective antitrust enforcement. A 2013 Harvard Law Review stated that: "The Court’s [Italian Colors] decision makes it likely that many federal statutes will no longer be enforced privately in certain contexts, further weakening a judicially created principle that was already difficult to apply. Thus, it is now up to Congress to determine whether, and in what contexts, it favors contractual freedom in arbitration agreements over private enforcement of federal statutes."
 References 
External links
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States arbitration case law
"""

From "American Automobile Ass'n v. United States" ==> """
American Automobile Association v. United States, 367 U.S. 687 (1961), was an income tax case before the United States Supreme Court.American Automobile Association v. United States, .
 Background 
 Facts 
For the taxable years 1952 and 1953, the American Automobile Association, an accrual-basis taxpayer, followed a method of accounting whereby annual membership dues collected in any month were treated as income 1/24 for the month received, 1/12 for each of the next 11 months, and 1/24 for the following month, a method which was in accord with generally accepted commercial accounting principles and which was consistent with the Association's over-all cost experience.
 Tax return 
The Commissioner of Internal Revenue determined not to accept the taxpayer's accounting system, and adjustments were made so as to reflect as gross income for each year the entire amount of membership dues actually received during the year. The Association paid the tax deficiencies resulting from the adjustments, and, after a timely claim for refund was denied, instituted suit to recover in the Court of Claims.
 Court of claims 
The court of claims sustained the Commissioner, finding that the national automobile club had failed to apply members' prepaid dues as taxable income in the calendar year of their actual receipt.
 Certiorari 
Petitioner claimed its accrual method of accounting was not artificial. The court granted certiorari to decide in what year its prepaid membership dues were taxable income.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court affirmed by Clark in a 5–4 decision.
It was held that the Commissioner of Internal Revenue did not abuse his discretion in determining that the prepaid dues were taxable as income in the year in which they were actually received and in rejecting the taxpayer's method of accounting.
It found that the accounting method employed by petitioner was in accord with generally accepted commercial accounting principles and practices, but could be rejected by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue in the exercise of his discretion under 26 U.S.C. § 41. In particular, petitioner's practice of accounting for expected future service expenses in advance could have been found purely artificial by the Commissioner. Furthermore, Congress had specifically authorized petitioner's desired method of accounting only in the instance of prepaid subscription income and had refused to enlarge 26 U.S.C. § 455 to include prepaid membership dues.
Thus, the exercise of the taxing authority in rejecting petitioner's accounting system was not unsound, in light of the discretion granted to the taxing authority by Congress. Moreover, Congress had refused to enlarge the use of petitioner's method of accounting beyond the area of prepaid subscription income in the field of publishing.
 Dissents 
Stewart dissented on the ground that the taxpayer was entitled to follow the accounting method adopted by it upon proof that its average costs of service in future periods reasonably matched dues allocated to such periods.
See also
 Schlude v. Commissioner
 Artnell Company v. Commissioner
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1961 in United States case law
Category:American Automobile Association
"""

From "American Broadcasting Cos., Inc. v. Aereo, Inc." ==> """
American Broadcasting Cos., Inc. v. Aereo, Inc, 573 U.S. 431 (2014), was a United States Supreme Court case. The Court ruled that the service provided by Aereo, allowing subscribers to view live and time-shifted streams of over-the-air television on Internet-connected devices, violated copyright laws.
 Background 
Cable companies are required by the 1992 Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act to negotiate for retransmission consent, usually paying broadcasters for the right to carry their signals. Broadcasters argued that Aereo was a threat both to their business model, by undermining the cable retransmission fees and the size of their audience. Because the fees cable companies pay for broadcast content can comprise up to 10% of a broadcaster's revenue, broadcasters object to Aereo's re-distribution of this content without paying any fees. Broadcasters have also identified Aereo as part of the cord-cutting trend among television audiences that poses a threat to broadcasters' advertising revenue.
In somewhat similar cases, the U.S. District Court for the Central District of California granted an injunction against Aereo's rival FilmOn, a similar service. However, the district court's injunction is only legally binding in its jurisdiction (including the West Coast of the continental United States, Alaska and Hawaii) and is currently being appealed to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. Other competitors have been blocked from providing service in Los Angeles and Seattle by similar injunctions.
 Federal court 
On March 1, 2012, two weeks before Aereo's initial launch in New York City, Aereo was sued for copyright infringement by a consortium of major broadcasters, including CBS Corporation's CBS, Comcast's NBC, Disney's ABC and 21st Century Fox's Fox. The broadcasters argued that Aereo infringed their copyrighted material because Aereo's streams constituted public performances. They sought a preliminary injunction against the company. On July 11, Federal Judge Alison Nathan denied this injunction, citing as precedent the 2008 Cablevision case, which established the legality of cloud-based streaming and DVR services. In response to the decision, Aereo Founder and CEO Chet Kanojia said "Today's decision shows that when you are on the right side of the law, you can stand up, fight the Goliath and win." In a subsequent interview with CNET, Kanojia asserted, "With one step, we changed the entire TV industry. The television industry and its evolution are now starting towards the Internet and that was stopped until Aereo came along...And I think as consumers start migrating to the Internet, new programming and new content are going to come in."
 Second Circuit appeal 
The plaintiffs appealed the decision to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. Several other players in the industry, such as cable provider Cablevision, the Electronic Frontier Foundation, and the Consumer Electronics Association filed amicus briefs. On April 1, 2013, the federal appeals court upheld the lower court's ruling, finding that Aereo's streams to subscribers were not "public performances", and thus did not constitute copyright infringement. The appeals court also affirmed the earlier district court decision that denied the broadcasters a preliminary injunction against Aereo. In response, News Corporation's Chief Operating Officer Chase Carey stated that the company is contemplating taking Fox off the air and converting it to a cable-only channel: "We need to be able to be fairly compensated for our content ... we can't sit idly by and let an entity steal our signal. We will move to a subscription model if that's our only recourse." Univision and CBS have also stated that they may also follow and convert to cable-only.
 Supreme Court 
In October 2013, the broadcasters filed a petition to the United States Supreme Court to take up the issue. On January 10, 2014, the Supreme Court agreed to hear the case.Supreme Court to Hear Aereo Case, Variety, January 10, 2014. In February 2014, in advance of the case being taken up by the Supreme Court, a judge in the 10th Circuit Court of Appeals granted a preliminary injunction against Aereo, blocking the service within the 10th district, which includes Colorado, Kansas, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Utah, Wyoming and Yellowstone National Park. On November 17, 2013, the National Football League and Major League Baseball filed a joint amicus brief to the Supreme Court, warning that sports programming would likely migrate from broadcast to cable television; and that Aereo may put the U.S. in violation of several international treaties that prohibit the retransmission of broadcast signals over the Internet without their copyright holder's consent. The United States Department of Justice and United States Copyright Office also filed a joint brief in March 2014, saying that "[Aereo's] system is clearly infringing". The Supreme Court heard oral arguments on April 22, 2014.Supreme Court to hear Aereo vs. big media case April 22, VentureBeat, February 11, 2014.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court decided in favor of the broadcasters on June 25 in a 6–3 decision and remanded the case. The Court's decision describes Aereo as not being "simply an equipment provider," with an "overwhelming likeness to cable companies" that "performs petitioners' works 'publicly.'" Further, the Court adds that its decision should not discourage the emergence or use of different kinds of technologies..
Justices Scalia, Thomas and Alito dissented. Writing for the dissenting minority, Scalia quoted from Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc., noting that the broadcasters made similar predictions regarding the VCR. Like the final paragraph in that previous ruling, he stated that the Court should be in no position to make judgements on novel technologies, and it is instead Congress's job to determine if the copyright laws should be modified to address these issues.American Broadcasting Cos., Inc. v. Aereo, Inc., 573 U. S., (Scalia, dissenting slip op., at 12-13)
The dissent continues and criticizes the majority's opinion calling it poorly reasoned because it relies on a "guilt by resemblance" standard, which states Aereo is performing because it "looks-like-cable-TV." 
 Subsequent developments 
Even though the United States Supreme Court held Aereo was "performing" the broadcasters copyrighted material because Aereo "looks-like-cable-TV" and was similar to community antenna television (CATV) systems, it was later held Aereo could not continue its service under a compulsory license, the way a cable provider would. 
On November 21, 2014, the company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York. It was later purchased by DVR company TiVo for $1 million in March 2015.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 573
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:2014 in American television
"""

From "American Communications Ass'n v. Douds" ==> """
American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382 (1950), is a 5-to-1 ruling by the United States Supreme Court which held that the Taft–Hartley Act's imposition of an anti-communist oath on labor union leaders does not violate the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, is not an ex post facto law or bill of attainder in violation of Article One, Section 10 of the United States Constitution, and is not a "test oath" in violation of Article Six of the Constitution.
Background
The American Communications Association (ACA) was founded in 1931 as the American Radio Telegraphists Association (ARTA) by Mervyn Rathbone.Lowitt, Interpreting Twentieth-Century America: A Reader, 1973, p. 452.The ARTA should not be confused with the United Radio Telegraphists Association, a similar union in the U.S. founded in 1917 but which had disbanded by 1922. See: May-Stewart, Handbook of American Trade-Unions: 1936 Edition, 1936, p. 278. The union represented telegraphists and radio operators (on land and at sea) in the United States. The union had previously been involved in a Supreme Court case regarding the use of strikebreakers in strikes (NLRB v. Mackay Radio & Telegraph Co., 304 U.S. 333 (1938)), which it had lost. In 1937, the union changed its name to the American Communications Association and affiliated with the newly formed Congress of Industrial Organizations.Downey, "Telegraph Messenger Strikes and Their Impact on Telegraph Unionization," in The Encyclopedia of Strikes in American History, 2009, p. 516. A majority of the union's members were strongly left-wing, and most of the union's leaders were members of the Communist Party USA (CPUSA)—with the union effectively under the control of the CPUSA.Stark, "Some Unions Will Sign Anti-Communist Papers," New York Times, August 31, 1947; Busky, Communism in History and Theory: Asia, Africa, and the Americas, 2002, p. 155; Starobin, American Communism in Crisis, 1943-1957, 1975, p. 143; Rabinowitz, Unrepentant Leftist: A Lawyer's Memoir, 1996, p. 31.
The United States Congress enacted the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) on June 27, 1935, and President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed it into law on July 5."Both Houses Clear Wagner Labor Bill," New York Times, June 28, 1935; "Roosevelt Signs the Wagner Bill as 'Just to Labor'," New York Times, July 6, 1935. In 1947, Congress amended the NLRA by enacting the Labor–Management Relations Act (better known as the Taft-Hartley Act) on June 23, 1947, overriding President Harry S. Truman's veto.Stark, "Industry, Labor Sharply Divided," New York Times, June 21, 1947; White, "Truman Plea Fails," New York Times, June 24, 1947. Section 9(h) of the Taft-Hartley Act required leaders of labor unions to file an affidavit with the National Labor Relations Board affirming that they were not members of the Communist Party USA and did not advocate the violent overthrow of the United States federal government.Abernathy and Perry, Civil Liberties Under the Constitution, 1993, p. 260. If a union had an elected leader who did not file such an affidavit, that union would lose the protection of the NLRA.
ACA leaders categorically refused to sign the anti-communist affidavits on the grounds that the oaths violated their First Amendment rights.  On October 29, 1947, Charles T. Douds, regional director of the National Labor Relations Board in New York City, barred the American Communications Association from appearing on an NLRB-supervised union organizing election (its very first action under the new Taft-Hartley anti-communist oath provisions).Stark, "NLRB Blocks Union Bargaining Right," New York Times, October 30, 1947."High Court Will Rule on Two Cases Involving Taft Act Oath and Eisler," New York Times, November 9, 1948. The ACA sued to have the provision declared unconstitutional as a violation of its leaders' First Amendment rights.Loftus, "High Court Delays Red Clause Ruling," New York Times, January 14, 1949.
On June 29, 1948, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit held, in a 2-to-1 decision written by Judge Thomas Walter Swan, that Section 9(h) did not impermissibly impose on union members' First Amendment rights."Final Court Test on Taft Bill Seen," New York Times, June 30, 1948. Attorney Victor Rabinowitz appealed the case to the Supreme Court. The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari on November 8, 1949. Although the Court was due to hear oral argument on January 13, 1949, it delayed this in order to take on another case (United Steelworkers of America v. National Labor Relations Board) with almost identical issues. Argument was rescheduled for February 28, 1949, but did not occur until October 11 so that both cases could be heard together.
thumb|left|150px|Justice Douglas did not participate in the case after being severely injured in a horse-riding accident.
Three of the Court's most liberal justices did not participate in the decision.Rabinowitz, Unrepentant Leftist: A Lawyer's Memoir, 1996, p. 54.Wiecek, History of the Supreme Court of the United States..., 2006, p. 547. Justice William O. Douglas did not participate because he had nearly been killed in a horseback-riding accident earlier in the year, and was still convalescing at his home in Arizona.Christopher, Chances of a Lifetime: A Memoir, 2001, p. 20; Douglas, The Court Years, 1939-1975: The Autobiography of William O. Douglas, 1981, p. 95. Associate Justice Tom Clark had been President Truman's Attorney General, and had overseen the prosecution of the ACA.Frankel, History in Dispute: The Red Scare After 1945, 2000, p. 151; Wiecek, History of the Supreme Court of the United States..., 2006, p. 546. Although he joined the Court on August 24, 1949,"Truman Sees Clark Sworn In By Vinson at the White House," New York Times, August 25, 1949. Clark had recused himself due to his prior involvement in the case.  Associate Justice Wiley Blount Rutledge, a staunch liberal and strong advocate for civil rights,Newman, The Yale Biographical Dictionary of American Law, 2009, p. 473. had died unexpectedly of a stroke on September 10, 1949, at the age of 55."Justice Wiley Rutledge Dies of Brain Hemorrhage at 55," New York Times, September 11, 1949. His successor, 59-year-old Sherman Minton, a former Democratic Senator from Indiana and a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, was nominated as his replacement on September 16, 1949, but was not sworn in until October 12.Wood,  "Minton Named to High Court," New York Times, September 16, 1949; "Minton Is Confirmed For Court, 48 to 16," Associated Press, October 5, 1949; "Minton Sworn In As Supreme Court Justice," New York Times, October 13, 1949. His arrival on the Court came two days after oral argument, and he was not able to participate in the decision.As it turned out, Minton was one of the Court's more conservative members. See: Eisler, The Last Liberal: Justice William J. Brennan, Jr., and the Decisions That Transformed America, 1993, p. 76.
Decision
Majority ruling
Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson wrote the plurality decision for the majority, joined by Associate Justices Stanley Forman Reed and Harold Hitz Burton. Associate Justice Felix Frankfurter joined in all but Part VII of the majority opinion.
In Part I of the decision, Vinson first reviewed the relevant language in the Taft-Hartley Act, as well as that language which provided for processing of affidavits and imposition of penalties in the event no affidavits were filed in the time permitted.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 385. He also reviewed the justification for upholding the constitutionality of the NLRA, which was to remove obstructions to interstate commerce.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 387. He also reviewed Congress' justification for passing the Taft-Hartley Act, which also attempted to remove impediments to interstate commerce—including the so-called "political strike," in which "legitimate trade union objectives" were subordinated by the Communist Party to political objectives.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 387-389.
In Part II, Vinson posed what a plurality of the court believed was the key question:American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 390.
We are, therefore, neither free to treat § 9(h) as if it merely withdraws a privilege gratuitously granted by the Government, nor able to consider it a licensing statute prohibiting those persons who do not sign the affidavit from holding union office. The practicalities of the situation place the proscriptions of § 9(h) somewhere between those two extremes. The difficult question that emerges is whether, consistently with the First Amendment, Congress, by statute, may exert these pressures upon labor unions to deny positions of leadership to certain persons who are identified by particular beliefs and political affiliations.
Part III of the decision addressed Congress' power to prevent political strikes through the Commerce Clause, whether the remedy designed was reasonable, and whether the threat posed by the Communist Party was so unique in its use of political strikes and in advocacy of violence that Congress could single it out. Vinson answered all questions affirmatively.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 390-391. Citing In re Summers, 325 U.S. 561 (1945); Clarke v. Deckebach, 274 U.S. 392 (1927); and Hirabayashi v. United States, 320 U.S. 81 (1943), among others, Vinson noted that the Constitution often permitted otherwise irrelevant beliefs, personal traits, or employment status to be infringed upon in certain, limited circumstances.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 391-392.
The question addressed in Part IV of the decision was whether the Communist Party presented such circumstances.  The unions had argued that a "clear and present danger" test be applied to the legislation, as this was a First Amendment issue, but could not agree on how to do so.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 393. Vinson rejected this test as mechanical.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 394-395. But Congress had not concluded in enacting the Taft-Hartley Act that expressing communist beliefs was a danger; rather, Congress had wished to eliminate impediments to interstate commerce.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 396. The problem with political strikes, Vinson asserted, was that rather than allowing speech to combat speech in the "marketplace of ideas", strikes constitute force and coercion which Congress has every authority to regulate. One of the unions had argued that political strikes did not constitute such an imminent danger as to pass constitutional scrutiny, but Vinson rejected this once more as a mechanical application of an inapt test.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 397-398.  Rather, Vinson argued, the Constitution permits infringement of constitutionally protected rights when a sound truck invades the privacy of the home (Kovacs v. Cooper, 336 U.S. 77 (1949)), unauthorized parades disrupt traffic (Cox v. New Hampshire, 312 U.S. 569, (1941)), the health of children is at stake (Prince v. Massachusetts, 321 U.S. 158 (1944)), or the provision of public services is affected (United Public Workers v. Mitchell, 330 U.S. 75 (1947)).American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 398-399. Advocating a balancing of interests and citing Reynolds v. United States, 98 U. S. 145 (1878) (an individual's religious beliefs cannot be accepted as proof of a felony act without evidence of commission of the crime), Vinson instead proposed a balancing test.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 399-400.
Part V of the decision discussed whether political strikes posed such a significant issue as to permissibly infringe on freedom of speech. Vinson refused to substitute the Court's judgment for the congressional determination that this was the case.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 400-401. In accepting the authority of government to promote strong unions, Vinson observed, the Court had repeatedly also accepted the authority of government to infringe in sometimes substantial ways upon individual liberties.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 401-402. The Taft-Hartley Act's penalties, Vinson held, were not direct infringements on the freedom to speak and thus not as onerous as infringements the Court had approved in the past.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 402-405. Vinson rejected the suggestion that the statute had not been narrowly drawn. Although legislation could have been enacted which made political strikes themselves unlawful (rather than require anti-communist affidavits), Vinson asserted that:American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 406.
...the legislative judgment that interstate commerce must be protected from a continuing threat of such strikes is a permissible one in this case. The fact that the injury to interstate commerce would be an accomplished fact before any sanctions could be applied, the possibility that a large number of such strikes might be called at a time of external or internal crisis, and the practical difficulties which would be encountered in detecting illegal activities of this kind are factors which are persuasive that Congress should not be powerless to remove the threat, not limited to punishing the act.
Part VI of the decision discussed whether the statute impermissibly targeted the Communist Party as the sole political party seeking the violent overthrow of the United States government. If the statute had penalized anyone who advocated violent overthrow of the government, Vinson held, there would be new constitutional doubts raised.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 406-407. But it was the Court's long-held tenet that statutes should be construed constitutionally wherever possible.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 407. Subsequently, Vinson interpreted Section 9(h) narrowly as barring from union office those who actually advocated overthrow of the government and not those who (for example) believed it would happen without their assistance.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 407-408. Vinson reiterated that the balancing of interests in Part V had found the infringement on free speech permissible.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 408-412. But how did this reconcile with Reynolds v. United States?  Because, Vinson said, "Insofar as a distinction between beliefs and political affiliations is based upon absence of any 'overt act' ... the act of joining the Party is crucial. ... courts and juries every day pass upon knowledge, belief and intent—the state of men's minds—having before them no more than evidence of their words and conduct, from which, in ordinary human experience, mental condition may be inferred."American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 410-411.
In Part VII, Vinson address whether Section 9(h) was unconstitutionally vague and/or was a bill of attainder or ex post facto law. Vinson admitted that, hypothetically, the language of the Act might be construed as vague. But in accordance with the Court's long-held rule, he construed the Act narrowly and asserted that there was no vagueness.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 413. Although the unions had held the Act was a bill of attainder under United States v. Lovett, 328 U.S. 303 (1946); Ex parte Garland, 71 U.S. 333 (1867); and Cummings v. Missouri, 71 U.S. 277 (1867), Vinson observed that these cases punished past actions whereas Section 9(h) punished only future conduct. Nor did the Act run afoul of Article VI of the Constitution: "...the mere fact that § 9(h) is in oath form hardly rises to the stature of a constitutional objection. All that was forbidden was a 'religious Test.' We do not think that the oath here involved can rightly be taken as falling within that category."American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 414-415.
The judgment of the district court was affirmed.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 415.
Concurrence
Associate Justice Felix Frankfurter concurred with the majority opinion except as to Part VII.
Frankfurter argued that constitutional questions should be decided as narrowly as possible.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 416. He asserted that "it would make undue inroads upon the policymaking power of Congress" to deny the government the right to prevent political strikes and disruptions to interstate commerce so long as it does not do so in an arbitrary way or infringes on unrelated rights.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 417-418, quoted at 417.
However, despite his agreement with nearly all of the majority's reasoning in Parts I-VI, Frankfurter held that portions of Section 9(h) over impermissibly overbroad.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 419. Section 9(h) "ask[s] assurances from men regarding matters that open the door too wide to mere speculation or uncertainty. It is asking more than rightfully may be asked of ordinary men to take oath that a method is not 'unconstitutional' or 'illegal' when constitutionality or legality is frequently determined by this Court by the chance of a single vote."American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 420. The safeguards of the judicial system, Frankfurter asserted, were "too tenuous to neutralize the danger" to First Amendment freedoms.
Section 9(h) simply goes too far, he said, in demanding that an oath taken today—even if well-considered, sincere, and seriously undertaken—is predictive of all future behavior and belief.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 420-421. 
I cannot deem it within the rightful authority of Congress to probe into opinions that involve only an argumentative demonstration of some coincidental parallelism of belief with some of the beliefs of those who direct the policy of the Communist Party, though without any allegiance to it. To require oaths as to matters that open up such possibilities invades the inner life of men...American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 422.
Frankfurter acknowledged, however, that only these parts of Section 9(h) were invalid, and he would have remanded the case back to the district court with instructions for the union officers to obey only those constitutionally sound provisions.
Concurrence/Dissent
Associate Justice Robert H. Jackson concurred in part and dissented in part.
Jackson held that the critical distinction was the nature of the Communist Party:  "If the statute before us required labor union officers to forswear membership in the Republican Party, the Democratic Party or the Socialist Party, I suppose all agree that it would be unconstitutional. But why, if it is valid as to the Communist Party?" But "the Communist Party is something different, in fact, from any other substantial party we have known, and hence may constitutionally be treated as something different in law."American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 423. Jackson reviewed at length the reasons why the Communist Party was unique:  It constituted a minority which advocated the seizing of power through non-majoritarian means, it was a political party controlled by a foreign government, it was dedicated to violence as the means of seizing power (including "occasional terroristic and threatening methods, such as picketing courts and juries, political strikes and sabotage"), it sought to achieve its violent ends by controlling the labor movement (control it must conceal in order to be effective), and it considers all its members "agents" of the party (unlike loosely-knit "native" parties).American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 425-433, quoted at 429-430.
Jackson equated the power of Congress to protect a union from domination by the Communist Party equal to the power Congress had to prevent a union from being dominated by an employer.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 433. The Taft-Hartley Act did not prevent unions from governing themselves or union members from electing Communists as its officers, but rather ensured transparency in governance and elections (thereby ensuring self-governance as well).American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 434.
Jackson agreed with the majority that the Act did not infringe free speech, but rather merely withdrew the protection of the NLRA from unions which exercised their transparent choice to elect Communists as leaders. Jackson saw the chilling effect on free speech to be incidental:American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 434-435.
I suppose no one likes to be compelled to exonerate himself from connections he has never acquired. I have sometimes wondered why I must file papers showing I did not steal my car before I can get a license for it. But experience shows there are thieves among automobile drivers, and that there are Communists among labor leaders. The public welfare, in identifying both, outweighs any affront to individual dignity.
However, did Congress have the "power to proscribe any opinion or belief which has not manifested itself in any overt act"?American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 436. That raised much more serious constitutional questions, Jackson said. He agreed that "The law sometimes does inquire as to mental state, but only, so far as I recall, when it is incidental to, and determines the quality of, some overt act in question."American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 437. Citing Cramer v. United States, 325 U.S. 1 (1945), Jackson observed that the Constitution barred punishment even of the very serious crime of treason unless there was some overt act. But under the majority's decision, Jackson said, "since Congress has never outlawed the political strike itself, the Court must be holding that Congress may root out mere ideas which, even if acted upon, would not result in crime."American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 438. That was anathema to the Constitution. Agreeing that the Bill of Rights was not a suicide pact (as the majority had pointed out), Jackson nonetheless concluded that Congress had narrower, just as effective means of preventing the violent overthrow of the government than attempting to regulate thought. "I think that, under our system, it is time enough for the law to lay hold of the citizen when he acts illegally, or in some rare circumstances when his thoughts are given illegal utterance. I think we must let his mind alone."American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 444.
Jackson would have upheld the power of Congress to require disclosure of past acts or membership in the Communist Party, but overturned any parts of the Act that called for a disclosure of belief.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 445.
Dissent
Associate Justice Hugo Black dissented.
The First Amendment does not allow the government to regulate beliefs, Black asserted, and yet the majority admitted that this is exactly what Section 9(h) does.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 446. Despite the majority's lengthy citation of cases, Black said, "No case cited by the Court provides the least vestige of support for thus holding that the Commerce Clause restricts the right to think."
Black found that Section 9(h) did indeed impose a "test oath" on union leaders, and the Constitution explicitly barred such oaths.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 4446-449. He rejected the majority's claim that the First Amendment was not offended since only a small number of people were affected. The very nature of "the First Amendment is its protection of each member of the smallest and most unorthodox minority."American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 448.
Furthermore, Black said, the majority's decision does not prevent the government from "barring Communists and their suspected sympathizers from election to political office, mere membership in unions, and, in fact, from getting or holding any jobs whereby they could earn a living."American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 449. He also found offensive the majority's belief that the Supreme Court exists to protect individual liberty. That claim "springs from the assumption that individual mental freedom can be constitutionally abridged whenever any majority of this Court finds a satisfactory legislative reason. Never before has this Court held that the Government could for any reason attaint persons for their political beliefs or affiliations. It does so today." That Congress had concluded from testimony that the Communist Party was a threat to national security was irrelevant, he said, for Democrats could testify the same thing about Republicans and thus ban Republicans from union office just as effectively.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 449-450. Such reasoning was offensive to the idea of constitutionally protected liberties, Black said:American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 450.
Under today's opinion, Congress could validly bar all members of these parties from officership in unions or industrial corporations; the only showing required would be testimony that some members in such positions had, by attempts to further their party's purposes, unjustifiably fostered industrial strife which hampered interstate commerce.
Nor was Justice Jackson's claim that the Communist Party was foreign-controlled a valid reason for imposing test oaths. Test oaths were imposed in 16th century England because Protestant rulers feared papal control of their Roman Catholic subjects, Black noted.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 450-451. Even Thomas Jefferson was once accused of having more loyalty to France than the United States.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 451. The Constitution expressly barred test oaths because of injustices such as these, Black said.
Black also held that "Guilt should not be imputed solely from association or affiliation with political parties or any other organization, however much we abhor the ideas which they advocate."American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 452. Addressing the majority's "suicide pact" idea, Black asserted that the First Amendment's tolerance of anti-democratic ideas was what protected the nation from disaster: "...the postulate of the First Amendment is that our free institutions can be maintained without proscribing or penalizing political belief, speech, press, assembly, or party affiliation. This is a far bolder philosophy than despotic rulers can afford to follow. It is the heart of the system on which our freedom depends."American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 452-453. Citing De Jonge v. Oregon, 299 U.S. 353 (1937), Black noted that a unanimous Court had already struck down laws which banned citizens from attending Communist Party meetings.American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 447. It should strike down the relevant portions of the Taft-Hartley Act as well, he concluded.
Assessment
The penalties imposed on the ACA by Section 9(h) crippled the union. In May 1949, the Congress of Industrial Organizations ordered its member unions to have their leaders sign the anti-communist oaths or risk expulsion.Loftus, "CIO Tells Leftists to Obey or Resign," New York Times, May 20, 1949. At its annual convention in early November 1949, the CIO found the ACA "guilty" of not filing the required oaths and ordered it expelled.Stark, "C.I.O. Starts Purge of Leftist Officers," New York Times, November 5, 1949; Stark, "Ouster of Leftists Is Pressed By C.I.O.," New York Times, November 6, 1949. Expulsion occurred in June 1950."Two More Unions Expelled by C.I.O.," New York Times, June 16, 1950. But lacking the protection of the NLRA and constantly fending off raids from affiliates of the CIO and the American Federation of Labor (affiliates whose leaders were eager to sign the oath), the ACA shrank rapidly.Estey, The Unions: Structure, Development, and Management, 1981, p. 34. Several of its divisions (including the old ARTA department) had disaffiliated and the union shrank to fewer than 2,000 members. It merged with the Teamsters in 1966.
American Communications Association v. Douds was the first important test of loyalty oaths in the U.S. Supreme Court.Walker, In Defense of American Liberties: A History of the ACLU, 1999, p. 189. A year later, the Court relied heavily on Douds''' oath-as-predictor-of-future-action rationale in upholding a local government loyalty test in Garner v. Board of Public Works, 341 U.S. 716 (1951). The divided court in Douds anticipated the difficulty the Supreme Court would have in the coming years, during which time it usually upheld loyalty oaths but found no clear test or rule for doing so. The case was also the first time the Court applied a balancing test to indirect restrictions on free speech, a test the Court would consistently apply in many similar cases in the future.Becker, "The Supreme Court's Recent 'National Security' Decisions: Which Interests are Being Protected?", Tennessee Law Review, Fall 1972, p. 15-16; Kearney, "Private Citizens in Foreign Affairs: A Constitutional Analysis," Emory Law Journal, Winter 1987, p. 329. But the balancing test itself has been criticized as offering little guidance to future courts, not enough protection to First Amendment rights, and too much deference to the legislature.Cohen, "The Scope of First Amendment Protection for Political Boycotts:  Means and Ends in First Amendment Analysis: NAACP v. Claiborne Hardware Co.," Wisconsin Law Review, July/August 1984, p. 1285; Nimmer, "The Right to Speak from Times to Time: First Amendment Theory Applied to Libel and Misapplied to Privacy," California Law Review, 1968, p. 939-941; Emerson, The System of Freedom of Expression, 1970, p. 54-55.
The reasoning by the majority in American Communications Association v. Douds has not been well-received by legal scholars. One historian characterized the decision as combining "guilt by association" with the discredited "bad tendency test". One legal scholar has called Vinson's heavy reliance on the Commerce Clause as "implausible". Douds also seems to have got some facts wrong: The political strikes Vinson relied on for examples in the case were not Communist-led but rather routine labor conflicts.Wiecek, History of the Supreme Court of the United States..., 2006, p. 548. The majority (unwittingly or not) believed in a distinctly American myth about a monolithic Communist Party controlled from overseas, endowed with the ability to deceive American workers, and capable of bringing the nation to its knees through the use of political strikes.Wiecek, "The Legal Foundations of Domestic Anticommunism: The Background of Dennis v. United States," Supreme Court Review, 2001, 378; Auerbach, "The Communist Control Act of 1954: A Proposed Legal-Political Theory of Free Speech," University of Chicago Law Review, 1956, p. 23; Bork, "Neutral Principles and Some First Amendment Problems," Indiana Law Journal, 1971, p. 29-35. Vinson's balancing test had a decidedly pro-government bias, and the decision appeared to undermine a decade's worth of First Amendment decisions.Wiecek, History of the Supreme Court of the United States..., 2006, p. 548-549. Vinson's claim that the Taft-Hartley Act did not proscribe belief has been called "sophistry."Wiecek, History of the Supreme Court of the United States..., 2006, p. 549. And the majority's claimThis is the majority's famous claim:  "...while this court sits." See: American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 410. that any flaws in its approach can be easily rectified by appealing to the Supreme Court was not only scoffed at by Justice Black but has also been sharply criticized by legal scholars.Nagel, "How Useful Is Judicial Review In Free Speech Cases?", Cornell Law Review, January 1984, p. 335-336. (To be fair, some legal scholars disagree, and believe the Court has done an excellent job of protecting First Amendment rights.)Schiller, "Free Speech and Expertise: Administrative Censorship and the Birth of the Modern First Amendment," Virginia Law Review, February 2000, p. 74.Douds has also been criticized for undermining the First Amendment right to freedom of association. This right was also enshrined in the First Amendment.  In 1945, the Court had declared in Thomas v. Collins, 323 U.S. 516 (1945) that freedom of association held a "preferred place"Thomas v. Collins, 323 U.S. 516, 530. in the pantheon of constitutional values.Inazu, "The Strange Origins of the Constitutional Right of Association," Tennessee Law Review, Spring 2010, p. 495. Three years later, in United States v. Congress of Industrial Organizations, 335 U.S. 106 (1948) Justice Rutledge had concluded that, when confronted with the freedom of association, "[Legislative] judgment does not bear the same weight and is not entitled to the same presumption of validity, when the legislation on its face or in specific application restricts the rights of conscience, expression and assembly protected by the Amendment..."United States v. Congress of Industrial Organizations, 335 U.S. 106, 140. Yet, in Douds, the Court announced it was going to show great deference to legislative determinations regarding the danger communists posed.
Nonetheless, American Communications Association v. Douds should not be seen as an anomalous decision in the Supreme Court's First Amendment jurisprudence. One noted legal historian has observed that it is but one of many "bad tendency test" cases in a series of decisions between 1919 and 1956.Wiecek, "The Legal Foundations of Domestic Anticommunism: The Background of Dennis v. United States," Supreme Court Review, 2001, 376-377.American Communications Association v. Douds is also important because it is part of the Court's evolving jurisprudence on bills of attainder."Beyond Process: A Substantive Rationale for the Bill of Attainder Clause," Virginia Law Review, April 1984, p. 476-487. It stands firmly in the Court's bill of attainder jurisprudence established by Justice Frankfurter in his dissent in United States v. Lovett, 328 U.S. 303 (1946), thereafter adopted by a majority of the Court."Beyond Process: A Substantive Rationale for the Bill of Attainder Clause," Virginia Law Review, April 1984, p. 484. Frankfurter and a majority of the Court believed that the framers of the Constitution were not concerned as much with unfairness as they were with specification of the offense, the legislative (rather than judicial) determination of guilt, and retribution for past acts. Douds stands firmly in this analysis, which found favor with the Court until 1965."Beyond Process: A Substantive Rationale for the Bill of Attainder Clause," Virginia Law Review, April 1984, p. 485. It is no surprise, then, that the Supreme Court refused to declare Section 9(h) a bill of attainder, because it prohibited future rather than past acts.Welsh, "The Bill of Attainder Clause: An Unqualified Guarantee of Process," Brooklyn Law Review, Fall 1983, p. 97. The ability to "escape" the penalty (e.g., renounce membership in the Communist Party and take the oath) also negated any conclusion that Section 9(h) was a bill of attainder.Carringan, "The Bill of Attainder Clause: A New Weapon to Challenge the Oil Pollution Act of 1990," Boston College Environmental Affairs Law Review, 2000, p. 143. In 1965, however, the Supreme Court held, 5-to-4, that Section 504 of the Taft-Hartley Act was a bill of attainder in United States v. Brown, 381 U.S. 437 (1965). Section 504 made it an actual crime for any person who was or had been a member of the Communist Party to serve as an officer in a labor union. The Court overturned Section 504 because past behavior was being punished. But the Court went further, and said that singling out members of the Communist Party for punishment also invalidated Section 504 as a bill of attainder. How could the Court reconcile this with its analysis in Douds, where it had not held such specificity to invalidate the law?  The Brown Court said that general legislation which required regulatory rulemaking did not specify individuals well enough to make the law a bill of attainder.Welsh, "The Bill of Attainder Clause: An Unqualified Guarantee of Process," Brooklyn Law Review, Fall 1983, p. 98. That regulatory action was needed under Section 9(h) but not under Section 504 saved Section 9(h). The Court implied that its Equal Protection analysis would be applied in cases where punishment was meted out under regulatory procedures, and that due process and equal protection would guarantee rights in these situations.Welsh, "The Bill of Attainder Clause: An Unqualified Guarantee of Process," Brooklyn Law Review, Fall 1983, p. 99. Douds was difficult to reconcile with Brown in another way, too.  Douds had focused heavily on the fact that the Taft-Hartley Act's restrictions were intended to prevent future, not past, actions.  This was critical to saving Section 9(h). But in Brown, the Court held that "Punishment serves several purposes; retributive, rehabilitative, deterrent—and preventive", establishing that a law can be a bill of attainder even it is preventive.Carringan, "The Bill of Attainder Clause: A New Weapon to Challenge the Oil Pollution Act of 1990," Boston College Environmental Affairs Law Review, 2000, p. 143, quoting United States v. Brown, 381 U.S. 437, at 458.
It is not clear whether Douds remains good case law. The Supreme Court distinguished the case but declined to overrule Douds in Dennis v. United States, 341 U.S. 494 (1951).Emerson, Haber, and Dorsen, Political and Civil Rights in the United States, 1967, p. 62. In 1965, in United States v. Brown, 381 U.S. 437 (1965), the Supreme Court essentially overturned Douds by holding that the Taft-Hartley Act's oath constituted a bill of attainder, but did not formally do so.Rabinowitz, Unrepentant Leftist: A Lawyer's Memoir, 1996, p. 56. Two years later, in United States v. Robel, 389 U.S. 258 (1967), the Court specifically declined to apply a balancing test to a law prohibiting members of the Communist Party from holding jobs in the defense industry.Kearney, "Private Citizens in Foreign Affairs: A Constitutional Analysis," Emory Law Journal, Winter 1987, p. 330. Although the law was based on the same rationale as Taft-Hartley (that membership in the Communist Party was a sure indication of future action), the Supreme Court said this was too heavy an infringement on the individual's First Amendment rights. Instead, the Court seemed to suggest a new, two-part test: Whether the governmental interests advanced are valid, and whether the statute is narrowly drawn to infringe on First Amendment rights in the most narrow way. The Court returned to the balancing test in Brandenberg v. Ohio, 395 U.S. 444 (1969), but this time concluded that prohibiting mere advocacy of violence was too heavy a burden on the First Amendment. Such advocacy must produce imminent action for the speech to be punishable, the Court held.Kearney, "Private Citizens in Foreign Affairs: A Constitutional Analysis," Emory Law Journal, Winter 1987, p. 327.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 339
Footnotes
Bibliography
Abernathy, M. Glenn and Perry, Barbara A. Civil Liberties Under the Constitution. Columbia, S.C.: University of South Carolina Press, 1993.
Auerbach, Carl A. "The Communist Control Act of 1954: a Proposed Legal-Political Theory of Free Speech." University of Chicago Law Review. 23:173 (1956).
Becker, Jerrold L. "The Supreme Court's Recent 'National Security' Decisions: Which Interests are Being Protected?" Tennessee Law Review. 40:1 (Fall 1972).
"Beyond Process: A Substantive Rationale for the Bill of Attainder Clause." Virginia Law Review. 70:475 (April 1984).
Bork, Robert H. "Neutral Principles and Some First Amendment Problems." Indiana Law Journal. 47:1 (1971).
"Both Houses Clear Wagner Labor Bill." New York Times. June 28, 1935.
Busky, Donald F. Communism in History and Theory: Asia, Africa, and the Americas. Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 2002.
Carringan, Alison C. "The Bill of Attainder Clause: A New Weapon to Challenge the Oil Pollution Act of 1990." Boston College Environmental Affairs Law Review. 28:119 (2000).
Cohen, Barbara Ellen. "The Scope of First Amendment Protection for Political Boycotts:  Means and Ends in First Amendment Analysis: NAACP v. Claiborne Hardware Co." Wisconsin Law Review. 1984:1273 (July/August 1984).
Christopher, Warren. Chances of a Lifetime: A Memoir. New York: Scribner, 2001.
Douglas, William O. The Court Years, 1939-1975: The Autobiography of William O. Douglas. New York: Vintage Books, 1981.
Downey, Greg. "Telegraph Messenger Strikes and Their Impact on Telegraph Unionization." In The Encyclopedia of Strikes in American History. Aaron Brenner, Benjamin Day, and Immanuel Ness, eds. Armonk, N.Y.: M. E. Sharpe, 2009.
Eisler, Kim Isaac. The Last Liberal: Justice William J. Brennan, Jr., and the Decisions That Transformed America. Washington, D.C.: Beard Books, 1993.
Emerson, Thomas Irwin. The System of Freedom of Expression. New York: Random House, 1970.
Emerson, Thomas I.; Haber, David; and Dorsen, Norman. Political and Civil Rights in the United States. 3d ed. Boston: Little, Brown, 1967.
Estey, Marten. The Unions: Structure, Development, and Management. New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 1981.
"Final Court Test on Taft Bill Seen." New York Times. June 30, 1948.
Frankel, Benjamin. History in Dispute: The Red Scare After 1945. Detroit: St. James Press, 2000.
"High Court Will Rule on Two Cases Involving Taft Act Oath and Eisler." New York Times. November 9, 1948.
Inazu, John D. "The Strange Origins of the Constitutional Right of Association." Tennessee Law Review. 77:485 (Spring 2010).
"Justice Wiley Rutledge Dies of Brain Hemorrhage at 55." New York Times. September 11, 1949.
Kearney, Kevin M. "Private Citizens in Foreign Affairs: A Constitutional Analysis." Emory Law Journal. 36:285 (Winter 1987).
Loftus, Joseph A. "CIO Tells Leftists to Obey or Resign." New York Times. May 20, 1949.
Loftus, Joseph A. "High Court Delays Red Clause Ruling." New York Times. January 14, 1949.
Lowitt, Richard. Interpreting Twentieth-Century America: A Reader. New York: Crowell, 1973.
May-Stewart, Estelle.  Handbook of American Trade-Unions: 1936 Edition. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1936.
"Minton Is Confirmed For Court, 48 to 16." Associated Press. October 5, 1949.
"Minton Sworn In As Supreme Court Justice." New York Times. October 13, 1949.
Nagel, Robert F. "How Useful Is Judicial Review In Free Speech Cases?" Cornell Law Review. 69:302 (January 1984).
Newman, Roger K. The Yale Biographical Dictionary of American Law. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2009.
Nimmer, Melville B. "The Right to Speak from Times to Time: First Amendment Theory Applied to Libel and Misapplied to Privacy." California Law Review. 56:935 (1968).
Rabinowitz, Victor. Unrepentant Leftist: A Lawyer's Memoir. Urbana, Ill.: University of Illinois Press, 1996.
"Roosevelt Signs the Wagner Bill as 'Just to Labor'." New York Times. July 6, 1935.
Schiller, Reuel E. "Free Speech and Expertise: Administrative Censorship and the Birth of the Modern First Amendment." Virginia Law Review. 86:1 (February 2000).
Stark, Louis. "C.I.O. Starts Purge of Leftist Officers." New York Times. November 5, 1949.
Stark, Louis. "Industry, Labor Sharply Divided." New York Times. June 21, 1947.
Stark, Louis. "NLRB Blocks Union Bargaining Right." New York Times. October 30, 1947.
Stark, Louis. "Ouster of Leftists Is Pressed By C.I.O." New York Times. November 6, 1949.
Stark, Louis. "Some Unions Will Sign Anti-Communist Papers." New York Times. August 31, 1947.
Starobin, Joseph R. American Communism in Crisis, 1943-1957. Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press, 1975.
"Truman Sees Clark Sworn in by Vinson at the White House." New York Times. August 25, 1949.
"Two More Unions Expelled by C.I.O." New York Times. June 16, 1950.
Walker, Samuel. In Defense of American Liberties: A History of the ACLU. Carbondale, Ill.: Southern Illinois University Press, 1999.
Welsh, Jane. "The Bill of Attainder Clause: An Unqualified Guarantee of Process." Brooklyn Law Review. 50:77 (Fall 1983).
White, William S. "Truman Plea Fails." New York Times. June 24, 1947.
Wiecek, William M. History of the Supreme Court of the United States: The Birth of the Modern Constitution: The United States Supreme Court, 1941-1953. New York: Macmillan, 2006.
Wiecek, William M. "The Legal Foundations of Domestic Anticommunism: The Background of Dennis v. United States." Supreme Court Review. 2001:375 (2001).
Wood, Lewis. "Minton Named to High Court." New York Times.'' September 16, 1949.
External links
Category:1950 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Anti-communism in the United States
"""

From "American Electric Power Co. v. Connecticut" ==> """
American Electric Power Company v. Connecticut, 564 U.S. 410 (2011), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court, in an 8–0 decision, held that corporations cannot be sued for greenhouse gas emissions (GHGs) under federal common law, primarily because the Clean Air Act (CAA) delegates the management of carbon dioxide and other GHG emissions to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).  Brought to court in July 2004 in the Southern District of New York, this was the first global warming case based on a public nuisance claim.
 Case overview 
Eight states, the City of New York, and three land trusts, separately sued the same electric power corporations that owned and operated fossil-fuel-fired power plants in twenty states.  The plaintiffs sought to cap-and-abate the defendants' GHG emissions under public nuisance law due to ongoing contributions to global warming.  They alleged that the defendants are the five largest emitters of GHGs in the United States, collectively emitting 650 million tons of carbon dioxide annually.  The plaintiffs claimed that by contributing to global warming the defendants are violating the federal common law of interstate nuisance.
The United States District Court for the Southern District of New York dismissed both groups of plaintiffs' federal common law nuisance claims as non-justiciable under the political question doctrine, and the plaintiffs appealed. The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit vacated and remanded.  The Second Circuit held that the lawsuits were not barred by the political question doctrine, and the plaintiffs had adequately alleged Article III standing.  Certiorari was granted by the United States Supreme Court.
 Parties 
thumb|350px|State plaintiffs in the case. New Jersey and Wisconsin, in light red, eventually withdrew. The Supreme Court held that state parties had standing following the precedent of Massachusetts v. Environmental Protection Agency.
 Plaintiffs 
One group of plaintiffs was composed of the City of New York and eight states, including: California, Connecticut, Iowa, New Jersey, New York, Rhode Island, Vermont, and Wisconsin.  However, New Jersey and Wisconsin eventually withdrew from the case.  The other group of plaintiffs included three nonprofit land trusts: The Open Space Institute, the Open Space Conservancy, and the Audubon Society of New Hampshire..
 Defendants 
The defendants were five private electric power companies: American Electric Power Co., American Electric Power Service Corp., Cinergy Co., Southern Co. Inc. of Georgia, and Xcel Energy Inc. of Minnesota, and the federal Tennessee Valley Authority.
 Issues 
 Whether states, cities, and private parties have standing to seek emissions caps on utilities for their alleged contribution to climate change. 
 Whether a cause of action to regulate carbon dioxide emissions can be inferred under federal common law even though the Clean Air Act designates authority for the regulation of greenhouse gas emissions to the EPA.
Noted cases
Two Supreme Court cases played significant roles in the decisions made by the courts.
 Baker v. Carr (1962) - Political Questions Doctrine 
In Baker v. Carr, the main issue was deciding if redistricting (attempts to change the way voting districts are delineated) presents justiciable questions, which would allow federal courts to hear the case, or whether the case presented a political question.  Any case that is deemed a "political question" cannot be resolved by federal courts.  In the decision, Justice  Brennan identified six factors to help determine which questions are political in nature.  The six factors are:
 Is there a textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the issue to a coordinate political department (i.e. foreign affairs or executive war powers)?
 Is there a lack of judicially discoverable and manageable standards for resolving the issue?
 The impossibility of deciding the issue without an initial policy determination of a kind clearly for nonjudicial discretion.
 The impossibility of a court's undertaking independent resolution without expressing lack of the respect due coordinate branches of government.                               
 Is there an unusual need for unquestioning adherence to a political decision already made?
 Would attempting to resolve the matter create the possibility of embarrassment from multifarious pronouncements by various departments on one question?
This ruling is significant in American Electric Power v. Connecticut because using the six-factor test that was established in Baker v. Carr, the district court dismissed the plaintiffs' suit as presenting a non-justiciable political question because of the "impossibility of deciding the issue without an initial policy determination of a kind clearly for nonjudicial discretion."   However, the Second Circuit reversed this decision and using the six-factor test determined that the plaintiffs were not barred by the political question doctrine.
 Massachusetts v. Environmental Protection Agency (2007) 
In Massachusetts v. Environmental Protection Agency, the court held that the CAA gives the EPA the task of regulating carbon dioxide and other GHG emissions.  This is significant in the American Electrical Power v. Connecticut case because it establishes that carbon dioxide and GHG emissions regulations set by the EPA supersede federal common law.  The EPA started phasing in requirements that new or modified GHG emitting facilities use the best available control technology (BACT) and started a rulemaking to set limits on GHG emissions from new, modified, and existing fossil-fuel fired power plants. The case of American Electric Power v. Connecticut started in 2004, well before the EPA began to regulate GHGs.
Based on Massachusetts v. Environmental Protection Agency, which permitted states to challenge EPA's refusal to regulate GHGs and effectively gave states a lower standing threshold than private parties, in American Electrical Power v. Connecticut the Supreme Court held that at least some of the plaintiffs had Article III standing, specifically the states.
Procedural history
 United States District Court for the Southern District of New York 
The plaintiffs claimed that GHG emissions from the defendants' power plants have significantly contributed to global warming.  By contributing to global warming, the defendants were violating the federal common law of interstate nuisance.  According to the states and New York City, climate change poses risks to public lands, infrastructure, and human health.  The private land trusts claimed climate change may cause destruction of habitat of rare species, trees and plants inhabiting land owned by the trusts.
The defendants filed a motion to dismiss based on failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted and for lack of subject matter jurisdiction.  The defendants claimed the plaintiffs raised a political question that was unfit for adjudication by the courts.  The District Court dismissed both suits, stating they were non-justiciable matters that raised a political question that can only be addressed by the legislative or executive branches, leaving the court without jurisdiction.
 United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit 
The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit reversed the judgement of the district court, holding that the political question doctrine did not bar the plaintiffs' case from adjudication by using the six-factor test from Baker v. Carr.  The Second Circuit also held that the plaintiffs had adequately alleged Article III standing under the federal common law of nuisance and maintained that states may bring suit to abate air and water pollution produced by other states or by out-of-state industry as stated in Illinois v. Milwaukee.  The Second Circuit also held that the CAA did not displace federal common law of nuisance because it is a federal common law issue when dealing with ambient or interstate air and water as stated in Milwaukee I.  In a ruling in September 2009, the Second Circuit determined the EPA failed to publicize any regulations pertaining to GHG emissions and could not speculate whether the hypothetical regulation of GHGs under the CAA would pertain to the issues raised by the plaintiffs.  Based on that fact, the Second Circuit denied defendants' request for rehearing.  The Supreme Court granted certiorari on December 6, 2010.
 Supreme Court ruling 
On June 20, 2011, Justice Ginsburg delivered the opinion of the Court, with Justices Roberts, Scalia, Kennedy, Breyer, and Kagan joining.  Justice Alito filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgement, which Justice Thomas joined.  Justice Sotomayor took no part in the consideration or decision of the case as, prior to her elevation to the Supreme Court, she heard the case as a Second Circuit judge.Connecticut v. American Electric Power Co., Inc. 582 F.3d 309 (2d Cir. 2009), FN*.  The Supreme Court rejected the plaintiffs' claim and the Second Circuit's holding that federal common law is not displaced since the EPA had not exercised its authority by setting emissions standards for the defendants' plants.  However, after the Second Circuit delivered its opinion and prior to the Supreme Court's judgment, the EPA had taken several relevant actions following Massachusetts v. Environmental Protection Agency, which included issuing the Endangerment Finding and establishing the Tailoring Rule, affecting the nation's largest greenhouse gas emitters.  With the ruling in Massachusetts v. Environmental Protection Agency setting precedent, the court held that the authority of the EPA to regulate GHGs delegated by the CAA displaces any federal common law right of state, city, and private parties to seek abatement of carbon-dioxide emissions from fossil-fuel fired power plants. The Supreme Court held that the plaintiffs could not sue based on the federal common law of public nuisance because the federal common law was in fact displaced by a federal statute, the CAA.  Displacement occurs when a statute "speaks directly to the question at issue."  Massachusetts v. Environmental Protection Agency established that emissions of carbon dioxide qualify as air pollution subject to regulation under the CAA and that this "speaks directly" to the emissions of carbon dioxide from the defendants power plants.
Based on EPA's designated authority, it is up to the EPA to decide whether and how to regulate GHGs from power plants.  However, the court does leave a course of legal action open in the event the EPA does not enforce emissions limits against regulated sources by allowing "any person" to bring civil enforcement action in federal court.  Also, if the EPA does not set emissions limits for certain pollutants or pollution sources, states and private parties can petition for a rulemaking in federal court.
 Significance 
The decision in this case confirms the EPA's primacy as the regulator of GHGs initially established in Massachusetts v. Environmental Protection Agency and limits the possibility of claiming federal common law public nuisance for climate change litigation.
The decision in this case also impacted the decisions of similar climate change litigation.  In Kivalina v. ExxonMobil Corporation, the city of Kivalina brought suit against 24 oil, gas, coal, and utility companies claiming the destruction of the coastal city of Kivalina, Alaska is being caused by activities of the energy industry that are resulting in global warming.  An appeal was filed in the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeal, but it was rejected, holding that the plaintiff did not have standing under federal common law.  Kivalina v. ExxonMobil Corporation followed the Supreme Court's decision in denying federal public nuisance claims of damages allegedly caused by GHGs as decided in American Electric Power Company v. Connecticut.
In Comer v. Murphy Oil, the residents and owners of property along the Mississippi Gulf Coast filed a class action lawsuit against a multitude of oil, coal, and chemical companies, alleging that GHGs were emitted by the defendants, thereby contributing to air and sea temperature elevations, which caused glacial melting and rising sea levels.   The foregoing actions fueled Hurricane Katrina, which caused damage to plaintiffs' property.  This case was dismissed on two occasions.  In Comer II, the court held that the CAA displaced the plaintiffs' public nuisance claim as in American Electric Power Company v. Connecticut and also preempted state law.
 References 
External links
The Wall Street Journal: Supreme Court Set to Review CO2 Suits
 The Second Circuit Appeals Court's opinion in the case
 Coverage of the case by SCOTUSblog
 Onthedocket.org's coverage of the case
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:2011 in Connecticut
Category:2011 in the environment
Category:Legal history of Connecticut
Category:Federal common law case law
Category:United States environmental case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Connecticut
Category:Energy in Connecticut
Category:Greenhouse gas emissions in the United States
"""

From "American Fur Co. v. United States" ==> """
American Fur Co. v. United States, 27 U.S. (2 Pet.) 358 (1829), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the American Fur Company agent's acts and statements bound the company; that all goods were subject to seizure and forfeiture; but that the instructions on where in Indian territory the seizure could be made was in error to the point that a new trial was required.
 Background 
On September 24, 1824, a licensed Indian trader, William H. Wallace, was caught with seven kegs of whiskey and one keg of shrub among his goods he had for trade with the Indians.American Fur Co. v. United States, 27 U.S. (2 Pet.) 358, 362 (1829); ,  232 (2011). The local District Attorney moved for the district court to forfeit all of the goods to the government, and following a trial in which John Davis, an employee of Wallace, testified about the alcohol, the jury agreed and forfeited the goods to government.American Fur Co., 27 U.S. at 363; see also Mark Moller, Article: Class Action Defendants' New Lochnerism, 2012  319, 351 (2012).
 Supreme Court 
left|thumb|Justice Washington, author of the majority opinion
Justice Bushrod Washington delivered the opinion of the Court. Washington noted that Davis was an agent of Wallace, and that his statements could bind the principal.American Fur Co., 27 U.S. at 364; ,  388-89 (1958, 2008 reprint). He further stated that all of the goods were subject to seizure, not just the alcohol, but that the instructions as to the location of the seizure to the jury was so confusing that a new trial was required.American Fur Co., 27 U.S. at 365.
 References 
External links
Category:1829 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:American Fur Company
"""

From "American Hospital Association v. Becerra" ==> """
American Hospital Association v. Becerra, 596 U.S. ___ (2022), was a United States Supreme Court case relating to administrative law. The case centered on a rule from the Department of Health and Human Services, which reduced reimbursement rates for certain hospitals. Several hospital associations and hospitals affected by the rule sued HHS, alleging that it exceeded its statutory authority. The court was tasked with deciding if the rule was a reasonable interpretation of the law, and if the statute blocked judicial review of the rule in the first place.
 Background 
 Rule in question 
The rule challenged dealt with 340B hospitals and Medicare Part B insured patients. Previously, the government reimbursed hospitals at a uniform rate if they provided outpatient care to Medicare Part B recipients. HHS then changed the rule to reduce reimbursement rates for 340B hospitals, because they could get drugs at lower costs.
 Lower court decisions 
The United States District Court for the District of Columbia initially found in favor of the American Hospital Association (AHA), stating the government exceeded its statutory authority. The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit reversed, finding that the rule was a reasonable interpretation of the law, and applied deference under Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc.. On March 15, 2021, the AHA filed a petition for a writ of certiorari.
 Supreme Court 
The Supreme Court granted certiorari on July 2, 2021, adding a question presented of whether the courts had jurisdiction to consider the challenge to the rule. It heard oral arguments on November 30, 2021. On June 15, 2022, the Supreme Court reversed the D.C. Circuit in a 9–0 decision, written by Justice Brett Kavanaugh. 
The court ruled that the statute does not give the Department of Health and Human Services the authority or the discretion to vary the reimbursement rates for 340B hospitals.
Many legal experts considered the case to have significant consequences for the future of Chevron deference, and although the precedent was discussed extensively during oral arguments, the opinion did not mention it even once.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States administrative case law
"""

From "American Insurance Ass'n v. Garamendi" ==> """
American Insurance Association v. Garamendi, 539 U.S. 396 (2003), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States invalidated a California law that required any insurance company wishing to do business in the state to publish information regarding insurance policies held by persons in Europe from 1920 through 1945..
Background
The Holocaust Victim Insurance Relief Act (HVIRA) was enacted in 1999 by the California State Legislature in "an attempt to facilitate Holocaust-era insurance claims by California residents." The law required that insurance companies in California that sold policies to people in Europe between 1920 and 1945 to go public with the records of their work during that time, "including the names of policy owners and the status of the policies." American Insurance, along with several other insurance companies and trade associations filed suit claiming that the Act exceeded the powers of the State of California since it is the federal government that has the power to regulate commerce and foreign affairs. The District Court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs, however the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals reversed the decision.
Question before the Supreme Court
Does the HVIRA "interfere with the federal government's sovereignty over foreign affairs established by Article 1 of the Constitution?"
Decision of the Court
In a 5–4 decision in favor of American Insurance Association, Justice Souter wrote the majority opinion for the Supreme Court. The Court held that California's HVIRA "interfere with the president's ability to conduct the nation's foreign policy and is therefore preempted."
 See also 
 Zschernig v. Miller: Oregon law with foreign policy implications
References
External links
Category:Insurance in the United States
Category:The Holocaust and the United States
Category:United States Constitution Article Two case law
Category:United States federalism case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2003 in United States case law
"""

From "American Insurance Co. v. 356 Bales of Cotton" ==> """
American Insurance Company v. 356 Bales of Cotton, 26 U.S. (1 Pet.) 511 (1828), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States. The case involved the validity of a local court established by Congress in the Florida Territory whose judges lacked life tenure, as mandated by Article III of the Constitution. Chief Justice John Marshall upheld the courts on the basis of Congress's broad power to enact local laws for territories under Article IV, Section 3, Clause 2 of the Constitution. The case was later discussed in Dred Scott v. Sandford, where Chief Justice Roger Taney distinguished it in holding that Congress could not ban slavery within a territory.
 References 
External links
Category:1828 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:United States admiralty case law
Category:Good Behavior Clause case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Four case law
Category:United States in rem cases
Category:Cotton industry in the United States
Category:Florida Territory
Category:Legal history of Florida
Category:1828 in Florida Territory
"""

From "American Legion v. American Humanist Association" ==> """
American Legion v. American Humanist Association, 588 U.S. ___ (2019), was a United States Supreme Court case dealing with the separation of church and state related to maintaining the Peace Cross, a World War I memorial shaped after a Latin cross, on government-owned land, though initially built in 1925 with private funds on private lands. The case was a consolidation of two petitions to the court, that of The American Legion who built the cross (Docket 17–1717), and of the Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission who own the land and maintain the memorial (Docket 18-18). Both petitions challenged the Fourth Circuit's ruling that, regardless of the secular purpose the cross was built for in honoring the deceased soldiers, the cross emboldened a religious symbol and had ordered it altered or razed. The Supreme Court reversed the Fourth Circuit's ruling in a 7–2 decision, determining that since the Cross had stood for decades without controversy, it did not violate the Establishment Clause and could remain standing.Am. Legion v. Am. Humanist Ass'n, .
Background
thumb|left|upright|The Peace Cross
The -tall Peace Cross was constructed in Bladensburg, Maryland by the American Legion with private funding in 1925 to honor the local servicemen that died during World War I. The creators opted for the cross shape to mirror the gravemarkers that were left in the war theaters to commemorate the dead buried there. At the time it was built, the monument was on private land, but the land was donated in 1961 to the Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission, a bi-county agency in Maryland, making it parkland owned by the state. The Commission continued to maintain the Cross even as additional highways were laid down across the land; the Cross eventually became a structure on the median of a highway, creating a potential safety hazard. The Commission provided illumination for the monument at night, and allowed the Cross to be used as a central point for Memorial Day and Veterans Day observances. Additional war memorials were built on nearby lands, creating the local Veterans Memorial Park.
Around 2012, local residents recognized that the placement of the Cross on state lands and the commission's continued care for it with taxpayer funds may be against the principle of the separation of church and state. A formal lawsuit was filed by the American Humanist Association, an atheist advocacy group, that argued that the Peace Cross violated the Establishment Clause of the Constitution. The case was heard by Judge Deborah Chasanow of the United States District Court for the District of Maryland, which granted summary judgement for the commission. Chasanow wrote that under the tests established in Lemon v. Kurtzman and Van Orden v. Perry, that the purpose of the Peace Cross was secular to honor fallen soldiers and did not violate the Establishment Clause.
The American Humanist Association appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit. In October 2017, a divided panel of the Fourth Circuit reversed the district court, with Judge Stephanie Thacker's opinion joined by Judge James A. Wynn Jr. Chief Judge Roger Gregory dissented.  The majority found that despite the commission's argument on the monument's secular nature, the symbol of the cross had been considered a religious icon for centuries, and thus they considered that its installation and maintenance on public lands violated the Establishment Clause. Further, the majority held that the commission's continued maintenance of the memorial contributed to entangling the state with a religious figure, further violating the Establishment Clause, even though the Commissions argued this was for purposes of motorist safety. The Fourth Circuit concluded that the commission's maintenance of the Peace Cross has "a primary effect of endorsing religion and excessively entangles the government and religion".
In March 2018, the full circuit denied petitions for rehearing en banc by a vote of 8–6, with Wynn authoring a concurrence. Gregory, who dissented again, feared that the ruling could affect thousands of cross-shaped memorials on public lands even though they were built under similar secular purposes as the Peace Cross. With the refusal, the Fourth Circuit subsequently ordered the Peace Cross to be altered so that it no longer resembled a cross, or to be razed. Judges Paul V. Niemeyer and J. Harvie Wilkinson III also wrote dissents.
Supreme Court
Both the Planning Commission and the American Legion petitioned for writs of certiorari from the Supreme Court, asking it to review the Fourth Circuit's decision. Both petitions were granted and consolidated to a single case. Questions asked included whether a memorial having the shape of a cross placed on public lands should be considered a violation of the Establishment Clause, or under what past tests they should be considered, and whether maintaining such memorials for other interests of the state, such as road safety, creates entanglement under the Establishment Clause. Among those supporting the Commission and American Legion included numerous veterans groups, the Trump Administration, and several Congresspersons. The Court accepted the case in November 2018.
The issue of cross-shaped memorials on public lands had been previously heard in Salazar v. Buono in 2010; while the 5–4 majority ruled that the cross could stay, the rationale was heavily divided by the justices, with a total of six different opinions submitted as part of the case. This had made it difficult to use Salazar as case law for other related cases, such as this one.
On February 27, 2019, the Supreme Court heard oral arguments, including appearances from Neal Katyal for the state petitioner and acting Solicitor General Jeffery Wall for the Federal Government as a friend of the petitioners, and Monica Miller for the respondents. Observers to the court believed the justices were in majority to support reversing the Fourth Circuit, believing that the memorial as built had secular purposes reflecting the way soldiers were memorialized at the time. However, how to qualify this under past case law was left as a question, and that if new memorials carrying the cross shape were installed today, they may not be acceptable under the Establishment Clause.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|150px|Justice Samuel Alito wrote for the majority and for the plurality
On June 20, 2019, the Supreme Court announced judgment in favor of the American Legion, reversing the lower court by a vote of 7–2. Justice Samuel Alito, joined by Chief Justice John Roberts, Justice Stephen Breyer, Justice Brett Kavanaugh, and partially by Justice Elena Kagan, wrote for the Court and, in some sections, for a mere plurality.
The Court declared that it generally does not apply the test from Lemon v. Kurtzman to longstanding monuments for four reasons. First, the passage of time makes it difficult to identify a monument's original purpose. Second, multiple overlapping purposes may emerge as time goes by. Third, the primary effect of a monument may change as it becomes embedded in a community's sense of place. And fourth, court-ordered removal of a longstanding monument may create the appearance of a government "aggressively hostile to religion."
Applying these principles, the Court held that the humanists could not overcome the strong presumption of constitutionality the passage of time had given to the Peace Cross.  Historically, the Court found that the World War I context contributed "added secular meaning" to the cross; quoting as support In Flanders Fields''' poetic allusion to rows of crosses,American Legion v. American Humanist Association, 139 S. Ct. 2067, 2076 citing  and noting that the Army Distinguished Service Cross and Navy Cross were both established in the immediate aftermath of the war.Am. Legion, 139 S. Ct. at 2076 citing  Furthermore, the Court recognized that many of the bereaved local parents would never be able to visit the foreign gravesites of their war dead sons.  Overlapping purposes for the cross, thus, evolved through time as first a place of grieving, then of remembrance, and, now, as a busy intersection. Likewise, the Court credited the planning commission's argument that the modern effects of the cross include historic preservation and improved traffic safety.  Finally, the Court found that ordering destruction of the cross would not be perceived as a religiously neutral act and viewed the Fourth Circuit's suggested remedy of "amputating the arms of the Cross" as "profoundly disrespectful."
Alito stated that "The cross is undoubtedly a Christian symbol, but that fact should not blind us to everything else that the Bladensburg Cross has come to represent", and that "destroying or defacing the Cross that has stood undisturbed for nearly a century would not be neutral and would not further the ideals of respect and tolerance embodied in the First Amendment".
Plurality sections
Justice Alito continued, in a four-justice plurality opinion that Justice Kagan did not join, to expressly disapprove of Lemon for, he argued, its failed attempt to create a "grand unified theory of the Establishment Clause".  Alito went on to praise the Court's "more modest approach" in earlier legislative prayer cases, such as Town of Greece v. Galloway (2014).
Concurrences
Justice Breyer, joined by Kagan, concurred. Breyer quoted his earlier opinion in Van Orden v. Perry (2005) to explain where here, again, a longstanding monument does not pose a real threat to secular tolerance.  Breyer, however, rejected arguments advanced by Justices Kavanaugh and Gorsuch that history and tradition create license to erect new monuments in the old style.
Justice Kavanaugh also concurred. Kavanaugh praised the Court for rejecting the Lemon test as it should, he argued, in all cases.  Instead, Kavanaugh posited that any government practice rooted in history and tradition that is not coercive should not violate the Establishment Clause.
Justice Kagan concurred in part. Kagan agreed that the Lemon test is not always useful, but she rejected the plurality's general disapproval of that precedent.  Likewise, in "perhaps an abundance of caution" Kagan did not join in the plurality's reliance upon history, instead arguing that cases are best decided case-by-case.
 Concurrence in the judgment 
Thomas and Gorsuch voted for the majority's judgment but did not join Alito's opinion.
Thomas, alone, asserted that the Establishment Clause has not been incorporated and so does not apply to the states.  Regardless, Thomas believed that sectarian religious displays on public property do not violate the clause anyway.
Gorsuch, joined by Thomas, argued the humanists had no standing to sue under the Case or Controversy Clause because they are merely an "offended observer".  Regardless, Gorsuch praised the plurality for rejecting the Lemon'' test.
Dissent
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote the dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Sonia Sotomayor. Ginsburg read aloud her dissent on the bench at the opinion announcement. According to Ginsburg, all crosses displayed on public property are presumptively unconstitutional endorsements of Christianity.  This presumption may be overcome in some contexts, she offered, such as in a museum display or in a history class.  Ginsburg argued that crosses remained unconstitutional in the World War I context by noting that the mass-produced Spirit of the American Doughboy statue was far more common and that the National Jewish Welfare Board had successfully objected to the inclusion of a cross on the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier.Am. Legion, 139 S. Ct. at 2111 (Ginsburg, J., dissenting) citing   In Ginsburg's view, the Peace Cross unconstitutionally "elevates Christianity over other faiths, and religion over non religion." An article published on PBS NewsHour noted this dissent as one of five of Ruth Bader Ginsburg's most powerful Supreme Court opinions.
References
External links
 Case page at SCOTUSblog
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:2019 in religion
Category:American Legion
Category:Memorial crosses
Category:American Humanist Association
Category:Bladensburg, Maryland
"""

From "American Lithographic Co. v. Werkmeister" ==> """
American Lithographic Co. v. Werkmeister, 221 U.S. 603 (1911), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held a corporation defendant in a suit to enforce copyright infringement penalties is not entitled to a Fourth or Fifth Amendment objection to the admission of its bookkeeping entries into evidence when they are produced under a subpoena duces tecum.
 References 
External links
Category:1911 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
"""

From "American Needle, Inc. v. National Football League" ==> """
American Needle, Inc. v. National Football League, 560 U.S. 183 (2010), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding the ability of teams in the National Football League to conspire for purposes of a violation of §1 of the Sherman Antitrust Act.
 Background 
The alleged conspiracy involved the formation of the National Football League Properties (NFLP), an entity responsible for licensing NFL intellectual property (IP) and formed in 1963. Before that date the NFL teams marketed their IP rights individually. Proceeds from NFLP activity were evenly distributed among the teams.
Between 1963 and 2000, the NFLP granted nonexclusive licenses to various suppliers permitting the manufacture and resale of apparel bearing team insignias. The petitioner in this case, American Needle, Inc., was one of those license holders. In December 2000, the teams voted to authorize the NFLP to begin granting exclusive licenses. The NFLP granted a 10-year exclusive license to Reebok to manufacture and sell trademarked headwear bearing team insignia of all 32 teams. At that point, the NFLP did not renew American Needle's nonexclusive license.
 Opinion of the Court 
In a unanimous decision, the Court held that NFL teams are distinct economic actors with separate economic interests that are capable of conspiring under §1 of the Sherman Act.Grady, Mark F.  Cases and Materials on Antitrust.  UCLA Academic Publishing, Los Angeles, CA.  2011, p. 346-48
 See also 
 Mid-South Grizzlies v. National Football League
 Radovich v. National Football League
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 560
 References 
 Further reading 
He, Yifei American Needle Upon Remand,  https://ssrn.com/abstract=2520044
External links
Category:2010 in American football
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:National Football League controversies
Category:National Football League litigation
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Inc. v. Hydrolevel Corp." ==> """
American Society of Mechanical Engineers v. Hydrolevel Corporation, 456 U.S. 556 (1982), is a United States Supreme Court case where a non-profit association, for the first time, was held liable for treble damages under the Sherman Antitrust Act due to antitrust violations.Association Law Handbook, Fourth Edition (2007) Jerald A. Jacobs, ASAE & The Center for Association Leadership.
In this case, the U.S. Supreme Court held an association liable when its agents appeared to be acting under the authority of the association. Such action is called apparent authority. The court determined that a non-profit association is liable when it fails to prevent antitrust violation through the misuse of the association's reputation by its agents (including lower level staff and unpaid volunteers).Professional Practices in Association Management, Second Edition, (2007) Executive Editor John, B. Cox; ASAE & The Center for Association Leadership.
 Background 
In 1982 the U.S. Supreme Court held that American Society of Mechanical Engineers (a nonprofit association) was responsible for treble damages under the Sherman Act. In 1971 the engineering firm of McDonnell and Miller requested an interpretation of the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code from the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Codes Committee. McDonnell and Miller planned to use the response to show that one of their competitors (Hydrolevel Corp) was selling a device not in compliance with the ASME BPV Code.
Unknown to ASME's leadership the volunteer chairman of the ASME committee wrote a response to McDonnell and Miller's inquiry that was later used by a McDonnell and Miller salesmen as proof of Hydrolevel's noncompliance. Subsequently, according to Hydrolevel, it never acquired sufficient market penetration for sustaining business, and eventually went bankrupt.
Hydrolevel sued McDonnell and Miller, the Hartford Steam Boiler Inspection and Insurance Company and ASME arguing that two ASME subcommittee members acted not only in the self-interest of their companies, but also in violation of the Sherman Anti-Trust Act.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court concluded that the association was liable even though the ASME leadership 1) was unaware of the action the volunteer chairman took, 2) had not approved the action, 3) and did not benefit from the action. Damages and legal fees paid by ASME were more than $6 million. An appellate court affirmed that ASME was liable because its agents had acted within the scope of their apparent authority.
 References 
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1982 in United States case law
Category:American Society of Mechanical Engineers
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "American Tobacco Co. v. Werckmeister" ==> """
American Tobacco Co. v. Werckmeister, 207 U.S. 284 (1907), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held the seizure by the United States marshal in a copyright case of certain pictures under a writ of replevin did not constitute an unreasonable search and seizure..
 References 
External links
American Tobacco Companyc
Category:1907 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States copyright case law
"""

From "American Tradition Partnership, Inc. v. Bullock" ==> """
American Tradition Partnership, Inc. v. Bullock, 2011 MT 328, is a decision by the Montana Supreme Court ruling that the broad free speech protections given to corporations in Citizens United v. FEC do not apply to Montana's campaign finance laws. The United States Supreme Court reversed the Montana Supreme Court's decision in American Tradition Partnership, Inc. v. Bullock, 567, U.S. 516 (2012), in a short, per curiam opinion issued without oral argument. The court wrote only that the legal issue had already been precluded by Citizens United, and this case offered no new arguments and failed to distinguish that prior decision.
Background
In a 1912 ballot initiative, the citizens of Montana passed the Montana Corrupt Practices Act in response to the major influence of corporations on state elections. During the early 20th century, a number of rich "Copper Barons" controlled most of the political process through quid pro quo financial transactions with politicians. In response, the state restricted the amount of money that corporations and individuals could donate to campaigns. American Tradition Partnership (ATP), formerly known as Western Tradition Partnership, had challenged the Montana Corrupt Practices Act of 1912, which prohibited independent expenditures to influence political campaigns by corporations, after the United States Supreme Court's Citizens United ruling. ATP was joined in its suit by Champion Painting and the Montana Shooting Sports Association. In October 2010 District Judge Jeffrey Sherlock ruled that the Montana law is unconstitutional. Ruling Judge Sherlock said he agreed with U.S. District Judge Paul Magnuson, who overturned a similar ban in Minnesota. Magnuson wrote that Citizens United "is unequivocal: The government may not prohibit independent and indirect corporate expenditures on political speech." Montana Attorney General Steve Bullock, a Democrat who had been elected to that office in 2008, argued on behalf of the State of Montana that the Corrupt Practices Act should remain in place.
Opinion of the Montana Supreme Court
In response to a potential U.S. Supreme Court challenge, the majority opinion included a great deal of historical evidence to document the "corrupting influence of campaign contributions on elections."  Citizens United focused primarily on the free speech limitations of the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act, whereas the Montana Supreme Court focused on the historical precedent for allowing campaign finance restrictions.Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission,   In particular, the Montana Supreme Court called the Supreme Court's declaration that corporations have the same constitutional rights as individual citizens "utter nonsense".
The use of abundant historical precedent allowed the majority to argue that their ruling is consistent with the original intent of the First Amendment.
Additionally, the Montana Supreme Court called Citizens United a "crabbed view of corruption" and argued that prior to Montana's campaign finance laws "the state of Montana and its government were operating under a mere shell of legal authority."  The majority criticized Citizens United as being unrealistic about the corrupting influence of unlimited secret money, and the court cited a litany of evidence to prove the direct correlation between independent expenditures and political corruption.
The Montana Supreme Court believed that this ruling does not blatantly contradict Citizens United because the ruling deals with a law that has major differences from the McCain-Feingold Act (the law that Citizens United partially overturned).
Dissent
James Nelson, who was one of the two dissenters, agreed with the majority opinion and called the reasoning of Citizens United "smoke and mirrors", but he did not believe that the Montana Supreme Court had the authority to contradict the Supreme Court.  According to Nelson, when the highest court makes a constitutional ruling, all other courts must follow it.
U.S. Supreme Court per curiam reversal and implication
American Tradition Partnership appealed the Montana Supreme Court decision after the court issued its decision. "If Montana is allowed to flout this court's holdings in Citizens United in such a willful and transparent fashion, respect for the Constitution, the rule of law and this court will be eroded", James Bopp, American Tradition Partnership lawyer, argued.  In February 2012, the U.S. Supreme Court stayed the decision pending further review by the high court. Justices Ginsburg and Breyer released a short statement, urging the court to revisit Citizens United and "to consider whether, in light of the huge sums of money currently deployed to buy candidate's allegiance, Citizens United should continue to hold sway." The justices asked the court to pay attention to the empirical evidence of corruption caused by the new unlimited spending, a problem that the majority downplayed in their opinion.
The U.S. Supreme Court reversed the Montana Supreme Court without hearing oral argument in American Tradition Partnership, Inc. v. Bullock, 567 U.S. 516 (2012) by a short, per curiam opinion. The court wrote only that "[t]here can be no serious doubt" that the holding of Citizens United applies to the Montana state law, as per U.S. Const., Art. VI, cl. 2, and that "Montana's arguments in support of the judgment below either were already rejected in Citizens United, or fail to meaningfully distinguish that case." Justice Breyer dissented in an opinion joined by Justices Ginsburg, Sotomayor, and Kagan. He would have reconsidered Citizens United or its applicability to the case at hand but believed that the votes to make such an effort meaningful did not exist.
The court had not summarily reversed any lower court with four strongly dissenting justices with so little analysis since 1968. With its ruling the Supreme Court upheld its Citizens United landmark decision. While the Citizens United decision initially appeared to apply equally to state contests, the Supreme Court ruled in American Tradition Partnership, Inc. v. Bullock that the Citizens United holding does so by applying it to Montana state law. Because the Citizens United decision supersedes state law, the states cannot bar corporate and union political contributions in their own elections.
 See also 
James Bopp
References
Category:Montana state case law
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:2011 in Montana
Category:United States elections case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Political history of Montana
"""

From "American Trucking Ass'ns, Inc. v. City of Los Angeles" ==> """
American Trucking Ass'ns, Inc. v. City of Los Angeles, 569 U.S. 641 (2013), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that certain regulations imposed by City of Los Angeles on trucking companies were preempted by federal law.Opinion p. 1, 12-13 In 2006 the Board of Harbor Commissioners for Los Angeles, California adopted an environmental protection plan that included an effort called Clean Truck Program (CTP).9th Circuit slip opinion p. 18202 The stated goal of the program is to "reduce negative impacts that port [trucking] inflicts on the local community."p.1 The implementation of this program began in 2007 and required trucking companies to comply with various requirements relating to maintenance of trucks, employment of drivers, and trucking operations.Opinion p. 2 The American Trucking Associations believed some of the regulations were in violation of the Federal Aviation Administration Authorization Act of 1994 (FAAAA) and filed suit.Opinion p. 3-4 Litigation eventually made its way up to the Supreme Court of the United States,p.1 where the Court held that two of the requirements of the CTP were in violation of the FAAAA.Syllabus p. 2
Notes
References
External links
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "American Well Works Co. v. Layne & Bowler Co." ==> """
American Well Works Co. v. Layne & Bowler Co., 241 U.S. 257 (1916), was a United States Supreme Court case governing the scope of federal question jurisdiction.
 Background 
Plaintiff American Well Works Co. manufactured, sold, and held the patent to a particular type of pump, which was known to be the best on the market.  The plaintiff sued defendant Layne & Bowler Co. on the grounds that defendant had maliciously libeled and slandered plaintiff's title to the pump by stating that the pump, and certain of its component parts, were infringements upon defendant's pump.  Layne & Bowler had also filed lawsuits against others who used plaintiff's pump, and were threatening to sue all who used it.
American Well Works filed suit in the Arkansas state court, claiming actual damages of $50,000 as well as punitive damages.  Layne & Bowler removed the suit to the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Arkansas on the grounds that the federal courts have exclusive jurisdiction over matters of patent law.  The district court then dismissed the action.  Plaintiff appealed directly to the United States Supreme Court.
Issue
Did the district court properly dismiss the matter; i.e. was federal question jurisdiction present here?
 Decision 
In a brief opinion, Justice Holmes wrote that this claim was based upon the allegedly defamatory actions and statements of the defendant, not any violation of the federal patent laws.  The plaintiff alleged that defendant's conduct had damaged its business, and was not bringing suit to prove who had proper title to the patent.  Holmes held that a suit for damages to a business caused by the defendant's allegations of patent infringement and threat to sue under the patent law was a matter of state law, and therefore the state courts had jurisdiction to hear the case.  Whether or not defendant's statements about the patent were true was simply a piece of evidence to be examine by the state trial court.
Thus, under the rule stated by this case, whether a suit arises under state or federal law determines whether or not federal question jurisdiction exists.  It is therefore consistent with the "well-pleaded complaint rule" set forth in Louisville & Nashville Railroad Company v. Mottley, 211 U.S. 149 (1908), just eight years earlier.
Justice McKenna dissented without opinion, on the grounds that he felt the case involved a direct and substantial controversy under the patent laws.
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States federal question jurisdiction case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:1916 in United States case law
"""

From "Americans for Prosperity Foundation v. Bonta" ==> """
Americans for Prosperity Foundation v. Bonta, 141 S.Ct. 2373 (2021), is a United States Supreme Court case dealing with the disclosure of donors to non-profit organizations. The case challenged California's requirement that requires non-profit organizations to disclose the identity of their donors to the state's Attorney General as a precondition of soliciting donations in the state. The case was consolidated with Thomas More Law Center v. Bonta. In July 2021, the Supreme Court ruled in a 6–3 decision that California's requirement burdened the donors' First Amendment rights, was not narrowly tailored, and was constitutionally invalid.
Background
Under federal law, non-profit organizations are required to provide the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) with a list of major donors (those that donate more than  or 2% of the total donations to the non-profit in a year) with their annual tax forms, Form 990. This information, held on Schedule B "Schedule of Contributors" of Form 990, is treated as sensitive within the IRS and not shared with states unless there is a pressing need. While non-profits are required to make Form 990 publicly available, they are not required to include the Schedule B donor information. This was established by Congress to protect the privacy of donors to non-profits.
Within California, non-profits must renew their registration with the state annually via the state's attorney general's office. Though no state statute required it, in 2010 the state began requiring non-profits to include the Form 990 Schedule B with their registration, or be decertified in the state. While many non-profits complied, others argued that this was unconstitutional. Unlike the federal filings, the California filings served no tax purpose. Further, California lacked the protections against accidental disclosure--including penalities for publicly disclosing the information--that applied to the IRS. While the state gave assurances that these forms would be held in confidence, during litigation it was found where over 1,800 forms were posted online for public access, while others were included in material that was taken during a computer hack.
Lower courts
Two of the non-profits affected, Americans for Prosperity and the Thomas More Law Center, filed suit against attorney general Kamala Harris in 2014 in the Central District of California. (Over the course of the litigation, the defendant shifted as the state Attorney General's office changed hands, from Harris to Xavier Becerra (AG from 2017 to 2021), to Matthew Rodriquez (acting AG in 2021), to Rob Bonta). The two non-profits argued that the California regulation on disclosure violated their freedom of association under the First Amendment and would scare away donors who otherwise wished to remain anonymous. The District Court granted a permanent injunction to prevent the state from collecting Schedule B from non-profits in a ruling in April 2016. 
The state appealed the injunction to the Ninth Circuit. There, the Ninth Circuit reversed the District Court ruling and lifted the injunction. The three-judge panel of the Ninth Circuit ruled that there was a compelling state interest to have the donor lists from the Schedule B form to police charitable fraud. The Ninth Circuit rejected a motion to hear the case en banc.
Supreme Court
Both Americans for Prosperity and the Thomas More Law Center separately petitioned to the Supreme Court to challenge the Ninth Circuit's decision. Both petitioners argued that strict scrutiny--the Supreme Court's most demanding standard of review--should apply in evaluating whether their freedom of speech and association rights could be infringed by the needs of the state. The petitioners referenced the Court's decisions in NAACP v. Alabama (1958) and Bates v. City of Little Rock (1960), which found that states could not demand donor lists or other private information from non-profits to make determinations about the nature of their business if there were other non-intrusive methods available to the state. The petitions further argued that California's request for Schedule B was far broader than necessary for its purported need to fight fraud, which would also result in the state's rule failing the strict scrutiny test. Petitioners further argued that even if the less demanding exacting scrutiny test were applied, the California requirement was overly broad and hence unconstitutional.
In response, California urged the Court to review the case under the lower standard of exacting scrutiny. The State argued that the request for all Schedule B's was necessarily broad so that it could review records when complaints are filed against charities, and generally to police fraud. The state also asserted that there was no evidence from the petitioners that showed that this disclosure of the donors lists had slowed down or scared off potential donors to non-profits. The state claimed the public disclosure of thousands of Schedule B forms were practical failures but should not affect the overall constitutionality of the policy.
In amicus briefs prior to the Court's certification, hundreds of non-profits wrote to support the petitioners' case. Those in support of California, including Democratic Senators, argued that upholding the Ninth Circuit decision was necessary to prevent the increased use of political "dark money" donated through non-profits. 
The Court certified both cases in January 2021, consolidating them under Americans for Prosperity's petition. Prior to oral arguments, several groups petitioned for Justice Amy Coney Barrett to recuse herself from the case, as Americans for Prosperity had spent significant funds for a ad campaign to promote her as the replacement justice for Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg. Barrett refused to recuse herself without comment.
Oral arguments were heard on April 26, 2021 and the Court issued its decision on July 1, 2021. The 6–3 decision reversed the Ninth Circuit's ruling and remanded the case to enter judgment in accordance with the Supreme Court's opinion. The majority opinion, written by Chief Justice John Roberts and joined by Justices Clarence Thomas, Samuel Alito, Neil Gorsuch, Brett Kavanaugh, and Amy Coney Barrett, ruled that California's regulation violated the First Amendment rights of donors and non-profits, did not serve a narrowly-tailored government interest, and thus was invalid. Roberts wrote "The upshot is that California casts a dragnet for sensitive donor information from tens of thousands of charities each year, even though that information will become relevant in only a small number of cases involving filed complaints."
Justice Sonia Sotomayor authored a dissent, which was joined by Justices Stephen Breyer and Elena Kagan. Sotomayor wrote the majority decision would open up more anonymous money into political donations, and that their evaluation of California's regulation "trades precision for blunt force" and creates a "significant risk that it will topple disclosure regimes that should be constitutional."
Although the case was widely cited in the media as a conservative victory, the American Civil Liberties Union, NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, and the Human Rights Campaign were among the non-profits filing or signing on to amicus briefs in support of Americans for Prosperity Foundation.
References
 External links 
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Freedom of Assembly Clause case law
Category:United States freedom of association case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Americold Realty Trust v. ConAgra Foods, Inc." ==> """
Americold Realty Trust v. ConAgra Foods, Inc., 577 U.S. ___ (2016), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States clarified rules for determining whether a federal court may exercise diversity jurisdiction in cases involving unincorporated organizations.Americold Realty Trust v. ConAgra Foods, Inc., No. 14–1382, 577 U.S. ___, slip op. at 1, 4 (2016) (internal quotations omitted). The case began as a contract dispute between food producers and a warehouse owner when millions of tons of stored food were destroyed in a warehouse fire.Americold, slip op. at 1; Amy Howe, Trusts and citizenship: It is an easy question for the Court,  (Mar. 7, 2016) (noting that "millions of tons" of food were destroyed). A federal trial court initially ruled in favor of the warehouse owner, but on appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit ruled that the federal district court may not have had jurisdiction.Americold, slip op. at 2. The Tenth Circuit held that the warehouse owner, a real estate investment trust ("REIT"), should be treated as an unincorporated organization and the district court should not be allowed to exercise diversity jurisdiction without examining the citizenship of the members of the real estate investment trust. The warehouse owner appealed to the Supreme Court, which granted certiorari to resolve a circuit split "regarding the citizenship of unincorporated entities."
Writing for a unanimous Court, Justice Sonia Sotomayor held that for the purposes of diversity jurisdiction, the citizenship of a real estate investment trust should be determined by the citizenship of its shareholders when the real estate investment trust is "held and managed for the benefit and profit of any person who may become a shareholder".Americold, slip op. at 1–4, 6 (internal quotations omitted). Although some commentators have suggested that the Court's ruling is "unlikely to have any broad or long-term impact",Ronald Mann, Opinion analysis: Justices choose bright-line rule limiting diversity jurisdiction over business trusts,  (Mar. 7, 2016). others have stated that the Court's ruling "means that REITs like Americold will have a much harder time getting (or keeping) their cases in federal court."Amy Howe, Trusts and citizenship: It is an easy question for the Court,  (Mar. 7, 2016).
Background
Federal diversity jurisdiction
United States district courts are courts of limited jurisdiction, but a federal statute permits district courts to hear cases when the parties are citizens of different states.. This form of jurisdiction is known as "diversity jurisdiction".See generally George W. Ball, Revision of Federal Diversity Jurisdiction, 28  356 (1933). In the mid-nineteenth century, the Supreme Court has clarified that for the purposes of determining citizenship, a corporation should be considered a citizen of the state in which it is incorporated.See     . Congress later codified this rule in statute and also expanded this definition so that corporations are also considered citizens of the state in which that corporation operates its primary place of business.Americold, slip op. at 3 (citing 28 U.S.C. § 1332(c) (1958 ed.)). However, for unincorporated entities, the citizenship of those entities is determined by the citizenship of its members.Carden v. Arkoma Associates, . When individuals own stock in an unincorporated organization, the shareholders function as the "members" of that organization.See Carden, 494 U.S. at 189–90.
Initial lawsuit and appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit
The case began as a contract dispute that arose when food owned by ConAgra Foods and other corporations was destroyed in a 1991 underground warehouse fire in Kansas City, Kansas.Americold, slip op. at 1. The corporations sued the warehouse's owner, which is now known as Americold Realty Trust, in a state court in Kansas. The case was later removed to the United States District Court for the District of Kansas, and the district court ultimately ruled in favor of Americold. On appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit held that district court did not have jurisdiction to hear the case. The parties argued that the district court could assert diversity jurisdiction in this case because the parties were citizens of different states, but the Tenth Circuit disagreed. The Tenth Circuit held that the citizenship of the corporate plaintiffs should be determined according to "where they were chartered and had their principal places of business", but that Americold (a real estate investment trust) should be considered a citizen of every state in which its shareholders were citizens. Because there was "no record of the citizenship of Americold’s shareholders", the Tenth Circuit ruled that the parties had failed to prove they were citizens of different states. Americold appealed the Tenth Circuit's ruling, and the Supreme Court of the United States granted certiorari to resolve a circuit split "regarding the citizenship of unincorporated entities."
Opinion of the Court
thumb|upright=1.0|right|In a unanimous opinion, Justice Sonia Sotomayor declined to remove the "doctrinal wall between corporate and unincorporated entities."Americold, slip op. at 6 (citing Carden, 494 U.S. at 190) (internal citations omitted).
Writing for a unanimous Court, Justice Sonia Sotomayor held that real estate investment trusts, as defined by Maryland law, should be treated like other unincorporated entities when determining diversity jurisdiction.Americold, slip op. at 3. Consequently, Justice Sotomayor ruled that "diversity jurisdiction in a suit by or against the entity depends on the citizenship of all its members."Americold, slip op. at 3 (citing Carden v. Arkoma Associates, ) (internal quotations and modifications omitted). Because Maryland real estate investment trusts are unincorporated organizations "in which property is held and managed for the benefit and profit of any person who may become a shareholder”, Justice Sotomayor explained that shareholders of Maryland real estate investment trusts "appear to be in the same position as the shareholders of a joint-stock company or the partners of a limited partnership — both of whom we viewed as members of their relevant entities."Americold, slip op. at 3 (citing Md. Corp. & Assns. Code Ann. §§ 8–704(b)(5), 8–101(d) (2014)) (internal quotations omitted). Therefore, for the purposes of determining whether diversity of citizenship exists, Justice Sotomayor held that "Americold’s members include its shareholders."Americold, slip op. at 4.
Commentary and analysis
In his analysis of the case for SCOTUSblog, Ronald Mann wrote that the case "seems most unlikely to have any broad or long-term impact" and that the "most likely fate" of the case "is an occasional appearance in the footnotes of casebooks and treatises on federal courts." Mann also observed that "Chief Justice John Roberts has not yet assigned any major opinions to Sotomayor, and this case leaves that pattern intact." Amy Howe also wrote that the Court's ruling "means that REITs like Americold will have a much harder time getting (or keeping) their cases in federal court."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
Notes
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:Conagra Brands
Category:Diversity jurisdiction case law
Category:History of Kansas City, Kansas
"""

From "AMG Capital Management, LLC v. FTC" ==> """
AMG Capital Management, LLC v. Federal Trade Commission, 593 U.S. ___ (2021), was a U.S. Supreme Court case dealing with the ability of the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) to seek monetary relief for restitution or disgorgement from those that it found in violation of trade practices. The Court ruled unanimously that the FTC had misused its authority granted by the Federal Trade Commission Act under Section 13(b) to obtain monetary relief.
 Background 
Scott Tucker ran several payday loan service companies under several different names (including AMG Capital Management) over a fifteen-year period. The companies drew consumer complaints for charging excessively-high interest rates on the loans, with those using their services paying nearly triple what they had taken as a loan from undisclosed fees. The Federal Trade Commission filed a formal civil suit against Tucker's companies in 2012 that asserted that the companies were deceiving consumers, and it sought to recover money that consumers had lost to those practices. Separately, Tucker was also criminally charged under RICO and TILA statutes. He was estimated to have cost over  to over 4.5 million consumers and was convicted on 17 counts in October 2017.
The civil case against Tucker's businesses was heard in the District Court of Nevada by Judge Gloria Navarro. Judge Navarro ruled in October 2016 against Tucker's businesses, granting the  in fees that the FTC had sought in monetary relief for consumers that were harmed by the businesses' practices. The ruling also barred Tucker from engaging in any further consumer lending.
Legal counsel for Tucker appealed the decision to the Ninth Circuit. In additional to challenging the legality of the lending practices, the counsel also questioned the authority of the FTC to seek monetary damages for restitution under their charter, the Federal Trade Commission Act (FTC Act). Tucker's counsel referred to  (also known as Section 13(b) of the FTC Act), which grants the ability to seek injunctive relief in court against those found violating trade practices, a measure added by 1973 amendment to the FTC Act. Tucker's counsel questioned if the amendment was intended to include seeking equitable relief for restitution or disgorgement. The FTC had presumed §13(b) provided that allowance and heavily used the amended language since its introduction to seek monetary relief for consumers that were financially impacted by those the agency had found in violation of fair trade practices. The practice had been backed by prior case laws at lower courts, including FTC v. Cephalon, Inc. and FTC v. Mylan Labs., Inc.. The three-judge panel ruled unanimously to uphold the District Court's ruling, rejecting the counsel's argument about the legality of their lending practices and asserting that the FTC had the authority to seek monetary relief under the FTC Act.
 Supreme Court 
Tucker's counsel petitioned the Supreme Court to hear the case against the FTC, specifically on the question of whether Section 13(b) of the FTC Act allows for the FTC to seek monetary relief. The Ninth Circuit's decision was in alignment with most other circuit courts and numerous FTC cases before, but Tucker's counsel had found that the Seventh Circuit had ruled in the 2019 case FTC v. Credit Bureau Center that Section 13(b) does not give the FTC that authority, which created a circuit split. The Supreme Court granted certiorari to the case in July 2020.
Oral arguments were heard on January 13, 2021. Court observers stated that the Justices appeared to be concerned that ruling in favor of Tucker although an appropriate textualist interpretation of the FTC Act would upend decades of precedent set by the courts.
The Supreme Court issued its decision on April 22, 2021. In a unanimous decision authored by Justice Stephen Breyer, the Court found that the FTC did not have the authority under Section 13(b) of the FTC Act to seek equitable monetary relief, overturned the lower court decisions, and remanded the case for review. Breyer wrote that the FTC could engage in other processes to seek monetary relief for consumers, or "it is, of course, free to ask Congress to grant it further remedial authority."
 Reaction to decision 
The National Law Review said that the decision will curtail the FTC's powers to seek restitution in court. Acting FTC Chair Rebecca Slaughter said that the Supreme Court had "ruled in favor of scam artists" and called on Congress to strengthen the FTC's powers. Senate Commerce Committee Chair Maria Cantwell also called for new legislation in the wake of the decision.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Anders v. California" ==> """
Anders v. California, 386 U.S. 738 (1967), was a United States Supreme Court case in which a court-appointed attorney filed a motion to withdraw from the appeal of a criminal case because of his belief that any grounds for appeal were frivolous.
The Supreme Court ruled that any such motion must be accompanied by a brief (commonly referred to as an Anders brief) outlining the case and any potential (albeit possibly frivolous) grounds for appeal, that the appellate court must independently review the case, and that a defendant must be allowed the right to appeal either pro se or by other counsel.
 Background 
The specific case involved a California defendant, Charlie Anders, who was convicted of felony possession of marijuana.  Anders then requested that the California District Court of Appeal appoint appellate counsel for him, which was granted.
Anders' counsel, after review of the case and discussion with Anders, determined that no non-frivolous grounds for appeal existed, and notified the court by letter that counsel would not file an appeal, and that Anders wanted to file an appeal on his own behalf. The entire notification consisted of a single letter from Anders' counsel to the court stating that there was no merit to the appeal. Anders then requested that another attorney be appointed. That request was denied, whereupon Anders filed a pro se appeal which was not successful.
Six years later, Anders requested that his case be re-opened on the basis that he was denied the right to counsel. Both the California District Court of Appeal and the California Supreme Court ruled against Anders, whereupon Anders appealed to the Supreme Court which granted certiorari.
The U.S. Supreme Court held in the specific case that Anders was denied his Sixth Amendment right to counsel, as the bare assertion of lack of grounds for appeal by his counsel was not enough to constitute adequate representation. The Court ruled, however, that an attorney could still move to withdraw on the basis that no non-frivolous grounds for appeal exist, but that certain steps had to be taken before such a motion could be granted.
Anders brief
In order to file an Anders brief (also called a "no-merits brief"), the attorney must do the following:
  The attorney must file a motion to withdraw as the defendant's counsel.
  The motion to withdraw must "be accompanied by a brief referring to anything in the record that might arguably support the appeal."  Any and all grounds, even if counsel considers them frivolous, must be raised in the brief.  Those grounds include areas such as whether or not a plea of guilty was made voluntarily and freely, or whether the sentence imposed by the court was within the permissible range. 
  The defendant should be given a copy of the brief and given time to raise any grounds (either pro se or by other counsel) that the defendant so chooses to raise.
  The court must then independently "after a full examination of all the proceedings" decide if the appeal is wholly frivolous.  If the court decides it is, then it is to grant counsel's motion to withdraw and then (depending on state law) either dismiss the appeal or rule on its merits, but must still allow the defendant to further appeal if desired.  If the court, though, finds that there is at least one non-frivolous ground, it must then allow the defendant the right to make the case and appoint counsel if needed.  (As part of an Anders brief, an attorney may request that, if the court finds a non-frivolous ground(s) for appeal, the attorney be allowed to withdraw the brief and remain as counsel, whereupon the attorney would then amend the appeal to argue on the ground(s) that the court has found.)
Practical effect
The decision of whether or not to file an Anders brief is sometimes difficult for lawyers seeking to respect the ethical rules on frivolity while being zealous advocates for their clients.
The Oregon Court of Appeals noted an anomaly with the Anders decision: if counsel raises no grounds for appeal, then the court must review the entire record to determine if a ground for appeal may exist, but if counsel raises any ground (even only one), then the court is required to review only that portion of the record pertaining to the ground raised by counsel and is not required to review any portion related to other grounds not raised. Anders in the Fifty States, Florida State University Law Review, 1996.
There is the possibility that an attorney may not see the merit in the error assigned by his or her client, and a client may have viable grounds for the client's claim. In State v. Williams, the Ohio Court of Appeals granted an attorney leave to withdraw, but found a potentially meritorious error and designated a different attorney to represent the defendant, noting pointedly that “an Anders brief is not a substitute for an appellate brief argued on the merits.”2009-Ohio-3199 (Ct. App. Ohio, 6th Dist., Fulton County 2009).
There have been incidents where cases have been pressed through the courts after the attorney was granted withdrawal based on an Anders brief, and the defendant has gone on to prevail. The Court of Appeals of Ohio reversed a conviction in State v. Wilkinson,178 Ohio App. 3d 99, 2008-Ohio-4400 (Ct. App. Ohio, 2d Dist., Montgomery County 2008).http://www.supremecourt.ohio.gov/rod/docs/pdf/2/2008/2008-Ohio-4400.pdf  and in State v. Kerby2007-Ohio-187 (Ct. App. Ohio 2d Cir. 2007). the court determined that there was a potential issue as to the voluntariness of the confession, appointed new counsel to argue it, and ultimately threw out the defendant's conviction.
States abandoning Anders
According to an article in the Florida State University Law Review, some states have abandoned the Anders procedure for other means to review appellate cases where the attorney claims no non-frivolous grounds.
For example, Idaho does not permit the attorney to withdraw from the case.  The attorney, though, can still file an Anders brief (in terms of arguing that there are no non-frivolous grounds for appeal), but the courts do not then independently review the record for error, the argument being that Anders does not trigger the court to do so unless the attorney moves to withdraw, which Idaho has chosen not to permit.  New Hampshire also does not permit withdrawal, but specifically exempts a potentially frivolous appeal from being subject to attorney sanctions.
North Dakota has taken a different approach: it allows an attorney to withdraw but then assigns a different attorney to the case so the defendant has counsel if desired.
California no longer requires the attorney to withdraw. Now she or he may submit a "Wende Brief",Wende Brief named after the case in which the procedure was approved.
States expanding Anders
Though Anders itself applies only to criminal proceedings, at least one state has expanded its holding to include other types of cases.  The Arkansas Supreme Court has applied Anders by case law to family law cases involving termination of parental rightsLinker-Flores v. Arkansas Dep't of Human Servs. , 359 Ark. 131, 194 S.W.3d 739 (2004). and to adult protective custody cases,Adams v. Arkansas Dep't of Health & Human Servs. , 375 Ark. 402, 291 S.W.3d 172 (2009). and by its own rules to juvenile delinquency and involuntary commitment cases.Rules of the Supreme Court and Court of Appeals of the State of Arkansas, Rules 4-3(k) (juvenile delinquency) & 4-8 (involuntary commitment). Reviewed June 22, 2013.
 See also 
Pennsylvania v. Finley (1987)
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1967 in United States case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment appointment of counsel case law
Category:United States professional responsibility case law
Category:1967 in California
Category:Legal history of California
"""

From "Andersen v. Treat" ==> """
Andersen v. Treat, 172 U.S. 24 (1898), was a United States Supreme Court case in which John Andersen was convicted of the murder of William Wallace Sanders, who was his mate on the ship Olive Pecket.  Andersen was found guilty and sentenced to death, but petitioned the District Court of the United States for the Eastern District of Virginia for a writ of habeas corpus, under the claim that he had been deprived of his right to counsel under the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution. Chief Justice Fuller delivered the opinion of the Court affirming the order of the lower court.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 172
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:1898 in United States case law
Category:United States admiralty case law
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
"""

From "Anderson County Commissioners v. Beal" ==> """
Anderson County Commissioners v. Beal, 113 U.S. 227 (1885), was a United States Supreme Court case.
 Background 
Bonds issued by Anderson County, Kansas, under legislative authority, and in payment of its subscription to the stock of a railroad company, after the majority of the voters of the county had at an election, voted in favor of subscribing for the stock and issuing the bonds, recited, on their face, the wrong statute, but also stated that they were issued "in pursuance to the vote of the electors of Anderson County, September 13, 1869." The statute in force required that at least 30 days' notice of the election should be given, and made it the duty of the Board of County Commissioners to subscribe for the stock and issue the bonds, after such assent of the majority of the voters had been given. In a suit against the board on coupons due on the bonds, brought by a bona fide holder of them, it appeared, by record evidence, that the board made an order for the election 33 days before it was to be held, and had canvassed the returns and certified that there was a majority of voters in favor of the proposition, and had made such vote the basis of their action in subscribing for the stock and issuing the bonds to the company, and the court directed the jury to find a verdict for the plaintiff..
After the plaintiff had offered in evidence the coupons sued upon, and one of the bonds (the bond having on it a certificate of the auditor of the state, dated March 27, 1872, that it had been regularly issued, and had been duly registered in his office under the Act of March 2, 1872, and a guarantee by the company of the payment of it and of its coupons), and the order of August 11, 1869, and the proceedings of September 17, 1869, and July 8, 1870, and September 5, 1870, and a copy of the registration of the bonds in the office of the auditor of the state, he rested his case. Thereupon the defendant demurred to the evidence and asked the court to declare the law to be that upon the pleadings and proofs the plaintiff was not entitled to recover; but the court refused so to do, and the defendant excepted.
The defendant then introduced the two resolutions of November 5, 1869, above set forth, and also gave evidence for the purpose of showing that previous notice of the holding of the election was published in a newspaper at Garnett only twenty-four days before the day of the election, and not thirty days. There was also evidence given in reply by the plaintiff to show that the county paid the interest on the bonds every year, down to that which fell due January 1, 1881; that in March 1872, when the bonds were registered in the office of the auditor of the state, they belonged to the company, and that it afterwards sold them for full value to various parties. At the close of the evidence, the court instructed the jury to find a verdict for the plaintiff, and the defendant excepted to such instruction.
 References 
External links
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Anderson County, Kansas
Category:Government bonds issued by the United States
Category:United States securities case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
"""

From "Anderson v. Celebrezze" ==> """
Anderson v. Celebrezze, 460 U.S. 780 (1983), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that Ohio's filing deadline for independent candidates was unconstitutional.
 Background 
John B. Anderson was a declared candidate for the 1980 presidential election. On  May 16, 1980, Anderson's supporters filed a nominating petition to the Ohio Secretary of State's office. Secretary Anthony J. Celebrezze Jr. rejected the petition because it had not been filed by the state's deadline of seventy-five days prior to the presidential primary. At that time, the primary election was held on the Tuesday following the first Monday in June. In 1980, the deadline would have been March 20.
The federal district court ruled that the statute was unconstitutional on two grounds. First, the statute violated the First Amendment to the United States Constitution by placing too high of a burden to petition the government. Second, the deadline was earlier than that required by candidates in the major parties, thereby violating the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. That decision was later reversed by the United States Court of Appeals, which was itself overturned by the United States Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
 Majority opinion 
The United States Supreme Court overturned the appellate court's ruling and reinstated that of the district court. Among other points, the majority stated:
An early filing deadline may have a substantial impact on independent-minded voters. In election campaigns, particularly those which are national in scope, the candidates and the issues simply do not remain static over time. Various candidates rise and fall in popularity; domestic and international developments bring new issues to center stage and may affect voters' assessments of national problems. Such developments will certainly affect the strategies of candidates who have already entered the race; they may also create opportunities for new candidates. See A. Bickel, Reform and Continuity 87-89 (1971). Yet Ohio's filing deadline prevents persons who wish to be independent candidates from entering the significant political arena established in the State by a Presidential election campaign - and creating new political coalitions of Ohio voters - at any time after mid-to-late March. 11  At this point developments in campaigns for the major-party nominations have only begun, and the major parties will not adopt their nominees and platforms for another five months. Candidates and supporters within the major parties thus have the political advantage of continued flexibility; for independents, the inflexibility imposed by the March filing deadline is a correlative disadvantage because of the competitive nature of the electoral process.
--John Paul Stevens
 Dissenting opinion 
The dissenting opinion of the court pointed to Ohio's deadline for partisan candidates, which was the same as that of independent candidates:
Should a candidate decide to seek the nomination of a political party participating in Ohio's primary election by capturing delegate votes for the party's national convention, the candidate must file a declaration of candidacy and a nominating petition bearing signatures from 1,000 members of the party; the filing must occur no later than the 75th day before the first Tuesday after the first Monday in June of the election year... If a candidate chooses to run as a nonparty candidate, he must file, by the same date as a party candidate participating in the primary, a statement of candidacy and a nominating petition bearing the signatures of 5,000 qualified voters.
--William H. Rehnquist
The dissent additionally stated that states had discretion in allowing or refusing to allow national candidates on their ballots. In light of a sensible system of petitioning, the Supreme Court should not interfere:
Today the Court holds that the filing deadline for nonparty candidates in this statutory scheme violated the First Amendment rights of 1980 Presidential hopeful John Anderson and Anderson's supporters. Certainly, absent a court injunction ordering that his name be placed on the ballot, Anderson and his supporters would have been injured by Ohio's ballot access requirements; by failing to comply with the filing deadline for nonparty candidates Anderson would have been excluded from Ohio's 1980 general election ballot. But the Constitution does not require that a State allow any particular Presidential candidate to be on its ballot, and so long as the Ohio ballot access laws are rational and allow nonparty candidates reasonable access to the general election ballot, this Court should not interfere with Ohio's exercise of its Art. II, 1, cl. 2, power.
--William H. Rehnquist
 See also 
 McIntyre v. Ohio Elections Commission (1995)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 460
 References 
 Further reading 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States freedom of association case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:1980 United States presidential election
Category:United States elections case law
Category:United States presidential elections in Ohio
Category:1980 Ohio elections
"""

From "Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc." ==> """
Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242 (1986), is a United States Supreme Court case articulating the standard for a trial court to grant summary judgment. Summary judgment will lie when, taking all factual inferences in the non-movant's favor, there exists no genuine issue as to a material fact and the movant deserves judgment as a matter of law. Because courts almost always cite Liberty Lobby in their opinions for the standard regarding motions for summary judgment, Liberty Lobby is the most cited Supreme Court case.
Background
The Investigator, an investigative news magazine, published three articles about the Liberty Lobby, calling the organization and its founder Willis Carto antisemitic, racist and Fascist. Liberty Lobby and Carto sued Investigator Publishing and its publisher, journalist Jack Anderson for libel. The defendants moved for summary judgment under the standard set by New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, which requires a plaintiff to prove with clear and convincing evidence that a defamatory statement was made with actual malice. The District Court ruled that The Investigator had duly researched its statements and granted the motion. Summary judgment was reversed on appeal with respect to some of the alleged defamatory statements, with the Court of Appeals stating that evidence need not be clear and convincing for the purpose of summary judgment.
A majority of the Supreme Court held that when a "clear and convincing" standard applies, it applies as well to summary judgment. It vacated the Court of Appeals' ruling and remanded the case for further proceedings. Justices Rehnquist, Burger and (separately) Brennan dissented on the grounds that the Court's reasoning was too abstract to provide the necessary guidance to lower courts.
See also
Celotex Corp. v. Catrett (1986), another major case on summary judgment under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States summary judgment case law
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Anderson v. Martin" ==> """
Anderson v. Martin, 375 U.S. 399, was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled unconstitutional a Louisiana statute that required that the race of all candidates be listed on ballots.
Background
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 375
External links
Category:Legal history of Louisiana
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Fourteenth Amendment case law
Category:1964 in United States case law
"""

From "Anderson v. Mt. Clemens Pottery Co." ==> """
Anderson v. Mt. Clemens Pottery Co., 328 U.S. 680 (1946), is a decision by the US Supreme Court that held that preliminary work activities, if controlled by the employer and performed entirely for the employer's benefit, are properly included as working time under Fair Labor Standards Act..  The decision is known as the "portal to portal case."
The Supreme Court reaffirmed Anderson v. Mt. Clemens Pottery in its 2016 ruling in Tyson Foods, Inc. v. Bouaphakeo, No. 14-1146 (March 22, 2016).
Background
The United States Congress passed the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) in 1938.  Section 7(a) of the Act defined working time, and required employers to pay overtime wages under certain circumstances.  Section 11(c) of the Act requires employers to keep accurate records regarding time on the job. Section 16(b) of the Act enables employees to sue to recover lost wages.
About 1,200 workers at the Mt. Clemens Pottery Co. facility in Mount Clemens, Michigan, were employed at a large,  facility. The plant was nearly a quarter-mile in length.  The employees' entrance was in the northeast corner.
Employees were given 14 minutes between each shift to punch the time clock, walk to their respective workbench and prepare for work. It took a minimum of eight minutes for all the employees to get by the time clock. The estimated walking time for employees ranged from 30 seconds to three minutes, but some workers needed as many as eight minutes to reach their workbenches. Upon arriving at their workbench, employees were required to put on aprons or overalls, removed shirts, tape or grease arms, put on finger cots, prepare equipment, turn on switches, open windows, and/or assemble or sharpen tools. Such preparatory activities consumed three to four minutes.
Working time was calculated by the employer based on the time cards punched by the clocks. The employer deducted walking and preparatory time from the time cards based on the punched time and assumptions about how long prep work and walking would take on average.
Seven employees and their labor union (represented by Edward Lamb) brought a class action suit under Section 16(b) of the FLSA alleging that the employer's calculations did not accurately reflect the time actually worked and that they were deprived of the proper amount of overtime compensation.
Special master's findings
The district court appointed a special master to investigate the case. The special master recommended that the case be dismissed because the employees did not establish by a preponderance of evidence a violation of the Act.  The special master concluded that walking time was not traditionally held to be compensable working time in the industry, that the employees had produced no reliable evidence to determine how much time they had lost, and that the employees had not shown that they were forced to wait until starting time.
District court's ruling
The district court agreed, with one exception. The court found that the vast majority of employees were ready for work approximately five minutes before the start of work and that it seemed unreasonable that employees would not begin work as they were paid by piece rate. The court fashioned a formula for computing which employees were forced to wait. The district court then entered a judgment against Mt. Clemens Pottery Co. in the amount of $2,415.74.
Court of appeals' ruling
The Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the district court in part, and overruled the district court in part.  The court of appeals upheld the district court and special master by concluding that the employees' claims were not supported by the evidence. However, the court of appeals ruled the district court had erred by assuming that work would begin before the official start of working time. The court of appeals further held that the burden rested upon the employees to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that they did not receive the wages to which they were entitled.
The workers appealed to the Supreme Court, which granted certiorari.
Holding
Justice Frank Murphy issued the opinion of the Court.Chief Justice Harlan Fiske Stone died on April 22, 1946.  He had participated in oral argument, but his death precluded participation in a decision. Stone's successor, Fred M. Vinson, would not be confirmed as Chief Justice until June 20, 1946. With Justice Jackson not participating in the case, the final vote for the majority was 5-2. The majority held that the court of appeals and the special master had imposed an improper standard of proof on the employees. Section 11(c) of the Act imposed upon the employer, not the worker, the duty to keep proper records of wages, hours and other conditions and practices of employment. Where the employer has failed to keep accurate or adequate records, Justice Murphy argued, the law does not deny recovery on the ground that the employee is unable to prove the precise extent of uncompensated work. Such a ruling, Murphy noted, would create a strong disincentive for employers to keep any records at all and shift the burden back onto the employee. Thus, Murphy concluded that "an employee has carried out his burden if he proves that he has in fact performed work for which he was improperly compensated and if he produces sufficient evidence to show the amount and extent of that work as a matter of just and reasonable inference."Anderson, 328 U.S. at 687.
The employer may rebut such claims by producing accurate and adequate records that document the actual work performed. In the absence of such rebutting evidence, the court may award damages to the employee, even though the award is only approximate.
Justice Murphy subsequently turned to the facts of the case. On the basis of the factual record, which proved decisive in the case, the court found that work had, in fact, begun and ended at the scheduled hours and that the employees had no basis for a claim in this regard. The court did not find that the time clock evidence was reliable. "[Time] clocks do not necessarily record the actual time worked by employees," Murphy wrote.Anderson, 328 U.S. at 690. Since it took eight minutes for an entire shift to punch in, it would be unfair to credit the first worker in line for eight minutes of work, and the time clocks did not show the time at which employees were compelled to be on the premises or at their workbenches.
But the majority held that the employer required workers to be on the premises prior and subsequent to the scheduled working hours. Some of this time was clearly spent on work such as preparatory activities such as putting on aprons, sharpening tools and turning on machinery.
Murphy dismissed arguments against vagueness in determining the compensatory award by advocating a de minimis approach.  Did the district court need to determine, down to the second, how much time was spent working?  He thought not: "Split-second absurdities are not justified by the actualities of working conditions or by the policy of the Fair Labor Standards Act."Anderson, 328 U.S. at 692. Murphy reasoned, however, that the evidence clearly showed that workers did spend a "substantial measure" of time engaged in prep work. This time could be gauged under a de minimis rule, and a satisfactory award fashioned.
The majority remanded the case to the district court and ordered that the court determine how much time (on average) was spent walking and how much time doing preparatory activities and to fashion an award based only the amount of time engaged in preparatory activity.
Dissent
Justice Harold Hitz Burton dissented, joined by Justice Felix Frankfurter. Justice Burton argued that Rule 53(e)(2) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure required the court to accept the special master's findings of fact unless clearly erroneous. Burton pointed out that the majority had accepted the special master's findings of fact. How, then, could the court reject the master's findings regarding prep time?
Burton also observed that, under the majority's de minimis rule, the employees would receive no award. Burton noted that employees had admitted that as little as one minute was spent in preparatory work. Under the de minimis rule, almost no workers had a claim.
Burton also argued that Congress had never intended to redefine the term "workweek" in the Act. Preparatory work was customarily not paid overtime but included in the rate of pay, Burton said. But the majority's ruling rested in a radical redefinition of the term "workweek," Burton claimed.
Burton would have affirmed the judgment of the court of appeals.
Aftermath
In 1947, Congress enacted the Portal to Portal Act of 1947 to amend the Fair Labor Standards Act in light of the court's ruling in Anderson v. Mt Clemens Pottery Co. The word "portal" refers to the workplace door, so "Portal-to-Portal" could be interpreted to mean that all time spent within that door is work time. However, Section 4 of the 1947 Act required that the determination of whether time spent in preliminary or postliminary activities was "work" under the FLSA was to be based solely on contract, custom, or practice.
Unfortunately, the Portal-to-Portal Act was equally unclear as to what constituted contract, custom or practice.  The Supreme Court attempted to clarify the issue in Steiner v. Mitchell, 350 U.S. 247 (1956), by ruling that activities which were "integral" to work (such as the donning of protective clothing) were compensable under the FLSA and Portal-to-Portal Act.
Nearly 50 years later, the Court again revisited the issue of what constituted "work."  In IBP, Inc. v. Alvarez,. the Court again engaged in a fact-specific analysis to conclude that time spent waiting while in protective gear, or time spent walking in protective gear, was compensable working time.
The Supreme Court reaffirmed Anderson v. Mt. Clemens Pottery in its 2016 ruling in Tyson Foods v. Bouaphakeo, No. 14-1146 (March 22, 2016). Justice Anthony Kennedy, writing for the 6-to-2 majority, quoted from Anderson v. Mt. Clemens Pottery in affirming the right of pork processing plant workers in using statistics to support their back-wage claims for time spent in donning protective clothing and equipment while at work.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 328
Notes
References
Cummins, H.J. "Tech Workers Are Pressing the Issue of Dressing." Minneapolis Star Tribune. March 9, 2007.
Lamb, Edward. No Lamb for Slaughter. New York: Harcourt, Brace World, 1963.
Mataya, Charles J. "Supremes Clarify Portal-to-Portal Act?" Findlaw.com. December 21, 2005.
"Portal to Portal For All."  Time. December 16, 1946.
Further reading
St. Antoine, Theodore J., Justice Frank Murphy and American labor law, Michigan Law Review (100 MLR 1900, June 1, 2002).
External links
Category:1946 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States labor case law
Category:History of labor relations in the United States
Category:Employee compensation in the United States
Category:Abrogated United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:Macomb County, Michigan
"""

From "Anderson's-Black Rock, Inc. v. Pavement Salvage Co." ==> """
Anderson's-Black Rock, Inc. v. Pavement Salvage Co., 396 U.S. 57 (1969), is a 1969 decision of the United States Supreme Court on the legal standard governing the obviousness of claimed inventions. It stands for the proposition that, when old elements are combined in a way such that they do not interact in a novel, unobvious way, then the resulting combination is obvious and therefore unpatentable.
Background
400px|thumb|right|Drawing of the machine patented in this case
The patent. sought to solve a problem in paving asphalt roads—the joint between the new section and old, cold sections tends to bond poorly. Previously, one machine spread and shaped the new deposit of asphalt and a second machine contained a radiant-heat burner, which softened cold asphalt. The claimed invention combined on one machine chassis the spreading and shaping equipment along with a radiant-heat burner.
The defendant highway constructor's alleged infringement resulted from its placing of a radiant-heat burner on the front of a standard paving machine. This allowed "its machine to perform the same functions with the same basic elements as those described in [the] patent.".
Proceedings in lower courts
District court ruling
The patent owner, Pavement Salvage Company, sued the highway constructor, Anderson's-Black Rock, in the United States District Court at Charleston, West Virginia. The district court held the claimed invention obvious and the patent invalid, because (according to the court of appeals) it believed that it was known that the answer to the problem of cold joints lay in heat treatment and that a generator of the type described by the inventor "would do the job."
The district judge concluded:
Court of appeals ruling
The patent owner appealed and the Fourth Circuit reversed (2-1). It held:
One judge dissented. He said, "Nor is it demonstrated to my satisfaction that the combination on one chassis of the paving machine and heat generator is necessary to produce the desired result. Yet, the combination is held patentable, though for all we know the same desired result may be achieved by two machines juxtaposed and separately propelled."
Supreme Court ruling
The Supreme Court, without dissent, reversed the judgment of the Fourth Circuit and reinstated the judgment of the district court. Justice William O. Douglas delivered the opinion of the Court.
The Court agreed with the reasoning of the district court and the court of appeals dissent that combining the claimed elements of the patent was obvious: "A separate heater can also be used in conjunction with a standard paving machine to eliminate the cold joint, and in fact is so used for heating the transverse joints of the pavement."Anderson's-Black Rock, 396 U.S. at 59.
The Court continued, "The combination of putting the burner together with the other elements in one machine, though perhaps a matter of great convenience, did not produce a 'new or different function.Anderson's-Black Rock, 396 U.S. at 60 (quoting 
Lincoln Co. v.  Stewart-Warner Corp., 303 U.S. 545, 549 (1938)). The Court also dismissed the Fourth Circuit's reliance on commercial success, because "those matters without invention will not make patentability."Anderson's-Black Rock, 396 U.S. at 61.
Pointing to the Supreme Court's 1966 ruling in Graham v. John Deere Co.,383 U.S. 1, 6 (1966). the Court said, as that case held, that "[t]he patent standard is basically constitutional, Article I, § 8, of the Constitution," and thus under that grant of power authorizing Congress "to promote the Progress of . . . useful Arts" Congress may not "enlarge the patent monopoly without regard to the innovation, advancement or social benefit gained thereby. . . . This is the standard expressed in the Constitution and it may not be ignored."
Therefore, based on the methodology commanded in the Graham case, the Court held the claimed combination obvious:
 Subsequent developments 
The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit for many years ignored and refused to cite or follow the Black Rock decision. But the 2007 Supreme Court decision in KSR v. Teflex,. which cited and followed Black Rock for the proposition that "a court must ask whether the improvement is more than the predictable use of prior art elements according to their established functions," gave the Federal Circuit "forceful instruction"Lawrence Ebert, More on the impact of KSR,  (May 1, 2007). to change its approach. After the Supreme Court granted certiorari in the KSR case, the Federal Circuit began to defer to the Black Rock decision.See  See also Sundance, Inc. v. Demonte Fabricating Ltd., 550 F.3d 1356, 1368 (Fed. Cir. 2008);  Before Dystar the Federal Circuit appears to have cited Black Rock only twice, in 1984 and 1985.
 References 
External links
Category:1969 in United States case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Andresen v. Maryland" ==> """
Andresen v. Maryland, 427 U.S. 463 (1976), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that search of petitioner's offices for business records, their seizure, and subsequent introduction into evidence did not offend the Fifth Amendment's proscription that "[n]o person ... shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself." Although the records seized contained statements that petitioner voluntarily had committed to writing, he was never required to say anything.
 See also 
 United States v. Miller, 425 U.S. 435 (1976)
 Fisher v. United States, 425 U.S. 391 (1976)
 Further reading 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:1976 in United States case law
"""

From "Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts, Inc. v. Goldsmith" ==> """
Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts, Inc. v. Goldsmith (Docket 21–869) is a pending U.S. Supreme Court case dealing with the transformative nature of fair use under U.S. copyright law. The case deals with the Prince Series created by Andy Warhol based on a photograph by Lynn Goldsmith of the musician Prince, and questions whether Warhol's changes were sufficiently transformative from Goldsmith to fall within fair use, an issue arising from a circuit split between the Second and Ninth Circuits among others.
 Background 
In 1981 photographer Lynn Goldsmith took a series of photographs of Prince at the start of his musical career. Following the release of Prince's Purple Rain in 1984, the magazine Vanity Fair, a Condé Nast publication, licensed a single black and white full length photograph of Prince for a planned feature and it was agreed the photograph would be used as an "artistic reference". Vanity Fair then commissioned pop-art artist Andy Warhol, who created a cropped, highly colorized painting using just Prince’s head from the photograph.  The painting illustrated the feature entitled "Purple Fame". Goldsmith received a co-credit for the illustration.
Warhol created 16 variants of the Prince portrait between 1984 and his death in 1987, collectively known as the Prince Series, including the notable Orange Prince variant that was completed in 1984. All of 16 works remained in Warhol's private collection whilst he was alive and after his death were managed by the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts (AWF). The Prince Series works have been exhibited many times in museum shows and galleries around the world including the Museum of Modern Art, Tate and The Andy Warhol Museum.
After Prince's death in 2016, Condé Nast published a commemorative magazine looking back on Prince’s life with one of the Prince Series variants as the cover image. Despite licensing the photograph and the co- credit in Vanity Fair, Goldsmith alleged that she had been unaware of the existence of the illustration and the Prince Series until 2016, over 30 years later when she saw the Condé Nast cover. Condé Nast credited the Foundation and did not mention her.
Goldsmith informed the Foundation that she believed these additional works were copyright violations of her photograph and stated her intent to seek legal action. The Foundation filed for a preliminary ruling in the Southern District of New York, stating in court papers that it felt like a "shakedown".  Federal judge John G. Koeltl granted motion for the Foundation in 2019 to block further litigation from Goldsmith. Koeltl ruled that Warhol had transformed Goldsmith's original photograph under fair use as to show the change of Prince "from a vulnerable, uncomfortable person to an iconic, larger-than-life figure".
Goldsmith appealed to the Second Circuit, which reversed Koeltl's judgement in March 2021 and allowing Goldsmith's lawsuit to proceed. In their opinion, the Second Circuit wrote that Koeltl erred in his judgment, with Judge Gerard E. Lynch writing "The district judge should not assume the role of art critic and seek to ascertain the intent behind or meaning of the works at issue. That is so both because judges are typically unsuited to make aesthetic judgments and because such perceptions are inherently subjective." Lynch continued that it was clear the Prince Series derived from Goldsmith's photograph, and that the fair use defense for transformative works failed because Warhol's work "retains the essential elements of the Goldsmith photograph without significantly adding to or altering those elements." The Foundation have claimed that Lynch undermines his own argument in the ruling, that a judge should not play art critic.
 Supreme Court 
The Andy Warhol Foundation petitioned to the Supreme Court to challenge the Second Circuit's ruling. The Foundation stated that the Second Circuit's ruling was "a sea-change in the law of copyright" and would cast "a cloud of legal uncertainty over an entire genre of visual art."
AWF claims the Second Circuit’s decision subverts the entire purpose of copyright law: to promote creative progress. As argued by AWF, the Second Circuit's insistence that its "conclusion that those images are closer to what the law deems 'derivative' (and not 'transformative') does not imply that the Prince Series (or Warhol’s art more broadly) is 'derivative', in the pejorative artistic sense, of Goldsmith’s work or of anyone else's" is disingenuous and could create a chilling effect. Under the Second Circuit’s logic, as claimed by AWF, an artist like Warhol would be chilled from creating a similar work today in fear of facing claims of infringement, which, under the AWF standard, would be upheld.
At the heart of AWF's petition was to address the circuit split on the matter of transformative works under fair use provisions created by the Second Circuit, particularly with the Ninth Circuit where most fair use defense cases have been heard and which supported the district court's treatment of transformative works. The Foundation also identified the Supreme Court's decision in Google LLC v. Oracle America, Inc. (2021) related to fair use and transformation that supported the district court's position.
In Goldsmith's filings, it is argued that the Second Circuit's decision is not as dire for copyright as the Foundation has claimed, and that they have "taken a Chicken-Little approach to the decision below, but the sky is not remotely close to falling."
The Supreme Court granted certiorari for the case in March 2022, to be heard during the Court's 2022–2023 term. The Court will decide whether Warhol, under fair use doctrine, "meaningfully transformed" the original black and white photo of Prince to create new works of art, the paintings and drawings of Prince.
The U.S. Copyright Office in its amicus brief sided with Goldsmith in that Warhol's works were not fair use, as they did not create new expressive meaning, and that a ruling in favor of Warhol would "dramatically expand copyists' ability to appropriate existing works".
 References 
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Prince (musician)
Category:Andy Warhol
"""

From "Animal Science Products v. Hebei Welcome Pharmaceuticals" ==> """
Animal Science Products v. Hebei Welcome Pharmaceuticals, 585 U.S. ___ (2018), was a case before the Supreme Court of the United States involving the interpretation of foreign law in US domestic courts. The case arose out of a controversy in which Hebei Welcome Pharmaceuticals (Hebei), a company incorporated under Chinese law, and its parent company North China Pharmaceutical Group was accused of price fixing in violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act by  Animal Science Products (ASP), which filed a class action against Hebei. Before the district court, Hebei claimed that Chinese law required them to price-fix, and this claim was supported by the Chinese Ministry of Commerce in written submissions to the court. The district court rejected this defense because, in the independent opinion of the judge, Chinese law did not actually impose this requirement; a jury subsequently awarded damages to ASP. On appeal, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that the district court erred by entering into an independent review of foreign law, and that it should have instead, for reasons of international comity, deferred to China's representation of its own law, provided that this representation was "reasonable". In a unanimous opinion, the Supreme Court reversed the ruling of the Second Circuit, finding that respectful consideration must be granted to a foreign government's statements, but not conclusive effect.. The case marked the first occasion that the Chinese government appeared as an amicus curiae in oral argument before the US Supreme Court, and was the third time that any foreign government had done so.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:China–United States economic relations
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:Pharmacy in China
Category:Conflict of laws case law
"""

From "The Antelope" ==> """
The Antelope, 23 U.S. (10 Wheat.) 66 (1825), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States considered, for the first time, the legitimacy of the international slave trade, and determined "that possession on board of a vessel was evidence of property".
Background
The importation of slaves into the United States became illegal in 1808, under the Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves. That act did not include any effective penalties for violation, and did not specify what was to be done with illegally imported slaves. In practice, each state auctioned off such slaves and kept the proceeds. In 1819 the Act in Addition to the acts prohibiting the slave trade gave the President authority to use U.S. Navy and other armed ships to capture slave ships, and to see to the "safe-keeping, support and removal beyond the United States" of any Africans found on captured slave ships. In 1820 the capture of "negroes or mulattoes" for the purpose of enslaving them, and the importation of slaves into the United States, was defined as "piracy" by an amendment to the Act to Protect the Commerce of the United States and Punish the Crime of Piracy.Noonan: 17–19
Capture and claims
On June 29, 1820, the United States Revenue-Marine cutter Dallas captured the slave ship Antelope, carrying some 280 Africans, off the coast of Florida (which was still Spanish at the time) on suspicion that it intended to illegally import slaves into the United States. The ship had been built in the U.S. and named Antelope. It was later sold to a Spanish owner, renamed Fenix, and licensed by the Spanish government to carry slaves from Africa to Cuba. The Antelope had been captured by a privateer at Cabinda, renamed General Ramirez, and used to transport slaves already on board, as well as slaves taken from other ships flying the Portuguese flag, and from an American ship. The Antelope, its crew, and the Africans aboard were taken to Savannah, Georgia.Noonan: 31–32
Captain John Jackson of the Dallas filed a claim (called a "libel" in admiralty law) in federal court in admiralty in Savannah to be paid either $25 a head for the Africans on the Antelope under the provisions of the 1819 Act in Addition to the acts prohibiting the slave trade, if they were free, or the salvage value as property lost at sea, if they were slaves of Spanish and Portuguese owners. In early August, libels were filed in federal court in admiralty that 150 or more of the Africans aboard the Antelope belonged to the King of Spain, and that 130 belonged to the King of Portugal. Later in August Richard W. Habersham, the United States District Attorney for Georgia, filed a libel in court that under the Act in Addition, the Africans on the Antelope were free, on the grounds that they had been removed from Africa by persons intending to sell them in the United States.Noonan: 32–33, 43, 44
thumb|The Slave Ship, an 1840 painting by J. M. W. Turner
Trial for piracy
John Smith was first mate on the Columbia, later renamed Arraganta, when it sailed from Baltimore, Maryland under a letter of marque issued by the Uruguayan revolutionary José Gervasio Artigas. (American law prohibited U.S. citizens from serving on foreign war ships, and all of the crew on the Columbia had sworn that they were not U.S. citizens.) After the Arraganta captured the Antelope, John Smith became captain of the prize crew on the Antelope, which was renamed General Ramirez.Noonan: 17–19, 27, 29
Smith was put on trial for piracy in December 1820 on three charges, that he had stolen $25 worth of goods from a French schooner attacked by the Arraganta, and that he had participated in the capture of a Portuguese ship and of the Antelope. In 1820 the capture of "negroes or mulattoes" for the purpose of enslaving them, and the importation of slaves into the United States, had been defined as "piracy" by an amendment to the :Act to Protect the Commerce of the United States and Punish the Crime of Piracy, but Smith was not charged under that provision. His initial defense was that he was an officer of the Banda Oriental. Evidence was found, however, that he was a citizen of the U.S., and it was thus illegal for him to serve in the military or on a privateer of a foreign country. His lawyer then argued that Smith had renounced his citizenship and become a citizen of the Banda Oriental, that he had relied on the validity of the letter of marque, that he had argued against the capture of the French ship, and that Spanish and Portuguese ships were legitimate targets under the letter of marque. The judge instructed the jurors that Smith had shown no piratical intent, and Smith was acquitted of all charges. After he was acquitted of piracy, Smith filed a libel for the return of the Antelope and its cargo as a legitimate prize.Noonan: 38, 51–53
Trial in admiralty
Trial in federal court in admiralty to consider the various libels against the Antelope began in January 1821. The number of Africans on the Antelope that had been taken from various ships (and therefore, their potential owners) was in contention. Three members of the Spanish crew, who had been put ashore when the Arraganta captured the Antelope, were then in Savannah. They testified that there were 166 Africans aboard the Antelope when it was captured. John Smith testified that there were only 93 Africans on the Antelope when it was captured, and that 210 Africans were taken from Portuguese ships. Smith and another member of the prize crew testified that 25 Africans had been taken from the American brig Essex, and that approximately half of those had died or drowned en route.Noonan: 53–55
Result
The Supreme Court dismissed the claim by John Smith for return of the Antelope as a prize of war. It calculated that the privateer had taken 93 Africans on the Antelope and 183 from the ships flying the Portuguese flag, noting a lack of proof of the actual nationality of those ships.
One hundred twenty survivors of the Africans found on the Antelope were sent to Liberia in July 1827. The people from the Antelope were settled in a new colony, called New Georgia after their home of the prior seven years. Approximately 30 slaves were ruled to be the property of the Spanish claimants and went to slavery in Florida.Noonan:134-35Swanson:108-09, 177–79
See also
United States v. The Amistad, 1841 case
Citations
References
Noonan, John Thomas. (1977) The Antelope: the ordeal of the recaptured Africans in the administrations of James Monroe and John Quincy Adams. University of California Press.  Google Books
Swanson, Gail. (2005) Slave Ship Guerrero. West Conshohocken, Pennsylvania: Infinity Publishing. 
External links
Category:Age of Sail ships of Spain
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:United States slavery case law
Category:1825 in United States case law
Category:Post-1808 importation of slaves to the United States
"""

From "Antoine v. Washington" ==> """
Antoine v. Washington, 420 U.S. 194 (1975), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that treaties and laws must be construed in favor of Native Americans (Indians); that the Supremacy Clause precludes the application of state game laws to the tribe; that Congress showed no intent to subject the tribe to state jurisdiction for hunting; and while the state can regulate non-Indians in the ceded area, Indians must be exempted from such regulations.
 Background 
thumb|350px|left|alt=map showing the location of the Colville Reservation|Colville Reservation
 History 
The Colville Indian Reservation was established in the north-central part of Washington for members of twelve different tribes of Indians.  These tribes were the Chelan, Colville, the Entiat, the Methow, the Nespelem, the Nez Perce of Chief Joseph's Band, the southern Okanagan, the Palus, the Sanpoil, the Sinixt (or "Lakes"), the Sinkiuse-Columbia, and the Wenatchi.  The reservation was originally created 1872 by a series of Executive Orders issued by President Ulysses S. Grant and stretched from the Columbia River on the south to the Canada–US border on the north.1  915-16 (Charles J. Kappler ed. 1904).  In 1887, the Dawes Act was passed and the federal government looked at allotting the land on the reservation.
In 1891, an agreement was reached with the tribe that they would cede the northern half of the reservation to the government.,  139-40 (2009); Rowland L. Young, Supreme Court Report, 61  1532 (Dec. 1975).  As part of the terms of the agreement, Indians in the northern half who did not wish to move to the southern half would be given 80 acres of land.  In addition, the United States agreed to pay $1,500,000 to the tribe and the tribe reserved hunting and fishing rights on the ceded land., at 139-40.  In 1892, Congress passed an act removing the northern half from tribal jurisdiction, but not implementing all of the agreement.Act of July 1, 1892, ; Kappler, Vol. 1 at 441.  The payment to the tribe was not initially made, but was eventually paid fourteen years later.
 Lower courts 
Alexander Antoine was an enrolled member of the Colville Confederated Tribes.  In 1971, Antoine and his wife Irene were hunting on the northern half of the former reservation and were cited for hunting deer during a closed season.Antoine v. Washington, 420 U.S. 194, 195-96 (1975); , at 139-40.  The Antoines were convicted of hunting and possessing a deer during a closed season in Superior Court.Colville Tribe: Control of Indian Hunting Said Illegal by High Court, , Feb. 20, 1975, at 5.  After the conviction, the tribe took up their defense and appealed to the Washington Supreme Court.
At the Washington Supreme Court the tribe and the Antoines argued that Article 6 of the 1891 agreement reserved to tribal members the right to hunt and fish in the ceded northern portion of the reservation.State v. Antoine, 511 P.2d 1351, 1352-53 (Wash. 1973), rev'd 420 U.S. 194 (1975).  The state of Washington argued that the agreement was not a treaty, but a mere contract.Antoine, 511 P.2d at 1354; , at 140; Young, at 1532.  While a treaty was "the supreme law of the land" under the Supremacy Clause, a contract was not, and a contract could not bind someone who was not a party to the contract.Antoine, 511 P.2d at 1354; , at 140; Colville Tribe, , at 5.  Since the state of Washington was not a party to the contract, it could not be bound by the contract and could exercise its police power to regulate hunting and fishing.Antoine, 511 P.2d at 1354-56; , at 140.  The court affirmed the convictions.Antoine, 511 P.2d at 1359; , at 140; Young, at 1532; Colville Tribe, , at 5.  The tribe then appealed the case to the U.S. Supreme Court and it granted certiorari., at 140.
 Supreme Court 
thumb|275px|left|alt=Photograph of an older white male standing, in judicial robes|Justice Brennan, author of the majority opinion
 Arguments 
The Antoines were represented by Mason D. Morisset of Seattle.  Morisset first argued that treaties, laws, and agreements with Indian tribes must be construed in the tribe's favor, according to the Indian canon of construction.Br. of Antoine, 1974 WL 185799, at *8.  Second, when lands are set aside for Indians, the tribe retains hunting and fishing rights unless they are specifically removed, and when the text is silent, the hunting and fishing rights remain, citing Menominee Tribe v. United States.Menominee Tribe v. United States, 391 U.S. 404 (1968); Br. of Antoine, at *8.  Third, on reservation lands, the state has no authority to regulate hunting.Br. of Antoine, at *8.  Fourth, the 1891 agreement is covered by the Supremacy Clause because Congress enacted a federal statute relating to Indians, which is binding on the states.Br. of Antoine, at *8.
The state was represented by Joseph Lawrence Coniff, Jr., Assistant Attorney General for Washington.  The state argued that since the federal government could not enter into a treaty with the Colville tribe, the Supremacy Clause did not apply.Br. of Washington, 1974 WL 185800, at *8-9.  Further, the 1891 agreement was a contract, not a treaty, and as a contract could not bind the state since the state was not a party to the contract.Br. of Washington, at *8-9.  Since the northern half was returned to the public domain, Washington had the authority to regulate hunting on the land.Br. of Washington, at *8-9.
The United States, through Solicitor General Robert Bork filed an amicus curiae brief supporting the position of the Antoines and the tribe.Br. of United States, 1974 WL 185802, at *1.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. delivered the opinion of the court.  Brennan began by following Morisset's argument that the Indian canon governed, that agreements must be construed in favor of the tribe, noting that this has been law for over 150 years.Antoine, 420 U.S. at 199.  Brennan next noted the fallacy of the lower courts position on the Supremacy Clause and the agreement with the tribe.  He noted that once Congress passed a statute implementing the agreement, it was law and the Supremacy Clause applied.Antoine, 420 U.S. at 200-02; Ralph W. Johnson & Berrie Martinis, Chief Justice Rehnquist and the Indian Cases, 16  1, 20 (1995); Young, at 1532; Colville Tribe, , at 5.  All the 1871 law did was change the method of dealing with the tribes, but a federal law still governed.Antoine, 420 U.S. at 202; Johnson, at 20; Young, at 1532; Colville Tribe, , at 5.  Brennan then noted that even though the statute did not explicitly state it reserved hunting and fishing rights for the Indians, it must be construed in that manner since the agreement stated that the rights "shall not be taken away or in anywise abridged."Antoine, 420 U.S. at 206; Young, at 1532.  The court reversed the lower court.Antoine, 420 U.S. at 208; Johnson, at 20; Young, at 1532.
 Concurrence 
thumb|200px|right|alt=Photograph of a balding white male sitting, in judicial robes|Justice Rehnquist, author of the dissenting opinion
Justice William O. Douglas concurred in the opinion.  Douglas summed it up clearly when he said "We have here only an issue involving the power of a State to impose a regulatory restraint upon a right which Congress bestowed on these Indians. Such an assertion of state power must fall by reason of the Supremacy Clause."Antoine, 420 U.S. at 212 (Douglas, J. concurring); Young, at 1532.
 Dissent 
Justice William Rehnquist dissented.  Rehnquist stated that the Washington hunting regulations and laws could only be affected by a treaty or a statute, not by an agreement between the United States and a tribe.Antoine, 420 U.S. at 213 (Rehnquist, J. dissenting).  Although the ratifying or enabling act passed, authorizing monies to pay for the land, there was no language in the act about hunting or fishing rights, nor about any of the other twelve articles of the agreement.Antoine, 420 U.S. at 213-14 (Rehnquist, J. dissenting); Johnson, at 20; Young, at 1532; Colville Tribe, , at 5.  Rehnquist noted that in every other case where the court held that the congressional act ratified an agreement, Congress had included the language of the agreement in the law.Antoine, 420 U.S. at 214-15 (Rehnquist, J. dissenting); Johnson, at 20.
 Footnotes 
 References 
External links
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States and Native American treaties
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Native American history of Washington (state)
"""

From "Anza v. Ideal Steel Supply Corp." ==> """
Anza v. Ideal Steel Supply Corporation, 547 U.S. 451 (2006), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court, relying on Holmes v. Securities Investor Protection Corporation, held that to establish standing under the civil Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO) provision that creates a civil cause of action for any person or entity injured in their business or property by reason of a RICO violation, a plaintiff must demonstrate that he or she was the direct victim of the defendant's RICO violation (e.g., a business may not sue a competitor that may have gained a competitive advantage by not paying taxes). The Court explained that this construction will save district courts from the difficulty of determining an indirect victim's damages caused by attenuated conduct.
 Background 
RICO
RICO makes it illegal for any person to use a pattern of racketeering activity to
engage in certain business activities.18 U.S.C. 1962. For a more detailed discussion of RICO and its elements, see CRS Report 96-950A, RICO: A Brief Sketch, by Charles Doyle. It designates a variety of federal crimes ranging from murder to fraud as racketeering activities.18 U.S.C. 1961(1). RICO violations may lead to civil actions when any person or entity is injured in his business or property by reason of the violation.18 U.S.C. 1964(c). This civil cause of action provides a private party the means to recover treble damages plus attorney's fees.Id.
Facts
Respondent Ideal Steel (Ideal) brought a civil action under 18 U.S.C. 1964(c) against Petitioners National Steel Supply, Inc. (National) and its owners, the Anzas. Both parties sell steel mill products along with related supplies and services in the New York boroughs of Queens and the Bronx. Ideal alleged that National failed to charge its cash customers New York sales tax, thereby enabling National to reduce its prices to Ideal's competitive disadvantage. National allegedly submitted fraudulent sales tax reports to the State Tax Department via wire and mail to conceal the tax evasion, which Ideal asserted constituted mail fraud and wire fraud,18 U.S.C. 1341 and 1343., forms of "racketeering activity" under RICO.18 U.S.C. 1961(1)(B).
Ideal claimed that National engaged in a "pattern of racketeering activity" because the fraudulent returns were submitted on an ongoing and regular basis.18 U.S.C. 1961(5), which states that a pattern of racketeering activity consists of at least two acts of racketeering activity within a ten-year period. Ideal also filed a claim against the Anzas and National, alleging that they violated section 1962(a)18 U.S.C. 1962(a) prohibits any person or entity who has received income derived from a pattern of racketeering activity "to use or invest" that income "in acquisition of any interest in, or the establishment or operation of," any enterprise engaged in or affecting interstate or foreign commerce. by using funds generated by their fraudulent tax scheme to open their Bronx location, causing Ideal to lose business and market share.
Procedural history
National moved to dismiss the case, arguing that Ideal did not have standing because it had not adequately alleged that its injuries were proximately caused by National's alleged RICO violations. The U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York granted National's motion, holding that Ideal had not pleaded "transaction causation," which, in complaints predicated on mail or wire fraud, requires a plaintiff to demonstrate that he or she relied on the defendant's misrepresentations.254 F. Supp. 2d 464, 468-69 (S.D.N.Y. 2003).
The Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit vacated the District Court's ruling, finding that where a pattern of racketeering activity was intended to and did give the defendant a competitive advantage over the plaintiff, the complaint adequately pleads the necessary injury.373 F.3d 251, 263 (2d Cir. 2004). This is so even where a third party (in this case the State of New York), rather than the plaintiff, was the one who received and relied upon the fraudulent communications. Thereby, Ideal had standing.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court disagreed.126 S. Ct. 1991 (2006). In the words of Justice Kennedy, "[the Court's] analysis begins -- and...largely ends -- with Holmes."Id. at 1995. In Holmes v. Sec. Investor Prot. Corp., 503 U.S. 258 (1992). the Securities Investor Protection Corporation (SIPC)The SIPC is a private nonprofit corporation authorized under the Securities Investor Protection Act of 1970 (See 15 U.S.C. 78aaa-78iii). Among other duties, SIPC is responsible for reimbursing customers of registered broker-dealers who are unable to meet financial obligations (up to $500,000 per customer). claimed that Petitioner Robert Holmes conspired with others to manipulate stock prices. Share prices dropped when the fraud was detected, causing two broker-dealers great financial difficulty, which led to their liquidation. SIPC thus had to advance nearly $13 million to cover the broker-dealers' customer claims. SIPC sued Holmes claiming that he participated in the conduct of an enterprise's affairs through a pattern of racketeering activity in violation of section 1962(c) and conspired to do so in violation of section 1962(d). The Court looked to legislative history to interpret section 1964(c)'s provision of a civil cause of action for people injured "by reason of" a defendant's RICO violation.
The Court recognized that Congress modeled section 1964(c) on section 4 of the Clayton Act,Clayton Antitrust Act, 15 U.S.C.S. 15 which provides for a civil action under the federal antitrust laws. The Supreme Court noted that in Associated General Contractors of California, Inc. v. Carpenters,459 U.S. 519 (1983). it held that to have a cause of action under section 4, a plaintiff must show that the defendant's violation was not only a "but for" cause of the injury, but also a proximate cause. The Court looked to the common-law foundations of proximate cause, which demands "some direct relation between the injury asserted and the injurious conduct alleged."503 U.S. at 268. Based upon these interpretations, the Court held that SIPC's RICO claims did not satisfy the directness requirement. The link between the stock manipulation and the customers' harm was too remote where the broker-dealers' insolvency was the only connection between the conspirators' acts and the customers' losses.Id. at 272.
Based upon the Holmes standard, the Court held that in this case, Ideal could not maintain its section 1962(c) claim. The direct victim of National's mail and wire fraud was the State of New York, not Ideal. While the Court recognized Ideal may have been harmed by National's lower prices, this harm was caused by actions entirely distinct from the alleged actions constituting the RICO violation (the fraudulent tax reports). The Court also noted that although the attenuation between Ideal's harms and the claimed RICO violation arose from a different source than in Holmes (where the alleged violations were linked to the plaintiff's alleged harm only through a third party), the absence of proximate causation was equally clear in both cases. The Court explained that the proximate cause requirement could not be avoided by claiming the defendant intended to and did harm the plaintiff. "When a court evaluates a RICO claim for proximate causation, the central
question it must ask is whether the alleged violation led directly to the plaintiff's injuries."126 S. Ct. at 1998. The Supreme Court held that, here, the answer was no.
The Court buttressed its determination based upon the underlying premises of the directness requirement. First, the Court explained that great difficulties arise when courts attempt to determine damages caused by attenuated actions. For example, in this case, National could have lowered its prices for numerous reasons unrelated to the asserted fraud. Conversely, Ideal's lost sales could have resulted from factors other than National's alleged RICO violation. Secondly, the direct causal connection requirement is especially warranted where the direct victims of the RICO violation can pursue their own claim. Here, the State of New York could file suit and in that situation, it would be much easier for a court to calculate New York's damages. Based on the foregoing reasons, the Court reversed the Second Circuit's holding that Ideal had satisfied the proximate cause requirement under its section 1962(c) claim.Id. at 1997-1998.
In approaching Ideal's second claim—that National had violated section 1962(a) by using illegitimate funds to purchase its second store—the Court explained that both section 1962(c) and 1962(a) claims must be asserted under section 1964(c), invoking the requirement that the plaintiff's injury be proximately caused by the defendant's RICO violation. However, where sections 1962(c) and 1962(a) establish two distinct prohibitions, the Court said it is debatable whether Ideal's 1962(a) claim should be analyzed in the same way as its 1962(c) claim in regards to proximate cause. The Supreme Court declined, however, to consider the issue because the Second Circuit failed to address proximate causation in relation to Ideal's 1962(a) claim. Thus, the Court vacated and remanded the Second Circuit's judgment with the instructions that the Second Circuit confront this issue.Id. at 1999.
The Court ultimately did not address the question posed in the grant of certiorari: whether a company seeking damages under RICO for alleged mail or wire fraud must
prove that it directly relied on the fraudulent conduct, and that this reliance resulted in injury. Where Ideal could not show proximate cause, the Court stated it had no occasion to address this issue.Id. at 1998.
 Concurrence 
Justice Scalia concurred with the majority, but wrote separately to note that Ideal's alleged 1962(c) injury was not within the zone of interests protected by the RICO cause of action and so Ideal did not have standing to bring suit.
 Concurrence in part 
Justice Thomas concurred only with the majority's holding in regards to Ideal's section 1962(a) cause of action. While he supported limiting the use of the civil provision of RICO, he felt that the majority's strict proximate causation requirement eliminated recovery for plaintiffs whose injuries are exactly those that Congress intended to remedy.Id. at 1999-2000. Thomas argued that the Court's determination in this case was actually based on a theory of "directness" distinct from that adopted in Holmes. Thomas emphasized that it was National's conduct that enabled the company to undercut Ideal's prices and thereby put Ideal at a competitive disadvantage. Therefore, Thomas argued that because National's tax fraud directly caused Ideal's injury, Holmes did not bar recovery.Id. at 2000-2001.
Thomas also asserted that the majority's reliance on the difficulty of ascertaining the amount of Ideal's damages in holding that the injuries were indirect was misguided, as it is within the district court's expertise to evaluate evidence and determine what portion of Ideal's lost sales were due to National's lower prices.Id. at 2001.
 Concurrence with judgment 
Justice Breyer concurred with the majority's outcome but not its reasoning.Id. at 2008. He distinguished this case from Holmes, stating that the causal links here were more direct. However, for Justice Breyer, RICO does not provide a private right of action based upon harm induced by normal business practices, such as offering lower prices. In Breyer's view, National cut prices by the amount of the sales tax and kept the money; this source of National's savings was irrelevant because the price cut itself was legitimate, and thus, Ideal could not prove a direct causal link.Id. at 2013.
 Subsequent developments 
RICO was enacted to combat the effects of organized crime on the nation's business economy; however, because of section 1964(c), a majority of RICO cases are brought against legitimate individuals or businesses rather than criminal organizations.Anza, 126 S. Ct. at 2004-05, (Thomas, J. dissenting); see also Philip A. Lacovara & Geoffrey F. Aronow, The Legal Shakedown of Legitimate Business People: The Runaway Provisions of Private Civil RICO, 21 New Eng. L. Rev. 1, 2-3 (1985-1986). Both the courts and the legislature have attempted to limit the scope of RICO in civil causes of action.126 S. Ct. at 2005-06, (Thomas, J. dissenting); see also 21 New Eng. L. Rev. at 3, nn.17-23. The Court's decision in Ideal apparently does so by imposing a higher burden on plaintiffs to establish a direct link between their injury and the defendant's alleged racketeering activity.A RICO plaintiff cannot circumvent the proximate-cause requirement by claiming the defendant took an indirect route to cause plaintiff's injury. Anza, 126 S. Ct. at 1998. A plaintiff must sufficiently address the question whether the alleged violation led directly to his or her injuries. Id. Failure to do so, under this new precedent, could provide grounds
for dismissal of a civil RICO case.Under the Court's view, the civil RICO provision would not confer any right to sue on the individual who was not the one the racketeering activity was perpetrated against, even if the conduct caused the person harm. Id. at 2006, (Thomas, J., dissenting). This limitation could also make it easier for businesses to harm their competitors and avoid liability where a third party is the direct victim of their scheme.Cornell Law School Legal Information Institute, Supreme Court Oral Argument Previews: Anza v. Ideal Steel Supply Corp. at /cert/04-433.html.
Congress could choose to nullify the Court's decision via legislation; however, Congress has not yet introduced any bills relating to Ideal'''s holding.
 Mohawk Industries v. Williams 
On the same day as its decision in Ideal, the Supreme Court remanded Mohawk Industries v. Williams for reconsideration in light of its holding in Ideal.
On December 12, 2005, the Supreme Court granted certiorari in Mohawk Industries, Inc. v. Williams,126 S. Ct. 830-31 (2005). another civil suit brought under section 1964(c) of RICO.The question presented was whether corporations working with third party contractors satisfy
the definition of "enterprise" under section 1961(4). In this case, employees alleged that their employer, Mohawk Industries (Mohawk), violated RICO by knowingly employing illegal immigrants with the help of third party employment agencies.This is a violation of section 274 of the Immigration and Nationality Act. The larger job pool enabled Mohawk to lower the wages of its legal employees and thereby reduce its labor costs. The Supreme Court, on the same day as its decision in Ideal, issued a brief order stating that certiorari had been granted improvidently and remanded the case to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit for consideration in light of its decision in Anza v. Ideal Steel Supply Corp.126 S. Ct. 2016 (2006). Under the Ideal rationale, it would appear that the direct victim of Mohawk's RICO violations was the federal government, not Mohawk's employees. Therefore, Ideal may pose a problem to the plaintiffs' case in Mohawk''.
References
External links
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Apodaca v. Oregon" ==> """
Apodaca v. Oregon, 406 U.S. 404 (1972), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that state juries may convict a defendant by a less-than-unanimous verdict in a felony criminal case.. The four-justice plurality opinion of the court, written by Justice White, affirmed the judgment of the Oregon Court of Appeals and held that there was no constitutional right to a unanimous verdict. Although federal law requires federal juries to reach criminal verdicts unanimously,Fed. R. Crim. P. 31. the Court held Oregon's practice did not violate the Sixth Amendment right to trial by jury and so allowed it to continue. In Johnson v. Louisiana, a case decided on the same day, the Court held that Louisiana's similar practice of allowing criminal convictions by a jury vote of 9–3 did not violate due process or equal protection under the Fourteenth Amendment..
Justice Powell, in his concurring opinion, argued that there was a constitutional right to a unanimous jury in the Sixth Amendment, but that the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause does not incorporate that right as applied to the states. This case is part of a line of cases interpreting if and how the Sixth Amendment is applied against the states through the Fourteenth Amendment for the purposes of incorporation doctrine, although the division of opinions prevented a clear-cut answer to that question in this case.
Apodaca v. Oregon was overruled by Ramos v. Louisiana (2020)..
 Background on non-unanimous jury verdicts 
Federal law requires that juries return a unanimous verdict—one that all members of the jury agree upon—in criminal trials. While most states follow the same requirement for felony convictions, at the time when Apodaca reached the U.S. Supreme Court, neither Oregon nor Louisiana required state court juries to return unanimous verdicts.
Oregon created its rule in 1934 by state constitutional amendment.Voters' pamphlet, State of Oregon special election (May 18, 1934), https://digital.osl.state.or.us/islandora/object/osl%3A64497/datastream/OBJ/view."Introduction and Measure Listings, 1902-2018," 2019-2020 Oregon Blue Book: Almanac & Fact Book, https://sos.oregon.gov/blue-book/Documents/elections/initiative.pdf. Specifically, as long as at least 10 jurors on a 12-member jury agreed, the jury could render a verdict of guilty or not guilty.Voters added a provision that allows "that in the circuit court ten members of the jury may render a verdict of guilty or not guilty, save and except a verdict of guilty for first degree murder, which shall be found only by unanimous verdict." OR. CONST. art I, § 11. The Louisiana Legislature passed a similar "Majority Rule" law in 1880, allowing for jury verdicts of 9–3, which was later ratified at its 1898 constitutional convention."Timeline: Louisiana's split-verdict jury law and its racist, white supremacist roots," The Advocate (Apr. 7, 2011), https://www.theadvocate.com/baton_rouge/news/courts/article_5db560ac-3a8e-11e8-b5de-874f8cdde5a5.html
In 2018, Louisiana voters passed a constitutional amendment that ended their practice of non-unanimous juries.Amended Louisiana Constitution, Art. I, § 17. When Apodaca was overruled by Ramos v. Louisiana in April 2020, Oregon was the only state that still allowed non-unanimous jury verdicts for felonies (although first-degree murder convictions require a unanimous jury verdict).
 Facts and procedural posture 
Robert Apodaca, Henry Morgan Cooper, Jr., and James Arnold Madden, were convicted of assault with a deadly weapon, burglary in a dwelling, and grand larceny, respectively, in separate trials in Oregon state court.Apodaca, 406 U.S. at 405–06. All three juries returned non-unanimous verdicts: Apodaca and Madden's juries voted 11–1 to convict, and Cooper's jury voted 10–2. They appealed their convictions to the Court of Appeals of Oregon, arguing that they were entitled to have the jury instructed that jurors must unanimously agree to convict.State v. Plumes, 1 Or. App. 483, 484 (1969), aff'd sub nom. Apodaca v. Oregon, 406 U.S. 404  (1972). The Court of Appeals of Oregon, sitting en banc, affirmed their convictions. In doing so, the court relied on a previous Oregon Supreme Court case, State v. Gann, 254 Or. 549 (1969), that had upheld the provision of the Oregon Constitution allowing the 10–2 jury practice as not a violation of the Fourteenth Amendment.State v. Gann, 463 P.2d 570 (1969). The Oregon Supreme Court denied review, and the three sought review in the U.S. Supreme Court.
In Johnson v. Louisiana (a case decided by the Supreme Court on the same day as Apodaca), a criminal defendant in Louisiana raised the same issue: whether a less-than-unanimous jury verdict in state court criminal cases violates a defendant's constitutional rights.Johnson v. Louisiana, 406 U.S. 356, Oral Argument,https://www.oyez.org/cases/1970/69-5035. Frank Johnson was convicted of armed robbery by a Louisiana state court jury verdict of 9–3, which was permissible under Louisiana law. However, unlike in Apodaca, where petitioners argued that this practice violated their Sixth Amendment right to a jury trial (as incorporated by the Fourteenth Amendment), the petitioner in Johnson raised Fourteenth Amendment equal protection and due process claims.  The Supreme Court of Louisiana affirmed his conviction, holding that a 9–3 jury verdict did not violate his equal protection or due process rights.State v. Johnson, 255 La. 314 (1970), aff'd, 406 U.S. 356 (1972). Johnson petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court for review.
Both Apodaca and Johnson were argued before the U.S. Supreme Court on March 1, 1971, and reargued on January 10, 1972.Apodaca v. Oregon, Oyez, https://www.oyez.org/cases/1971/69-5046; Johnson v. Louisiana, Oyez, https://www.oyez.org/cases/1970/69-5035. Arguing the case for the state of Oregon were Jacob Tanzer and Lee Johnson; both would later serve on the Oregon Court of Appeals. The Court decided both cases on May 22, 1972, and upheld the Oregon and Louisiana non-unanimous jury convictions.
 U.S. Supreme Court decision and reasoning 
First, the Supreme Court held that the constitutional right to trial by jury found in the Sixth Amendment (made applicable to the states by the Fourteenth Amendment.) was not violated by a less-than-unanimous jury verdict in state criminal court.Apodaca, 406 U.S. at 414.
The Court likened jury unanimity to the 12-person requirement for juries. In Williams v. Florida, decided just four years before Apodaca, the Court held that Florida's refusal to impanel more than six members for a jury trial did not violate the defendant's Sixth Amendment rights. Although the Court in Williams recognized a long common law tradition of having 12-member juries, it stated, "[w]e conclude, in short, as we began: the fact that the jury at common law was composed of precisely 12 is a historical accident.". The Court in Apodaca drew parallels between the 12-member requirement and the unanimous requirement: both "arose during the Middle Ages and had become an accepted feature of the common-law jury by the 18th century."Apodaca, 406 U.S. at 407. And yet neither a 12-member jury nor jury unanimity, the Court held, were constitutional requirements.
In its reasoning, the Court recognized, as it did in Duncan and Williams, that the purposes of a jury included to "safeguard against the corrupt or overzealous prosecutor and against the compliant, biased, or eccentric judge," and to inject into the trial "commonsense judgment of a group of laymen".Apodaca, 406 U.S. at 410. But the Court found that these purposes could still be accomplished even if a jury returned a less-than-unanimous verdict. Moreover, the Court reasoned, requiring unanimity would simply produce more hung juries.Apodaca, 406 U.S. at 411. The Court also rejected the argument that unanimity would protect the reasonable-doubt standard. If some jurors voted to acquit, the petitioners argued, they could not have been found guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. But the Court rejected the idea that this requirement is found in the Sixth Amendment, because the reasonable-doubt standard arose after the Constitution was written and is instead rooted in due process.Apodaca, 406 U.S. at 410-11.
Second, the Court also held that jury unanimity is not mandated by the Fourteenth Amendment's requirement that racial minorities not be systemically excluded during voir dire, the process by which jurors are chosen for a trial.Apodaca, 406 U.S. at 404. Petitioners had argued that allowing non-unanimous jury verdicts skirts the requirement to not exclude minorities because the majority could simply out-vote minority members of the jury by 10–2 or 11–1. In rejecting this argument, the Court first said that defendants do not have a right to have members of their community on their particular jury, but rather that minority members simply cannot be systematically excluded from juries. Next, the Court said that even if racial minorities found themselves in a jury minority, the rest of the jury would hear their voices and that there is "no proof for the notion that a majority will disregard its instructions and cast its votes for guilt or innocence based on prejudice rather than the evidence".Apodaca, 406 U.S. at 413-14.
 Concurrences and dissents 
The four-justice plurality decided that federal and state juries should operate in the same way—and that the constitution does not require jury unanimity in either court system. The four dissenting justices agreed that federal and state juries should abide by the same rules—but argued that the constitution does require jury unanimity. Justice Powell concurred with the plurality opinion, determining that the Sixth Amendment mandated jury unanimity in federal trials but not in state trials, because he found that the Fourteenth Amendment did not incorporate that right as applied to the states. Because the Court's decision garnered support from only four justices—a plurality, rather than a majority—Justice Powell's narrower concurrence controls, and is what must be followed by state courts..
Because Apodaca and Johnson presented the same question, the Court decided both cases on the same day and some of the justices' opinions apply to both cases. In Apodaca, Justice White wrote the plurality opinion of the court, which was joined by Chief Justice Burger, Justice Blackmun, and Justice Rehnquist.Apodaca, 406 U.S. at 404 (White, J., plurality opinion). Justice Stewart dissented, and Justice Brennan and Justice Marshall joined that dissent.Apodaca, 406 U.S. at 414 (Stewart, J., dissenting). Similarly, in Johnson, Justice White wrote the opinion of the Court,Johnson, 406 U.S. at 357 (White, J., opinion). and Justice Stewart filed a dissenting opinion, which Justice Brennan and Justice Marshall joined.Johnson, 406 U.S. at 397 (Stewart, J., dissenting). There were five other written opinions that applied to both Apodaca and Johnson. Justice Blackmun and Justice Powell each wrote a concurring opinion; and Justices Douglas, Brennan, and Marshall each wrote a dissent (Justice Douglas's dissent was joined by Justice Brennan and Justice Marshall; Justices Brennan and Marshall joined each other's dissents).For Mr. Justice Blackmun's concurring opinion, see 92 S.Ct. 1635. For Mr. Justice Powell's opinion concurring in judgment, see 92 S.Ct. 1635. For Mr. Justice Douglas' dissenting opinion, in which Mr. Justice Brennan and Mr. Justice Marshall joined, see 92 S.Ct. 1643. For Mr. Justice Brennan's dissenting opinion, in which Mr. Justice Marshall joined, see 92 S.Ct. 1650. For Mr. Justice Marshall's dissenting opinion, in which Mr. Justice Brennan joined, see 92 S.Ct. 1651.
 Controversial history 
Recent scholarly debate has focused on the historical origins of Oregon and Louisiana's less-than-unanimous jury practices.
Oregon's constitutional amendment was put on the ballot a year after a lone holdout juror prevented a Jewish man from being found guilty of murdering a Protestant one. On Nov. 25, 1933, the day after the jury convicted on the lesser offense of manslaughter (resulting in a three-year sentence), The Morning Oregonian "railed against the juror in an editorial tinged with racist undertones and nativist fervor," in which the editors wrote that "the vast immigration into America from southern and eastern Europe, of people untrained in the jury system, have combined to make the jury of twelve increasingly unwieldy and unsatisfactory." Previous editorials around the same time "bemoaned 'mixed-blood' jurors and lamented the role that some immigrants played on juries, questioning their 'sense of responsibility' and 'views on crime and punishment.'" The Oregon constitutional amendment passed on May 18, 1934.
In the 1990s, an Oregon study found that too few minorities were called for jury duty, even fewer served on juries, and preemptory challenges were being used based on race.Amy Saack & Aliza B Kaplan, "Overturning Apodaca v. Oregon Should Be Easy: Nonunanimous Jury Verdicts in Criminal Cases Undermine the Credibility of Our Justice System." Rochester, NY. (citing "The Oregon Supreme Court Task Force on Racial/Ethnic Issues in Judicial System, May 1994 Report (1994), https://digital.osl.state.or.us/islandora/object/osl:25704). Furthermore, other studies show that non-unanimous juries make it more likely that minority members on a jury can be out-voted.Amy Saack & Aliza B Kaplan, "Overturning Apodaca v. Oregon Should Be Easy: Nonunanimous Jury Verdicts in Criminal Cases Undermine the Credibility of Our Justice System." Rochester, NY. (citing American Bar Association, "Principles for Juries and Jury Trials with Commentary," at 24 (2005) (“A non-unanimous decision rule allows juries to reach a quorum without seriously considering minority voices, thereby effectively silencing those voices and negating their participation.”)). The Supreme Court in Apodaca had considered this issue, but hypothesized that the majority would still carefully consider the objections of minority jurors before overruling them. The Court lent further support to the states' non-unanimous jury verdict systems by saying that they helped prevent hung juries with holdouts who refuse to convict–or acquit. Because this rule can go either way, it could benefit some defendants who will be acquitted of a crime instead of having to go through another trial.
Louisiana's legislature changed its Code of Practice to allow for non-unanimous jury verdicts in 1880, during the Jim Crow era. Louisiana's white land owners struggled to replace free slave labor, and the state began leasing convicts to plantation owners. During the 1898 Louisiana constitutional convention, the Louisiana legislature ratified the split verdict law, making it possible to convict defendants on a jury verdict of 9–3. This, in turn, created more convicts (especially freed blacks), and thus increased the numbers available for for-profit convict leasing.
Louisiana officially ended its non-unanimous jury verdict system by constitutional amendment in 2018.
Scholars and politicians had argued that Oregon should also end its practice.Amy Saack & Aliza B Kaplan, "Overturning Apodaca v. Oregon Should Be Easy: Nonunanimous Jury Verdicts in Criminal Cases Undermine the Credibility of Our Justice System." Rochester, NY.
On April 20, 2020, the Supreme Court overruled Apodaca v. Oregon in Ramos v. Louisiana.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 406
 References 
Further reading
Aliza B. Kaplan & Amy Saack, Overturning Apodaca v. Oregon Should Be Easy: Nonunanimous Jury Verdicts in Criminal Cases Undermine the Credibility of Our Justice System (February 28, 2017). 95 Oregon L. Rev. 1 (2017). SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2922181.
Gary J. Jacobsohn, The Unanimous Verdict: Politics and the Jury Trial, 1977 Wash. U. L. Q. 39 (1977). 
Jury Trial—Unanimous Verdicts: Johnson v. Louisiana, 406 U.S. 356 (1972), Apodaca v. Oregon, 406 U.S. 404 (1972), 63 J. Crim. L. Criminology & Police Sci. 500 (1972).
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Sixth Amendment jury case law
Category:Incorporation case law
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:Unanimity
"""

From "The Steamship Appam" ==> """
The Steamship Appam, 243 U.S. 124 (1917), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court affirmed a lower court's decision to restore the British prize of a German warship to the British owners.
Background
thumbnail|left|Appam
On January 15, 1916, the British steamship  was captured off the Canary Islands by the German auxiliary cruiser . A 22-man prize crew, and 138 passengers taken from other captured ships, were put aboard and she was taken to Hampton Roads, Virginia, arriving on February 1. Appams British owner, the British and African Steam Navigation Co, filed suit to recover possession of her from her captors. Federal Judge Edmund Waddill of Virginia, in a 15,000-word opinion, directed, July 29, 1916, that the vessel, with the cargo remaining aboard her and the proceeds of the perishable cargo already sold, should be restored at once to her British owners.
 Supreme Court 
The German government appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States, which on March 6, 1917 handed down a decision that a belligerent nation may not bring prizes of war into a neutral port. The Supreme Court held that it would be unneutral for the United States to permit either belligerent to bring prizes into American ports, and that Germany could not claim such right under any of the existing treaties between that country and the United States. In bringing Appam into an American port, it was held, the German officials were committing a clear breach of American neutrality. 
Ship and cargo, valued at between three and four million dollars, were delivered to the British owners March 28, 1917. The decision, written by Justice William R. Day, affirmed decrees by Federal Judge Waddill, and upheld the original ruling by Secretary of State Robert Lansing that prizes coming into American ports unaccompanied by captor warships have the right to remain only long enough to make themselves seaworthy. The court stated that neither the Treaty of 1799 with Prussia, the Hague conventions nor the Declaration of London, entitled any belligerents to make American ports a place of deposit of prizes as spoils of war under such circumstances.
The opinion adds:
The principles of international law, leaving the treaty aside, will not permit the ports of the United States to be thus used by the belligerents. If such use were permitted, it would constitute the ports of a neutral nation harbors of safety into which prizes might be safely brought and indefinitely kept.
From the beginning of its history this country has been careful to maintain a neutral position between warring governments, and not to allow use of its ports in violation of the obligations of neutrality, nor to permit such use beyond the necessities arising from perils of the seas or the necessities of such vessels as to seaworthiness, provisions and supplies.
Aftermath
After return to its initial owners, the ship was renamed  for the rest of the war before reverting to her original name in 1919. Thereafter she traded for many years on routes to West Africa and was scrapped in 1936.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 243
References
External links
 "Supreme Court Gives Appam to British Owners", New-York Tribune. (New York [N.Y.]), March 7, 1917. Chronicling America: Historic American Newspapers. Library of Congress.
 "Appam Returned to British Owners", The Sun. (New York [N.Y.]), March 7, 1917. Chronicling America: Historic American Newspapers. Library of Congress.
Category:1917 in United States case law
Category:United States admiralty case law
Category:United States foreign relations case law
Category:United States in World War I
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "Apple Inc. v. Pepper" ==> """
Apple Inc. v. Pepper, 587 U.S. ___ (2019), was a United States Supreme Court case related to antitrust laws related to third-party resellers.. The case centers on Apple Inc.'s App Store, and whether consumers of apps offered through the store have Article III standing under federal antitrust laws to bring a class-action antitrust lawsuit against Apple for practices it uses to regulate the App Store. The case centers on the applicability of the "Illinois Brick doctrine" established by the Supreme Court in 1977 via Illinois Brick Co. v. Illinois, which determined that indirect consumers of products lack Article III standing to bring antitrust charges against producers of those products. In its 5–4 decision, the Supreme Court ruled that since consumers purchased apps directly through Apple, that they have standing under Illinois Brick to seek antitrust charges against Apple.
 Background 
With the introduction of the iPhone in 2007, Apple Inc. also provided the App Store marketplace that allows third-party developers to provide mobile apps to iPhone users. Apps can be provided for free or at a price, with Apple taking a 30% cut of any revenue generated by the sale of digital products. Apple's approach has been criticized, as its terms and conditions for developers to use the App Store prevent them from selling their apps on other marketplaces, and Apple's consumer warranties strongly discourage the use of installing apps in other ways. Some saw these conditions enabling Apple to effectively create a monopoly for app distribution, artificially forcing developers to raise costs of apps to cover Apple's fee. Apple has asserted that it has not violated antitrust laws as it considers itself a reseller of apps, its 30% fee a commission on the sale of those apps.
 Case origins 
Several class-actions suits against Apple were filed shortly after the introduction of the iPhone; three of these were combined into a consolidated case In Re Apple & AT&TM Anti-Trust Litigation (No. C 07-05152 JW), filed in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California. One of these focused on complaints towards Apple for violating the Sherman Antitrust Act in its alleged monopoly of the App Store marketplace, while a second set of complaints were aimed at both Apple and AT&T Mobility (AT&TM) for monopolizing the iPhone market via SIM card locking, forcing iPhone users to only use the AT&T Mobility cellular network. Apple sought to dismiss the case on various procedural grounds, including asserting that on consolidation, AT&T Mobility had been omitted as a defendant, and that as the class-action group, consumers using the iPhone, did not state they bought an iPhone or any App through the App Store, and thus did not have grounds to litigate under Article III of the Constitution. Following the Supreme Court's ruling in , which stated that state laws cannot override arbitration allowances set by the Federal Arbitration Act, the District Court de-certified the case from its class-action status.
Renewed case
A new class-action suit, In Re Apple iPhone Antitrust Litigation (11-cv-06714-YGR) was filed shortly after the decertification by the same plaintiffs in District Court; the new complaint, after several refinements, narrowly focused only on Apple as the sole defendant and the App Store complaints, and identified the plaintiffs as consumers of the iPhone and its apps, thus allowing for them to seek class-action. The District Court dismissed the suit with prejudice, upholding Apple's defense that the "Illinois Brick doctrine" from the Supreme Court case  applied, as only the developers of apps could be damaged by Apple's policies, and consumers did not have statutory standing to bring suit on the developers' behalf. The Court specifically noted that the 30% fee Apple collects is "a cost passed-on to consumers by independent software developers".
Appeal
The class appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. The Ninth Circuit reversed the District Court's ruling, stating that the class had standing to sue under antitrust laws. The decision raised the question of "whether Plaintiffs purchased their iPhone apps directly from the app developers, or directly from Apple". The ruling opened the question of whether, in terms of the App Store, Apple was a manufacturer or producer, in which case under Illinois Brick the class would not have standing, or whether Apple was a distributor, in which case the class would have standing. This decision was split from the Eighth Circuit, where in a class-action suit against Ticketmaster alleging antitrust complaints on venue tickets sales, the Eighth Circuit ruled that consumers were indirect purchasers under Illinois Brick due to the nature of ticket sales, and thus did not have standing. Apple attempted to seek a rehearing en banc but were denied by May 2017.
 Hearing 
Apple filed a petition for writ of certiorari to the Supreme Court in August 2017, posing the question "whether consumers may sue anyone who delivers goods to them for antitrust damages, even when they seek damages based on prices set by third parties who would be the immediate victims of the alleged offense". The US Government filed an amicus brief in support of Apple, arguing that the Ninth Circuit in reversing the District Court's ruling, went against the precedent established by the Supreme Court in Illinois Brick. The Court agreed to hear the case in June 2018. Oral arguments were held on November 26. Court observers stated that the four liberal Justices were joined by three of the conservative ones, Justices Alito, Gorsuch, and Kavanaugh, as to side with consumers on the question of standing. Justice Sonia Sotomayor stated that Apple's practice creates a closed loop that impacts the price paid by consumers. Justice Neil Gorsuch considered that the prior decision from Illinois Brick may need to be overturned at the federal level, as at least 30 states have rejected the Illinois Brick doctrine.
 Decision 
The Court issued its 5–4 decision on May 13, 2019, affirming the Ninth Circuit's decision that consumers were "direct purchasers" of apps from Apple's store and had standing under Illinois Brick to sue Apple for antitrust practices. Justice Brett Kavanaugh, writing for the majority, stated that under the test of Illinois Brick, consumers were directly affected by Apple's fee and were not secondary purchasers; that consumers could sue Apple directly since it was Apple's fee that affected the prices of the apps; and that while the structure for any damages that consumers may win in the continuing suit may be complicated, that is not a factor to determine the standing of the suit. The Court stated that Apple's interpretation of Illinois Brick "did not make a lot of sense" and served only to "gerrymander Apple out of this and similar lawsuits." Disagreeing with Apple's reasoning, the Court explained that if adopted, it would "directly contradict the longstanding goal of effective private enforcement and consumer protection in antitrust cases." Kavanaugh was joined by Justices Ginsburg, Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan. The decision remanded the class-action case to continue in lower courts but did not rule on any of the antitrust factors otherwise at the center of the case.
 Dissenting opinion 
Justice Neil Gorsuch wrote the dissenting opinion, joined by Chief Justice Roberts and Justices Thomas and Alito, arguing that the majority's interpretation of Illinois Brick goes against previous principles and long-standing antitrust regulations.
 Notes 
 References 
External links
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:Apple Inc. litigation
Category:United States class action case law
"""

From "Apple Inc. v. Samsung Electronics Co." ==> """
Apple Inc. v. Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd. was the first of a series of ongoing lawsuits between Apple Inc. and Samsung Electronics regarding the design of smartphones and tablet computers; between them, the companies made more than half of smartphones sold worldwide as of July 2012. In the spring of 2011, Apple began litigating against Samsung in patent infringement suits, while Apple and Motorola Mobility were already engaged in a patent war on several fronts. Apple's multinational litigation over technology patents became known as part of the mobile device "smartphone patent wars": extensive litigation in fierce competition in the global market for consumer mobile communications. 
By August 2011, Apple and Samsung were litigating 19 ongoing cases in nine countries; by October, the legal disputes expanded to ten countries. By July 2012, the two companies were still embroiled in more than 50 lawsuits around the globe, with billions of dollars in damages claimed between them. While Apple won a ruling in its favor in the U.S., Samsung won rulings in South Korea, Japan, and the UK. On June 4, 2013, Samsung won a limited ban from the U.S. International Trade Commission on sales of certain Apple products after the commission found Apple had violated a Samsung patent, but this was vetoed by U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman.
On December 6, 2016, the United States Supreme Court decided 8–0 to reverse the decision from the first trial that awarded nearly $400 million to Apple and returned the case to Federal Circuit court to define the appropriate legal standard "article of manufacture" because it is not the smartphone itself but could be just the case and screen to which the design patents relate.
Origin
On January 4, 2007, 4 days before the iPhone was introduced to the world, Apple filed a suit of 4 design patents covering the basic shape of the iPhone. These were followed up in June of that year with a massive filing of a color design patent covering 193 screenshots of various iPhone graphical user interfaces.  It is from these filings along with Apple's utility patents, registered trademarks and trade dress rights, that Apple selected the particular intellectual property to enforce against Samsung.Nowotarski, Mark, " The Power of Portfolio: Strong Design Patents III ", IP Watchdog, 23 August 2013  Apple sued its component supplier Samsung, alleging in a 38-page federal complaint on April 15, 2011, in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California that several of Samsung's Android phones and tablets, including the Nexus S, Epic 4G, Galaxy S 4G, and the Samsung Galaxy Tab, infringed on Apple's intellectual property: its patents, trademarks, user interface and style. Apple's complaint included specific federal claims for patent infringement, false designation of origin, unfair competition, and trademark infringement, as well as state-level claims for unfair competition, common law trademark infringement, and unjust enrichment.
Apple's evidence submitted to the court included side-by-side image comparisons of iPhone 3GS and i9000 Galaxy S to illustrate the alleged similarities in packaging and icons for apps. However, the images were later found to have been tampered with in order to make the dimensions and features of the two different products seem more similar, and counsel for Samsung accused Apple of submitting misleading evidence to the court.See also:
Samsung counter-sued Apple on April 22, 2011, filing federal complaints in courts in Seoul, South Korea; Tokyo, Japan; and Mannheim, Germany, alleging Apple infringed Samsung's patents for mobile-communications technologies. By summer, Samsung also filed suits against Apple in the British High Court of Justice, in the United States District Court for the District of Delaware, and with the United States International Trade Commission (ITC) in Washington D.C., all in June 2011.
South Korean courts
In Seoul, Samsung filed its lawsuit in April 2011 in the Central District Court citing five patent infringements.
In late August 2012, a three-judge panel in Seoul Central District Court delivered a split decision, ruling that Apple had infringed upon two Samsung technology patents, while Samsung violated one of Apple's patents. The court awarded small damages to both companies and ordered a temporary sales halt of the infringing products in South Korea; however, none of the banned products were the latest models of either Samsung or Apple.
The court ruled that Samsung violated one of Apple's utility patents, over the so-called "bounce-back" effect in IOS and that Apple was in violation of two of Samsung's wireless patents. Apple's claims that Samsung copied the designs of the iPhone and iPad were deemed invalid. The court also ruled that there was "no possibility" that consumers would confuse the smartphones of the two brands, and that Samsung's smartphone icons did not infringe upon Apple's patents.
Japanese courts
Samsung's complaint in Japan's Tokyo District Court cited two infringements.  Apple has filed other patent suits in Japan against Samsung, most notably one for the "bounce-back" feature. Samsung has also sued Apple, claiming the iPhone and iPad infringe on Samsung patents.
On August 31, 2012, The Tokyo District Court ruled that Samsung's Galaxy smartphones and tablets did not violate an Apple patent on technology that synchronizes music and videos between devices and servers.Tabuchi, Hiroko, and Wingfield, Nick, Tokyo Court Hands Win to Samsung Over Apple, The New York Times, nytimes.com, August 31, 2012. Accessed December 22, 2012. The three-judge panel in Japan also awarded legal costs to be reimbursed to Samsung. Presiding Judge Tamotsu Shoji said: "The defendant's products do not seem like they used the same technology as the plaintiff's products so we turn down the complaints made by [Apple]."
German courts
In August 2011, the Landgericht court in Düsseldorf, Germany granted Apple's request for an EU-wide preliminary injunction barring Samsung from selling its Galaxy Tab 10.1 device on the grounds Samsung's product infringed on two of Apple's interface patents. After Samsung's allegations of evidence tampering were heard, the court rescinded the EU-wide injunction and granted Apple a lesser injunction that only applied to the German market. Samsung also pulled the Galaxy Tab 7.7 from Berlin's IFA electronics fair due to the ruling preventing marketing of the device, before the court was set to make its ruling in September 2011.Samsung pulls tablet computer from German fair, AP Worldstream, AP, 2011. Retrieved August 29, 2012German court bans sales of Samsung's new 7.7-inch tablet, CPI Financial, Al Bawaba (Middle East) Ltd. 2011. Retrieved August 29, 2012 According to an estimate by Strategy Analytics, the impact  on Samsung, in Germany, could have cost up to half a million unit sales.Samsung not to promote its new Galaxy Tab at Berlin fair, Times of Oman, (Muscat, Oman), Al Bawaba (Middle East) Ltd. 2011. Retrieved August 29, 2012. In the same time period and in similar cases of related legal strategy, Apple filed contemporaneous suits against Motorola with regard to the Xoom and against German consumer electronics reseller JAY-tech in the same German court, both for design infringement claims seeking preliminary injunctions.
On September 9, 2011, the German court ruled in favor of Apple, with a sales ban on the Galaxy Tab 10.1.Apple wins key German patent case against Samsung, Khaleej Times, (Dubai, United Arab Emirates). Al Bawaba (Middle East) Ltd. 2011. Retrieved August 29, 2012. The court found that Samsung had infringed Apple's patents. Presiding judge Johanna Brueckner-Hofmann said there was a "clear impression of similarity". Samsung would appeal the decision.
In March 2012, the Mannheim state court judges dismissed both the Apple and Samsung cases involving ownership of the "slide-to-unlock" feature used on their respective smartphones. The New York Times reported the German courts were at the center of patent fights among technology company rivals. In July 2012, the Munich Higher Regional Court Oberlandesgericht München affirmed the lower Regional Court's denial of Apple's motion for a preliminary injunction on Apple's allegation that Samsung infringed Apple's "overscroll bounce" patent; the appellate court's appealable ruling affirmed the lower court's February decision doubting the validity of Apple's patent. On September 21, the Mannheim Regional Court ruled in favour of Samsung in that it did not violate Apple's patented features in regards to touch-screen technology.
French and Italian courts
Shortly after the release of the iPhone 4S, Samsung filed motions for injunctions in courts in Paris and Milan to block further Apple iPhone sales in France and Italy, claiming the iPhone infringed on two separate patents of the Wideband Code Division Multiple Access standard. Samsung reportedly singled out the French and Italian markets as key electronic communications markets in Europe, and by filing suit in a different court, avoided going back to the German court where it had lost a round earlier in its battle with Apple.
Dutch courts
Apple initially sued Samsung on grounds of patent infringement, specifically European patents 2.059.868, 2.098.948, and 1.964.022. On the 24th of October, 2011, a court in the Hague ruled only a photo gallery app in Android 2.3 was indeed infringing a patent (EP 2.059.868), resulting in an import ban of three Samsung telephones (the Galaxy S, Galaxy S II, and Ace) running the infringing software. Phones operating more recent versions of Android remained unaffected. This made the import and sale of the banned phone models with updated software still legal. This ruling was widely interpreted as a favourable one for Samsung, and an appeal by Apple may still be forthcoming.
On September 26, 2011, Samsung counter-sued and asked the court for an injunction on sale Apple's iPad and iPhones, on the grounds that Apple does not have the licenses to use 3G mobile technology.Corder, Mike, Samsung seeks iPhone, iPad sale ban in Dutch court, AP Worldstream, AP, 2011. Retrieved August 29, 2012. On October 14, the court ruled, denying the sales ban and stating that because 3G was an industry standard, Samsung's licensing offer had to meet FRAND (fair, reasonable and nondiscriminatory) terms.Dutch court refuses to ban iPhone, iPad sales, AP Online, AP, 2011. Retrieved August 29, 2012. The court found that Samsung's fee was unreasonable, but noted that, if the companies cannot make a fair and reasonable licensing fee, Samsung could open a new case against Apple.
In late October 2011, the civil court in The Hague ruled for Apple in rejecting Samsung's infringement arguments and denied Samsung's motion made there; Samsung appealed the decision and in January 2012, the Dutch appeals court overruled the civil court decision, rejecting Apple's claim that Samsung's Galaxy Tab 10.1 infringed its design rights.
Australian courts
Also in early 2011, an Australian federal court granted Apple's request for an injunction against Samsung's Galaxy Tab 10.1. Samsung agreed to an expedited appeal of the Australian decision in the hope that if it won its appeal before Christmas, it might salvage holiday sales that it would otherwise lose. Ultimately, the injunction Apple sought to block the Tab 10.1 was denied by the High Court of Australia. In July 2012 an Australian judge started hearing the companies' evidence for a trial anticipated to take three months.
British courts
Samsung applied to the High Court of Justice, Chancery Division, in Samsung Electronics (UK) Limited & Anr v. Apple Inc.,  for a declaration that its Galaxy tablets were not too similar to Apple's products. Apple counterclaimed, but Samsung prevailed after a British judge ruled Samsung's Galaxy tablets were not similar enough to be confused with Apple's iPad. In July 2012, Birss J denied Samsung's motion for an injunction blocking Apple from publicly stating that the Galaxy infringed Apple's design rights, but ordered Apple to publish a disclaimer on Apple's own website and in the media that Samsung did not copy the iPad. The judge stayed the publishing order, however, until Apple's appeal was heard in October 2012.  When the case reached the court of appeal, the previous ruling was supported, meaning that Apple is required to publish a disclaimer on Apple's own website and in the media that Samsung did not copy the iPad.
U.S. courts
First U.S. trial
In two separate lawsuits,  Apple accused Samsung of infringing on three utility patents (United States Patent Nos. 7,469,381, 7,844,915, and 7,864,163) and four design patents (United States Patent Nos. D504,889, D593,087, D618,677, and D604,305). Samsung accused Apple of infringing on United States Patent Nos. 7,675,941, 7,447,516, 7,698,711, 7,577,460, and 7,456,893. One 2005 design patent "at the heart of the dispute is Design Patent 504,889", which consists of a one-sentence claim about the ornamental design of an electronic device, accompanied by nine figures depicting a thin rectangular cuboid with rounded corners..  A U.S. jury trial was scheduled for July 30, 2012 and calendared by the court through September 7, 2012. Both Phil Schiller and Scott Forstall testified on the Apple v. Samsung trial.
First trial verdict
On August 24, 2012, the jury returned a verdict largely favorable to Apple. It found that Samsung had willfully infringed on Apple's design and utility patents and had also diluted Apple's trade dresses related to the iPhone. The jury awarded Apple $1.049 billion in damages and Samsung zero damages in its counter suit. The jury found Samsung infringed Apple's patents on iPhone's "Bounce-Back Effect" (US Patent No. 7,469,381), "On-screen Navigation" (US Patent No. 7,844,915), and "Tap To Zoom" (US Patent No. 7,864,163), and design patents that covers iPhone's features such as the "home button, rounded corners and tapered edges" (US$593087) and "On-Screen Icons" (US$604305).Burnett, Ed, The verdict is in: Samsung vs. Apple, zdnet.com, August 25, 2012. Retrieved October 23, 2012. Design Patent 504,889 (describing the ornamental design of the iPad) was one of the few patents the jury concluded Samsung had not infringed. This amount is functionally reduced by the bond posted by Apple for the injunction granted during the trial (see below).
On October 23, 2012, U.S. Patent and Trademark Office tentatively invalidated Apple's bounce back patent (US Patent No. '381) possibly affecting the ruling in the Apple v. Samsung trial.Condliffe, Jaime, The US Patent Office Has Invalidated Apple's Bounce Scroll Patent, gizmodo.com, October 23, 2012. Retrieved October 24, 2012. Apple's attorneys filed a request to stop all sales of the Samsung products cited in violation of the US patents, a motion denied by Judge Lucy H. Koh on December 17, 2012,Apple Denied Motion for Permanent Injunction who also decided that the jury had miscalculated US$400 million in its initial damage assessment and ordered a retrial.
Injunction of U.S. sales during first trial
The injunction Apple sought in the U.S. to block Samsung smartphones such as the Infuse 4G and the Droid Charge was denied. Judge Koh ruled that Apple's claims of irreparable harm had little merit because although Apple established a likelihood of success at trial on the merits of its claim that Samsung infringed one of its tablet patents, Apple had not shown that it could overcome Samsung's challenges to the patent's validity. 
Apple appealed Judge Koh's ruling, and on May 14, 2012, the appeals court reversed and ordered Judge Koh to issue the injunction. The preliminary injunction was granted in June 2012, preventing Samsung from making, using, offering to sell, selling, or importing into the U.S. the Galaxy Nexus and any other of its technology making use of the disputed patent. Simultaneously, Apple was ordered to post a US$95.6 million bond in the event that Samsung prevailed at trial.
Following the trial, in which the Nexus was found not to infringe Apple's patents, Samsung filed an appeal to remove the preliminary injunction.Samsung to appeal US Galaxy Tab 10.1 injunction after tablet ruled innocent [Update: Request filed], thenextweb.com, August 27, 2012. Retrieved August 30, 2012. On October 11, 2012, the appeals court agreed and vacated the injunction.
A new hearing was held in March 2014, in which Apple sought to prevent Samsung from selling some of its current devices in U.S. At the hearing, Judge Koh ruled against a permanent injunction., fosspatents.com, March 6, 2014. Retrieved January 29, 2015.
First trial appeal
There was an interview given by the jury foreman,Apple Jury Foreman: Here's How We Reached a Verdict Interview between Jury Foreman Vel Hogan and Emily Chang, Bloomberg Television, Bloomberg West, August 28, 2012. Retrieved August 30, 2012. where, at the 3 minute mark in the video, the jury foreman Hogan said: "the software on the Apple side could not be placed into the processor on the prior art and vice versa, and that means they are not interchangeable," and at the 2:42-2:45 minute mark, in which Hogan states "each patent had a different legal premise." Groklaw reported that this interview indicates the jury may have awarded inconsistent damages and ignored the instructions given to them. In an article on Gigaom, Jeff John Roberts contended that the case suggests that juries should not be allowed to rule on patent cases at all.Roberts, Jeff John, 3 reasons juries have no place in the patent system, gigaom.com, August 27, 2012. Retrieved August 30, 2012 Scott McKeown, however, suggested that Hogan's comment may have been poorly phrased.
Some have claimed that there are a few oddities with Samsung's U.S. Patent discussed by Hogan during the interview, specifically that the '460 patent has only one claim.. Most US patents have between 10 - 20 separate claims,Radack, David, Reading and Understanding Patent Claims, JOM, 47:11 (1995), p. 69. Retrieved September 1, 2012. most of which are dependent claims.  This patent was filed as a division of an earlier application, possibly in anticipation of litigation, which may explain the reduced number of claims.  The specifics of this patent have not been discussed in the Groklaw review or the McKeown review because most  believe that the foreman misspoke when he mentioned the number of the patent in question; a more detailed interview with the BBC made it clear that the patent(s) relevant to the prior art controversy were owned by Apple, not Samsung, meaning that his mention of the "460 patent" was a mistake.
On Friday, September 21, 2012, Samsung requested a new trial from the judge in San Jose arguing that the verdict was not supported by evidence or testimony, that the judge imposed limits on testimony time and the number of witnesses prevented Samsung from receiving a fair trial, and that the jury verdict was unreasonable. Apple filed papers on September 21 and 22, 2012 seeking a further amount of interest and damages totaling $707 million. A hearing has been scheduled in U.S. District Court on December 6, 2012, to discuss these and other issues.
On October 2, 2012, Samsung appealed the decision to the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, requesting that Apple's victory be thrown out, claiming that the foreman of the jury had not disclosed that he had been sued by Seagate Technology Inc., his former employer, and which has a strategic relationship with Samsung, despite having been asked during jury selection if he had been involved in lawsuits. Samsung also claimed that the foreman had not revealed a past personal bankruptcy. The foreman responded that he had been asked during jury selection whether he had been involved in any lawsuits during the past 10 years, so that the events claimed by Samsung occurred before that time frame, although his claim is not consistent with the actual question he was asked by the Judge. Apple has similarly appealed the decision vacating the injunction on Samsung's sales.
Leading up to a December 4, 2014 hearing at the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, Samsung had noted that the USPTO had released preliminary and/or final findings of invalidity against some of the patents relevant to the first case, namely the so-called pinch-to-zoom patent 7,844,915., fosspatents.com, December 5, 2014. Retrieved January 28, 2015.  Samsung argued for, at the very least, a recalculation of the damages they owe in the case.  On May 18, 2015, the Federal Circuit affirmed parts of the jury verdict, but vacated the jury's damages awards against the Samsung products that were found liable for trade dress dilution.
First trial controversy
The ruling in the landmark patent case raised controversies over the impact on the consumers and the smartphone industry. The jury's decision was described as being 'Apple-friendly' by Wired and a possible reason for the increased costs—because of licensing fees to Apple—that subsequently affected Android smartphone users. A question was also raised about the validity of lay juries in the U.S. patent system, whereby the qualifications of the jury members were deemed inadequate for a complex patent case; however, it was later revealed that the jury foreman Velvin Hogan was an electrical engineer and a patent holder himself. Hogan's post-verdict interviews with numerous media outlets raised a great deal of controversy over his role as the jury foreman. He told Bloomberg TV that his experience with patents had helped to guide the jurors' decisions in the trial. A juror Manuel Ilagan said in an interview with CNET a day after the verdict that "Hogan was jury foreman. He had experience. He owned patents himself … so he took us through his experience. After that it was easier." As the jury instructions stated that jurors can make decisions based solely on the law as instructed and "not based on your understanding of the law based on your own cases," controversy was consequently generated.
Hogan also told the Reuters news agency that the jury wanted to make sure the message it sent was not just a "slap on the wrist" and wanted to make sure it was sufficiently high to be painful, but not unreasonable. His remark does not corroborate with jury instructions that state: "the damages award should put the patent holder in approximately the financial position it would have been in had the infringement not occurred" and "it is meant to compensate the patent holder and not to punish an infringer." Samsung appealed against the decision, claiming jury misconduct, and Samsung can be given a new trial if the appeal court finds that there was juror misconduct.
Other questions were raised about the jury's quick decision. The jury was given more than 700 questions, including highly technical matters, to reach the verdict and awarded Apple more than US$1 billion in damages after less than three days of deliberations. Critics claimed that the nine jurors did not have sufficient time to read the jury instructions. A juror stated in an interview with CNET that the jury decided after the first day of deliberations that Samsung was in the wrong.
First Retrial of damages amount from first U.S. trial
In a damage-only retrial court session on November 13, 2013, ordered in relation to the first U.S. trial by Judge Koh in December 2012, Samsung Electronics stated in a San Jose, U.S. courtroom that Apple's hometown jury found Samsung copied some elements of Apple's design. Samsung's attorney clarified the purpose of the damage-only retrial and stated, "This is a case not where we're disputing that the 13 phones contain some elements of Apple's property," but the company disputed the US$379.8 million amount that Apple claimed that it is owed in the wake of Samsung's—Samsung presented a figure of US$52 million.
On November 21, 2013, the jury awarded a new figure of US$290 million. The following devices were the concern of the retrial: Captivate, Continuum, Droid Charge, Epic 4G, Exhibit 4G, Galaxy Prevail, Galaxy Tab, Gem, Indulge, Infuse 4G, Nexus S 4G, Replenish, and Transform.
Supreme Court decision of First Trial
On December 6, 2016, the United States Supreme Court decided 8–0 to reverse the decision from the first trial that awarded nearly $400 million to Apple and returned the case to Federal Circuit court to define the appropriate legal standard to define "article of manufacture" because it is not the smartphone itself, but could be just the case and screen to which the design patents relate.
Second Retrial of damages amount from first U.S. trial
On Sunday, October 22, 2017, district court judge Lucy Koh ordered a second retrial of damages based upon the limitations imposed by the above decision of the United States Supreme Court. The parties were ordered to propose a schedule for a new trial by Wednesday, October 25.
The jury trial for damages concluded on May 24, 2018, awarding Apple $539 million, which includes $399 million for damages of Samsung's products sold that infringed on the patents.
Second U.S. trial
Apple filed a new U.S. lawsuit in February 2012, asserting Samsung's violation of five Apple patents across Samsung's product lines for its Admire, Galaxy Nexus, Galaxy Note, Galaxy Note II, Galaxy S II, Galaxy S II Epic 4G Touch, Galaxy S II Skyrocket, Galaxy S III, Galaxy Tab II 10.1, and Stratosphere. Samsung responded with a counterclaim, stating that two patents for nine phones and tablets have been infringed on by Apple across its iPhone 4, iPhone 4S, iPhone 5, iPad 2, iPad 3, iPad 4, iPad mini, iPod touch (5th generation), iPod touch (4th generation), and MacBook Pro lines. Samsung stood to gain US$6 million if the jury rules in its favor, while Apple was seeking US$2 billion in damages and could proceed with similar lawsuits against other Android handset makers, as the relevant patent issues extend beyond Samsung's software technology.
The second trial was scheduled for March 2014 and jury selection occurred on March 31, 2014. Judge Koh referred to the new lawsuit as "one action in a worldwide constellation of litigation between the two companies."
The trial began in early April and decision was delivered on May 2, 2014, and Samsung was instructed to pay US$119.6 million to Apple for smartphone patent violations, a compensatory amount that was termed a "big loss" by The Guardian "Technology" team—the media outlet described the victory as "pyrrhic." The jury found that Samsung had infringed upon two Apple patents and Brian Love, assistant professor at the Santa Clara University law school, explained: "This amount is less than 10% of the amount Apple requested, and probably doesn't surpass by too much the amount Apple spent litigating this case." Apple's official response was a reaffirmation that "Samsung willfully stole" from the Cupertino, US-based corporation; however, Apple's lawyers claimed that a technical mistake has been made by the jury and Koh ordered the jurors to return on May 5, 2014, to resolve an issue that is potentially worth several hundred thousand dollars.
The jury also found Apple liable for infringing one of Samsung's patents and the South Korean corporation, which had initially sought US$6 million of damages, was awarded US$158,400. In the wake of the verdict, Judge Koh will be responsible for deciding whether a sales ban of Samsung products will be implemented, a decision that was deemed highly unlikely by legal experts, such as Rutgers Law School's Michael Carrier, after the verdict announcement.
Samsung appealed the jury verdict to a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in 2015, and won in February 2016, with the panel nullifying the jury verdict. The panel unanimously argued that one patent cited by Apple was not infringed by Samsung, while two others, related to autocorrect and "slide to unlock" features, were invalid based on existing prior art. Apple requested an en banc hearing from the full Federal Circuit, which ruled in favor of Apple by an 8-3 decision, restoring the $120 million award, in October 2016. While the original three judges maintained their opinion from the previous hearing, the remaining judges argued that the three-member panel had dismissed the body of evidence from the jury trial supporting that Apple's patents were valid and Samsung was infringing upon them.
Samsung appealed to the Supreme Court, but the Court announced in November 2017 that it would not hear the appeal, leaving the Federal Circuit's ruling in Apple's favor in place.Samsung Electronics Co. v. Apple Inc., 
As of mid 2018, the trials over the patent dispute have been resolved, resulting in Apple being awarded $539 million.
See also
 Apple Inc. litigation
 Motorola Mobility v. Apple Inc.
 Smartphone patent wars
 U.S. patent law
 Markman v. Westview Instruments, Inc.
References
Further reading
Category:Apple Inc. litigation
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States computer case law
Category:United States contract case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States District Court for the Northern District of California cases
Category:Samsung Electronics
Category:Smartphone patent wars
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Apprendi v. New Jersey" ==> """
Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466 (2000), is a landmark United States Supreme Court decision with regard to aggravating factors in crimes. The Court ruled that the Sixth Amendment right to a jury trial, incorporated against the states through the Fourteenth Amendment, prohibited judges from enhancing criminal sentences beyond statutory maxima based on facts other than those decided by the jury beyond a reasonable doubt.  The decision has been a cornerstone in the modern resurgence in jury trial rights.  As Justice Scalia noted in his concurring opinion, the jury-trial right "has never been efficient; but it has always been free."
The Apprendi decision was subsequently cited as precedent by the court in its consideration of Ring v. Arizona (2002), which struck down Arizona's judge-only method of imposing the death penalty, and also in Blakely v. Washington (2004), which ruled that mandatory state sentencing guidelines are the statutory maximum for purposes of applying the Apprendi rule.
 Background 
In the early morning hours of December 22, 1994, Charles Apprendi, Jr., fired several .22-caliber bullets into the home of an African-American family that had recently moved into his neighborhood.  He was arrested an hour later.  During questioning by police, he admitted that he shot at the house because its occupants were "black in color" and for that reason he did not "want them in the neighborhood."
Later, Apprendi pleaded guilty to weapons possession charges.  Each of these counts carried a sentence of between 5 and 10 years in prison.  As part of the plea bargain, the prosecution reserved the right to seek an enhanced sentence on the basis that the crime was committed with a biased purpose.  Such an enhancement would have doubled the sentence otherwise imposed for each of the crimes.  Apprendi, in turn, reserved the right to challenge the bias crime enhancement, claiming it violated the federal Constitution.
The trial judge accepted Apprendi's plea. At a later hearing, he heard testimony from Apprendi himself as well as from psychologists stating that the shooting was not motivated by racial hatred but instead was the result of intoxication.  The policeman testified at this hearing that Apprendi's motivation was racial animus.  The trial judge found "by a preponderance of the evidence" that Apprendi's crime was motivated by the race of the victims.  He sentenced Apprendi to 12 years in prison—2 years above the maximum sentence authorized for the weapons charge apart from the race enhancement.
Apprendi appealed, represented by Charles Coant and Joseph O'Neill.  The Appellate Division of the New Jersey Superior Court affirmed the enhancement on the grounds that it was a "sentencing factor" rather than an "element" of the crime, and therefore not subject to the jury-trial and proof-beyond-a-reasonable-doubt requirements of the Constitution.  The New Jersey Supreme Court agreed with this conclusion, and also affirmed Apprendi's sentence. Apprendi appealed to the Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
Apprendi shifted the landscape with regard to the findings that comprise a criminal sentence.  "Other than the fact of a prior conviction, any fact that increases the penalty for a crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum must be submitted to a jury and proved beyond a reasonable doubt."  In this case, the hate-crime enhancement was determined by a judge, sitting alone, and subjected to a lower standard of proof — a preponderance of the evidence, instead of beyond a reasonable doubt.  Because of the enhancement, the judge imposed a 12-year sentence, which was 2 years greater than the 10-year sentence otherwise authorized by the findings at the plea hearing.  Under the rule the Court formulated, Apprendi's case had to be sent back to the New Jersey courts.
 Historical basis 
Oliver Wendell Holmes observed, "The law threatens certain pains if you do certain things, intending thereby to give you a new motive for not doing them. If you persist in doing them, it has to inflict the pains in order that its threats may continue to be believed."Oliver Wendell Holmes, The Common Law, p. 46.  Here, New Jersey threatened punishment for infractions against its firearms laws, and additional punishment for violations of its hate-crimes laws.  Due process procedural safeguards should apply equally to both of these punishments.
Under the Constitution, due process gives criminal defendants two interdependent procedural safeguards with respect to the manner in which the sentence is determined.  The first of these is the jury trial, a "guard against a spirit of oppression and tyranny on the part of the rulers" and "the great bulwark of our civil and political liberties," whereby "the truth of every accusation, whether preferred in the shape of indictment, information, or appeal, should afterwards be confirmed by the unanimous suffrage of twelve of the defendant's equals and neighbors."  The second is proof beyond a reasonable doubt, the historical "measure of persuasion by which the prosecution must convince the trier of all the essential elements of guilt."  There was historically no distinction between an "element" of a crime and a "sentencing factor" because the trial judge had very little discretion at sentencing, because most crimes had a specific sentence attached to them.
Justice Thomas explained how the original understanding of the jury-trial requirement supported the Court's ruling.  He also argued that the jury-trial requirement applied to both mandatory minimum sentences and the findings of prior convictions used to enhance sentences.  To make this argument, Justice Thomas had to repudiate his prior support for the prior conviction exception crafted in Almendarez-Torres v. United States, .  "What matters is the way by which a fact enters into the sentence."  Even though a prior conviction may be valid because it entailed its own jury trial, the fact that that prior conviction was being used to enhance a new sentence meant that that fact must be submitted to a jury again.
 20th-century developments 
In Williams v. New York, , the Court affirmed that a sentencing judge has discretion to impose any sentence authorized by statute in an individual case.  This statement accommodated a shift in the way legislatures had set punishments between the 18th and 20th centuries — a shift away from fixed punishments and toward broader and broader ranges of punishment.  This was not to say that "trial practices cannot change in the course of centuries and still remain true to the principles that emerged from the Framers' fears that the jury right could be lost not only by gross denial, but by erosion."  Nevertheless, practice should at least adhere to basic principles, even as that practice evolves over the course of time.
With the decision in In re Winship in 1970, the Court expressly said for the first time that due process demands from the government proof beyond a reasonable doubt of every element of a crime.  Thus, the Court held that a state court could not force a defendant to prove he did not act with malice aforethought in order to avoid a murder conviction, as in Mullaney v. Wilbur, .  Criminal law "is concerned not only with guilt or innocence in the abstract, but also with the degree of criminal culpability assessed" in the defendant.  Thus, redefining the elements of murder to make the level of intent required bear on punishment was not an appropriate method for avoiding the reasonable-doubt requirement of the Constitution.
It was not until 1986, in McMillan v. Pennsylvania, , that the Court first coined the term "sentencing factor."  A "sentencing factor" is a fact not found by a jury that nevertheless affected the sentence imposed by a judge.  In McMillan, a state statute required a 5-year minimum sentence for anyone who visibly possessed a firearm during certain crimes.  Imposing a mandatory minimum sentence based on this factual finding did not violate the reasonable-doubt requirement because it merely limited the discretion of the sentencing court rather than increased the maximum sentence available to the judge by virtue of the finding.
 Sentencing enhancements and the reasonable-doubt requirement 
The hate-crime sentencing enhancement at issue in this case was a ratchet — it exposed Apprendi to greater punishment by virtue of an additional fact which was not a component of the firearms violation that exposed him to any criminal liability at all.  Thus, in order to apply the historical procedural safeguards in the novel context of sentencing enhancements, the Court had to extend these protections to those new enhancements.
Because the hate-crime enhancement increased the punishment available to the sentencing judge instead of raising the floor on the sentencing range as a mandatory minimum would, the Court would not allow the hate-crime enhancement to escape the constitutional protections.  The reason for criminal activity requires an inquiry into the defendant's motive, a traditional arena of criminal examination.  Punishing a person for this specific bad intent has historically been the province of the criminal law, and historically required certain procedural safeguards.  Merely labelling the hate-crime enhancement as a "sentencing factor" could not allow New Jersey to escape constitutional requirements.
 Preservation of the recidivism exception 
Two years before Apprendi, the Court decided Almendarez-Torres v. United States, , in which the Court held that a federal statute authorizing increased punishment for illegally reentering the United States after deportation pursuant to a conviction for certain crimes was constitutional despite a then-emerging view (later solidified in Apprendi) that facts that increased punishment must be proved to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt.  In Apprendi, the Court acknowledged that Almendarez-Torres might conflict with the blanket rule it was adopting in that case.  However, the Court allowed sentencing enhancements for prior convictions to stand because those prior convictions had already been subject to the jury-trial and reasonable-doubt requirements.
 Dissents 
Justice O'Connor began with the argument that rather than allowing the Constitution to dictate what elements of crimes are, the Court usually deferred to the legislature's definition of the elements that constitute a crime.  She also disputed that the historical evidence cited by the majority dictated the result it reached.  The fact that common-law judges may have had little discretion in imposing sentence had little bearing for her on modern sentencing schemes.
Furthermore, Justice O'Connor disputed that the Court's modern cases dictated the result.  Although the Court in Mullaney v. Wilbur, , may have ruled that the jury-trial and reasonable-doubt requirements applied to the facts that dictated the degree of homicide crime the defendant had committed, and thus the level of punishment to which he was subject, two years later, in Patterson v. New York, , the Court ruled that a state could place on defendants the burden of proving affirmative defenses, such as extreme emotional disturbance.  Patterson, for Justice O'Connor, repudiated the general principle that facts bearing on the degree of punishment must be proved to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt.  Also, McMillan v. Pennsylvania, , was not relevant to the Court's rule because McMillan involved a mandatory minimum punishment, rather than a maximum sentence.
Finally, Justice O'Connor warned that the Court's decision did not square with Walton v. Arizona, , in which the Court had ruled that the jury-trial requirement expressly did not apply to the aggravating factors required under Arizona law to impose a death sentence.  As Justice O'Connor observed, a judge in Arizona could not impose a death sentence without a finding that one of the aggravating factors applied.  Under the rule the majority adopted, that finding would have to be made by a jury, yet O'Connor found the majority's attempt to distinguish Arizona's death penalty to be "baffling."  Two years later, in Ring v. Arizona, , Justice O'Connor's view about Arizona's death penalty scheme would prevail.  O'Connor also predicted that the Apprendi decision would give rise to serious constitutional doubt in the federal sentencing scheme.  In 2005's United States v. Booker, , this prediction also came to pass.
Justice Breyer complained that the "real world of criminal justice" would not be able to meet the "ideal" of submitting to juries facts that subject criminal defendants to increased punishments.  Fixing certain punishments for all defendants convicted of the same offense would ignore specific harms committed by different defendants as well as certain characteristics of individual defendants.  "There are, to put it simply, far too many relevant sentencing factors to permit submission of all (or even many) of them to a jury."  Because this was a premise upon which the Federal Sentencing Guidelines rested, Justice Breyer dissented from the majority's opinion.  Yet his opinion for the majority in United States v. Booker, in which he crafted the remedy of severance and excision of the mandatory nature of the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, meant that Breyer ultimately prevailed in the sentencing war, even if he had momentarily lost the constitutional battle in Apprendi.
Subsequent cases
In Southern Union Co. v. United States (2012), the Supreme Court determined that when a criminal fine is sufficient to trigger the Sixth Amendment jury-trial guarantee, facts that would increase the penalty beyond the statutory maximum must be submitted to a jury and proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
Respondent was convicted of storing hazardous liquid mercury without a permit, “on or about September 19, 2002 to October 19, 2004,” in violation of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.). The jury was not asked to determine the exact duration of the violation. In sentencing, the probation office set a maximum fine of $38.1 million, calculated by assessing the $50,000 maximum daily fine for each of the 762 days between September 19, 2002 and October 19, 2004. Respondent appealed on the basis that the jury never determined the exact duration of the violation. The Court of Appeals for the First Circuit upheld the sentence, agreeing that the jury had not determined the duration of the violation, but holding that Apprendi did not apply to criminal fines.
The Supreme Court reversed, holding there is no principled distinction between criminal fines and imprisonment for the purpose of Apprendi because Apprendi requires that any fact other than a prior conviction that increases the penalty for a crime beyond the statutory maximum must be submitted to the jury and determined beyond a reasonable doubt. The rule preserves the historic fact-finding function of the jury. Where a fine is sufficiently substantial to trigger the Sixth Amendment jury-trial guarantee, Apprendi applies.
In Alleyne v. United States (2013), the Court ruled that all facts that increase a mandatory minimum must be submitted to and proven by a jury. In this ruling, the court explicitly overruled Harris v. United States (2002), which had held that such facts did not need to be submitted to a jury.
 Footnotes 
* As applied to the states through the Fourteenth Amendment; see Incorporation.
 References 
 External links 
Slate's Dahlia Lithwick's take on the oral argument
Amicus brief of the Solicitor General
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment sentencing case law
Category:Hate crime
"""

From "Aptheker v. Secretary of State" ==> """
Aptheker v. Secretary of State, 378 U.S. 500 (1964), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court on the right to travel and passport restrictions as they relate to Fifth Amendment due process rights and First Amendment free speech, freedom of assembly and freedom of association rights.  It is the first case in which the US Supreme Court considered the constitutionality of personal restrictions on the right to travel abroad.
In Aptheker, the petitioner challenged Section 6 of the Subversive Activities Control Act of 1950, which made it a crime for any member of a Communist organization to attempt to use or obtain a passport..
 Background 
Appellants Herbert Aptheker and Elizabeth Gurley Flynn were native born citizens and residents of the United States and had held valid passports. Aptheker was editor of Political Affairs, the 'theoretical organ' of the Communist Party in the United States and appellant Flynn was chairman of the Party. On January 22, 1962, the Acting Director of the Passport Office notified appellants that their passports were revoked because the Department of State believed that their use of the passports would violate § 6 of the Subversive Activities Control Act of 1950 which provided that it was unlawful for any member of a Communist party to apply for or to renew a US passport or to use such a passport.
Appellants requested and received hearings to review the revocations of their passports. The examiners recommended that the passport revocations be sustained. Both appellants appealed to the Board of Passport Appeals which recommended affirmance of the revocations. The Secretary of State subsequently approved the recommendations of the Board.
Appellants thereupon filed separate complaints seeking declaratory and injunctive relief in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia. The complaints asked that judgments be entered declaring § 6 unconstitutional and ordering the Secretary of State to issue passports to appellants. Appellant-plaintiffs alleged that § 6 was unconstitutional as, inter alia, "a deprivation without due process of law of plaintiff's constitutional liberty to travel abroad, in violation of the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States."
The three-judge District Court rejected appellants' contentions, sustained the constitutionality
of § 6 of the Control Act, and granted the Secretary's motion for summary judgment, concluding that the enactment by Congress of § 6 was a valid exercise of the power of Congress to protect and preserve the Government against the threat posed by the world Communist movement and that the regulatory scheme bore a reasonable relation thereto.
In the US Supreme Court, appellants attacked § 6, both on its face and as applied, as an unconstitutional deprivation of the liberty guaranteed in the Bill of Rights. The Government, while conceding that the right to travel is protected by the Fifth Amendment, contended that the Due Process Clause does not prevent the reasonable regulation of liberty and that § 6 was a reasonable regulation because of its relation to the danger the world Communist movement presented for national security.  Alternatively, the Government argued that 'whether or not denial of passports to some members of the Communist Party might be deemed not reasonably related to national security, surely Section 6 was reasonable as applied to the top-ranking Party leaders involved here.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Goldberg held, with Justices Black and Douglas concurring, that § 6 of the Control Act too broadly and indiscriminately restricted the right to travel and thereby abridged the liberty guaranteed by the Fifth Amendment and that § 6 of the Control Act was unconstitutional on its face.  As to the government's alternative theory, the clarity and preciseness of the provision in question made it impossible to narrow its indiscriminately cast and overly broad scope without substantial judicial rewriting which was beyond the power of the Court in this case.
 Majority 
The Court began with Kent v. Dulles,. reaffirming that the right to travel abroad was 'an important aspect of the citizen's 'liberty" guaranteed in the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment.  It then cited NAACP v. Alabama. and NAACP v. Button. in support of the "well-established principles by which to test whether the restrictions here imposed [were] consistent with the liberty guaranteed in the Fifth Amendment."  It enumerated these principles by citing Shelton v. Tucker via NAACP v. Alabama "'(E)ven though the governmental purpose be legitimate and substantial, that purpose cannot be pursued by means that broadly stifle fundamental personal liberties when the end can be more narrowly achieved. The breadth of legislative abridgment must be viewed in the light of less drastic means for achieving the same basic purpose.'"
It then considered the congressional purpose underlying § 6 of the Control Act, noting that the legislation in question flowed from the congressional desire to protect national security which it held was obviously and unarguably within the Congress' Constitutional power.  But it concluded that the legislation was indiscriminate due to an absence of criteria linking the bare fact of membership in a Communist organization to the individual's knowledge, activity or commitment. The provision swept within its prohibition both knowing and unknowing members, citing Wieman v. Updegraff: 'Indiscriminate classification of innocent with knowing activity must fall as an assertion of arbitrary power.'.  The irrebuttable presumption of Section 6 that individuals who are members of the specified organizations will, if given passports, engage in activities inimical to the security of the United States also rendered irrelevant the member's degree of activity in the organization and his commitment to its purpose, citing Schware v. Board of Bar Examiners..
The Court further noted that section 6 excluded other considerations which might more closely relate the denial of passports to the stated purpose of the legislation, such as the purposes for which an individual wishes to travel or the security-sensitivity of the areas in which he wishes to travel. In determining whether there has been an abridgment of the Fifth Amendment's guarantee of liberty, the Court recognized the danger of punishing a member of a Communist organization 'for his adherence to lawful and constitutionally protected purposes, because of other and unprotected purposes which he does not necessarily share, citing Noto v. United States.  And it noted that Congress had within its power 'less drastic' means of achieving the congressional objective of safeguarding the nation's security.
The Court then considered the government's alternate theory, rejecting it because the law was clear and precise and could not be judicially rewritten to take in only top party members.  The Court concluded that "since freedom of travel is a constitutional liberty closely related to rights of free speech and association, we believe that appellants in this case should not be required to assume the burden of demonstrating that Congress could not have written a statute constitutionally prohibiting their travel."
 Concurrence 
In a concurring opinion, Justice Black expressed his opinion that the whole act, including Section 6, was a bill of attainder.  He held it appropriate "to point out that the Framers thought that the best way to promote the internal security of our people is to protect their First Amendment freedoms of speech, press, religion and assembly, and that we cannot take away the liberty of groups whose views most people detest without jeopardizing the liberty of all others whose views, though popular today, may themselves be detested tomorrow."
Justice Douglas, also concurring, opined that "Freedom of movement is kin to the right of assembly and to the right of association. These rights may not be abridged," citing De Jonge v. Oregon..  "War may be the occasion for serious curtailment of liberty. Absent war, I see no way to keep a citizen from traveling within or without the country, unless there is power to detain him. Ex parte Endo, 323 U.S. 283, 65 S.Ct. 208, 89 L.Ed. 243. And no authority to detain exists except under extreme conditions, e.g., unless he has been convicted of a crime or unless there is probable cause for issuing a warrant of arrest by standards of the Fourth Amendment."  "We cannot exercise and enjoy citizenship in world perspective without the right to travel abroad; and I see no constitutional way to curb it unless, as I said, there is the power to detain."
 Dissent 
Justice Clark wrote the minority opinion which was joined by Justices Harlan and White.  The minority objected to the refusal of the majority to consider the government's alternate theory, citing United States v. Raines, 362 U.S. 17, distinguishing the Court's thinking in First Amendment cases in Thornhill and Button and Fifth Amendment cases in Kent.  The minority would hold that as applied to the prosecution of the Communist Party's top dignitaries, the section was clearly constitutional, noting that Aptheker and Flynn fail the majority's criteria for "indiscriminate" because each clearly knew of their party membership and each was committed to its causes.  Neither desired to travel to some innocent destination.   Consequently, the Court should not reject the law on the hypothetical but should rather hold the law constitutional as applied.
He would also find the section valid on its face, holding that the remedy adopted by the Congress had a rational basis because it was reasonably related to national security and reasonably tailored to accomplish the purpose.  He rejected the "loose generalization" that individual guilt might be conclusively presumed from membership in the Party" because the matter could not be held in isolation but need be considered relative to the subject matter involved and legislative findings.
Justice White, without elaboration, would hold Section 6 constitutional as applied but did not join Justice Clark in his facial analysis.
See also
 Kent v. Dulles
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:Passports
Category:Communist Party USA litigation
"""

From "Arbaugh v. Y & H Corp." ==> """
Arbaugh v. Y & H Corp., 546 U.S. 500 (2006), is a United States Supreme Court decision involving Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which provides a private cause of action to victims of employment discrimination.Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 can be found in the United States Code at  et seq.  The Court ruled that Title VII's "employee-numerosity requirement," which limits potential defendants to those maintaining at least fifteen employees, is not a limit on a court's jurisdiction to hear Title VII claims.  The requirement is instead a substantive element of a Title VII claim, which means that a defendant must raise the issue prior to verdict or the requirement will be waived.
 Background 
Jenifer Arbaugh was employed as a bartender and waitress at the Moonlight Cafe, a New Orleans restaurant, from May 2000 until February 2001.  During this time, she alleged that she was continually sexually harassed by one of the restaurant's owners.
On November 8, 2001, Arbaugh filed suit in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana, asserting claims against Y & H Corporation (the operator of the Moonlight Cafe) and the owner she alleged harassed her.  Her complaint alleged sexual harassment in violation of Title VII, in addition to various tort claims under Louisiana state law.  Arbaugh's complaint asserted that her Title VII claim invoked the court's federal question jurisdiction to hear her case..
 District Court proceedings 
After a two-day jury trial in October 2002, a $40,000 verdict was returned in favor of Arbaugh. Two weeks later, Y&H filed a motion to dismiss for lack of subject matter jurisdiction, asserting for the first time in the litigation that it did not qualify as an "employer" under Title VII because it did not employ fifteen or more employees for 20 or more calendar weeks during the relevant time period.This definition of "employer" is set forth in .  If Arbaugh did not state a valid claim under Title VII, Y&H argued that she accordingly failed to invoke federal question jurisdiction.
Though the district court considered it "unfair and a waste of judicial resources" for the defendant to raise the issue after trial had already been conducted, the court nevertheless ordered both parties to conduct post-trial discovery on the issue, because objections to subject matter jurisdiction could be raised at any stage of litigation.Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(h)(3).  After converting the motion to dismiss to a motion for summary judgment, the district court determined that the employer criteria were not satisfied, because Y&H's delivery drivers, owner-managers, and their shareholder wives were not "employees" for Title VII purposes, and the company could not meet the requirement without their inclusion.  The court vacated its prior judgment in favor of Arbaugh, dismissed her Title VII claim with prejudice, and her state-law claims without prejudice.
 Court of Appeals decision 
Arbaugh appealed the reversal to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, which affirmed the district court's decision.Judge Harold R. DeMoss, Jr. wrote the panel's opinion, which was joined by Judge Edith Brown Clement.  Judge Emilio M. Garza concurred in the judgment only, without filing a separate opinion.  Bound by its prior decisions, the Court of Appeals held that a defendant's failure to qualify as an "employer" under Title VII deprives a district court of subject matter jurisdiction.Arbaugh v. Y & H Corp., 380 F.3d 219, 224 (5th Cir. 2004).  The court ruled that dismissal for want of subject matter jurisdiction was proper because the record warranted the conclusion that Y&H did not employ the requisite 15 employees.Id. at 225-231.
 Opinion of the Court 
Arbaugh petitioned for certiorari to the U.S. Supreme Court, which granted review of the decision to resolve conflicting opinions among the Courts of Appeals on the question whether Title VII's employee-numerosity requirement was jurisdictional or simply an element of a plaintiff's claim for relief.  The U.S. Solicitor General was granted permission to participate in oral argument as amicus curiae, to argue in support of Arbaugh's legal interpretation.Motion granted, 126 S. Ct. 326 (2005).
The Supreme Court unanimouslyThe Supreme Court's decision was 8-0; Justice Samuel Alito was confirmed to the Court after it had already heard oral argument, and so did not participate. reversed the Fifth Circuit's decision in an opinion delivered by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, holding that the threshold number of employees for application of Title VII is an element of a plaintiff's claim for relief, not a jurisdictional issue.
 Ginsburg's majority opinion 
The Court first noted that federal question case law often erroneously conflated subject matter jurisdiction requirements with the required elements of a claim for relief.  Courts often did not specify whether a case was dismissed for lack of subject matter jurisdiction or for failure to state a claim.  The Supreme Court had itself in prior Title VII decisions declined to comment on whether the lower court had properly designated the plaintiff's failure to state a claim under Title VII as a failure to establish subject matter jurisdiction, preferring instead to focus on the lower court's construction of the statute.
The court described the three main consequences that followed from subject matter jurisdiction limitations, and found that these did not apply to the employee-numerosity requirement.  First, because subject matter jurisdiction involves a court's power to hear a case, it can never be forfeited or waived.  All courts have an independent obligation to determine whether subject-matter jurisdiction exists, even in the absence of a challenge from any party.  The Court believed that nothing in the text of Title VII indicated that Congress intended courts, on their own motion, to assure that the employee-numerosity requirement was met.
Second, if subject-matter jurisdiction turns on contested facts, the trial judge may be authorized to review the evidence and resolve the dispute on her own.  By contrast, if satisfaction of an essential element of a claim for relief is at issue, the jury is the proper trier of fact.
Third, when a federal court concludes that it lacks subject-matter jurisdiction, the court must dismiss the complaint in its entirety, which is why the trial court dismissed Arbaugh's state-law claims even though they had already been tried and determined by a jury.  In contrast, when a court grants a motion to dismiss for failure to state a federal claim, the court generally retains discretion to exercise supplemental jurisdiction to hear the state-law claims.Supplemental jurisdiction is granted to federal courts by .
The Court noted that Congress could make the employee-numerosity requirement "jurisdictional" if it wanted to, similar to how it made the "amount-in-controversy" threshold an ingredient of subject matter jurisdiction in delineating diversity jurisdiction.. However, the 15-employee threshold appears in a separate provision from Title VII's jurisdictional provision, (authorizing jurisdiction over actions "brought under" Title VII). and does not speak in jurisdictional terms or refer in any way to the jurisdiction of the district courts.  Given the "unfairness" and "waste of judicial resources,"  entailed in tying the employee-numerosity requirement to subject-matter jurisdiction, the Court considered it "the sounder course" to refrain from construing the requirement as jurisdictional.  The Court concluded by stating that "when Congress does not rank a statutory limitation on coverage as jurisdictional, courts should treat the restriction as nonjurisdictional in character."
 Footnotes 
External links
 Brief for the United States as amicus curiae supporting petitioner Arbaugh
 Transcript of the Supreme Court arguments
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:Harassment case law
"""

From "Argersinger v. Hamlin" ==> """
Argersinger v. Hamlin, 407 U.S. 25 (1972), is a United States Supreme Court decision holding that the accused cannot be subjected to actual imprisonment unless provided with counsel. Gideon v. Wainwright made the right to counsel provided in the Sixth Amendment applicable to the states through the Fourteenth Amendment.
Background
Jon Richard Argersinger was sentenced under Florida law to 90 days in jail for carrying a concealed weapon but was never represented by counsel. Hamlin was the local sheriff. Argersinger claimed his conviction was unconstitutional, but his case was dismissed by the Florida Supreme Court, who relied on Duncan v. Louisiana, which held that jury trials were not required for crimes with a sentence of less than six months. The Florida court claimed that since jury trials were not required for misdemeanors, then neither was counsel.
Supreme Court decision
The Supreme Court disagreed with the Florida courts and overturned the conviction. The Court held that a criminal defendant may not be actually imprisoned unless provided with counsel.
References
Steamer, Robert J. "Argersinger v. Hamlin", Academic American Encyclopedia, 1991 edition, vol. 2, p. 152
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Sixth Amendment appointment of counsel case law
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Arizona Christian School Tuition Organization v. Winn" ==> """
Arizona Christian School Tuition Organization v. Winn, 563 U.S. 125 (2011), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States involving taxpayer standing under Article Three of the United States Constitution..
A group of Arizona taxpayers challenged a state law providing tax credits to people who donate to school tuition organizations providing scholarships to students attending private or religious schools. The taxpayers claimed a violation of the Establishment Clause. The District Court dismissed the case, holding that the taxpayers did not state a valid claim. The decision was reversed by the Ninth Circuit, which ruled that the respondents had standing to sue, citing Flast v. Cohen.
The Supreme Court ruled 5–4, in an opinion delivered by Justice Anthony Kennedy, that the plaintiffs did not have standing to bring suit.Fairleigh Dickinson University PublicMind poll, ["Public Blesses Arizona Christian Tuition" http://publicmind.fdu.edu/2011/taxcredits/] press release (April 4, 2011) The Court stated that it had "rejected the general proposition that an individual who has paid taxes has a 'continuing, legally cognizable interest in ensuring that those funds are not used by the Government in a way that violates the Constitution.'" Ultimately, the Supreme Court found that any damages or harm claimed by the taxpayers by virtue of simply being a taxpayer would be pure speculation because the issue at hand was a tax credit and not a government expenditure. Justice Scalia filed a concurring opinion, joined by Justice Thomas.
In her dissent, Justice Kagan said "cash grants and targeted tax breaks are means of accomplishing the same government objective—to provide financial support to select individuals or organizations." She further argued: "taxpayers should be able to challenge the subsidy." The dissent was joined by Justices Ginsburg, Breyer, and Sotomayor. Bruce Peabody, a political science professor at Fairleigh Dickinson University, remarked "the case brought out four dissents, a signal that those justices were prepared to decide the substantive issue." Equally, Peter Woolley, professor of political science and director of the PublicMind Poll, posited "in making this ruling on such narrow grounds, the court virtually guarantees that plaintiff in one guise or another will be back another day."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 563
References
Further reading
External links
 U.S. Supreme Court's coverage
 Oral argument transcripts and audio
 SCOTUSBlog coverage
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Education in Arizona
Category:Alliance Defending Freedom litigation
"""

From "Arizona Free Enterprise Club's Freedom Club PAC v. Bennett" ==> """
Arizona Free Enterprise Club's Freedom Club PAC v. Bennett, 564 U.S. 721 (2011), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States.
In 1998, Arizona voters approved the ballot measure known as the Clean Elections Act.  When it was passed, the Clean Elections law established public financing for elections of statewide office campaigns.  Candidates who choose to participate in the system must collect a specific number of $5 donations.  This makes them eligible to receive government funds to run their campaigns.  Under the law as passed, if a participating candidate is outspent by a non-participating opponent, the participating candidate receives added government funds matching the money raised privately by the non-participating candidate, up to three times the original government subsidy.Beard Rau, Alia.“Clean Elections arguments to be heard in court”, The Arizona Republic, April 11, 2010.  The most prominent candidates filing under the Clean Elections system were Janet Napolitano, who was elected Governor in 2002, and Jan Brewer, who was elected Governor in 2010.
Lawsuit
The plaintiffs filed a legal challenge against the Arizona Clean Elections Commission on August 21, 2008 in the United States District Court for the District of Arizona.  Just months earlier, the Supreme Court had heard Davis v. Federal Election Commission (2008). Under federal law, if candidates raised $350,000 of their own money, their opponent would be awarded special public fundraising advantages, a provision known as the “Millionaire’s Amendment.”  However, the Supreme Court struck this provision down, holding that the “goal of ‘leveling’ electoral opportunities does not justify a campaign finance system in which “the vigorous exercise of the right to use personal funds to finance campaign speech produces fundraising advantages for opponents in the competitive context of electoral politics.”“McComish v. Bennett (Clean Elections)”, The Goldwater Institute.  According to the Plaintiffs, the Clean Elections system produced a chilling effect on speech because it “seeks to equalize funding.”Fischer, Howard.“Suit seeks to derail Ariz.’s Clean Elections Law”, The East Valley Tribune, August 23, 2008.  But advocates of the Clean Elections law argue that the system deters corruption because candidates do not have to cater to special interest groups.
On January 20, 2010, Federal Judge Roslyn Silver struck down the matching funds provision of the Arizona Clean Elections law as unconstitutional.  Judge Silver agreed with the Plaintiffs that the matching funds provision could not stand under Davis, although she referred to the result as "illogical" and referred to the holding in Davis as "an ipse dixit unsupported by the slightest veneer of reasoning to hide the obvious judicial fiat by which it is reached."Beard Rau, Alia and Mary Jo Pitzl.“Federal judge strikes down Ariz. Matching funds”, The Arizona Republic, January 21, 2010.  Silver suspended her order while the Arizona Clean Elections Commission appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.  The case was heard by the Ninth Circuit Court on April 12, 2010.  The Ninth Circuit reversed, holding that the matching funds provision of Arizona's law was analytically distinct from the millionaire's amendment."Election Subsidy Challenged". Scotus Blog, May 25, 2010.
The Supreme Court agreed to hear an appeal of McComish. (This case was consolidated with Arizona Free Enterprise Club Freedom Club PAC v. Bennett prior to consideration by the Supreme Court.)  Oral arguments were heard March 28, 2011. On June 27, 2011, the Supreme Court reversed the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals' ruling and declared matching funds schemes designed to "level the playing field" unconstitutional in a 5–4 decision.
Case timeline
August 21, 2008: Case filed in U.S. District Court.
July 17, 2009: Deadline for opposition brief.
July 31, 2009: Deadline for reply brief.
August 7, 2009: Hearing deadline.
January 5, 2010: Plaintiffs file preliminary injunction asking Judge Roslyn O. Silver to stop the issuance of matching funds for the 2010 election.
January 15, 2010: Hearing on motions for summary judgment
January 20, 2010: Judge Silver strikes down Clean Elections as unconstitutional, but puts a stay on her order that allows for the state to appeal.
January 27, 2010: Plaintiffs ask 9th Circuit Court of Appeals to remove the stay and strike down the Matching Funds provision of Clean Elections immediately. It is refused.
February 3, 2010: Plaintiffs file emergency appeal to repeal the stay on Judge Silver's order with Supreme Court Justice Anthony Kennedy. The appeal is refused and gives the 9th Circuit until June 1 to rule on the appeal by the state.
May 21, 2010: 9th Circuit rules in favor of the state in appeal, saying that Clean Elections' Matching Funds is constitutional.McComish v. Bennett, 
May 24, 2010: Plaintiffs file emergency motion to vacate the stay with the Supreme Court of the United States.
June 1, 2010: The Court refuses the stay request on the grounds that Goldwater must state, and had not stated, an intent to appeal the Ninth Circuit decision."Order in Pending Case" Unsigned, U.S. Supreme Court, June 1, 2010, as posted at www.scotusblog.com Goldwater files a third application to lift stay adding its intent to appeal the 9th Circuit's decision.
June 8, 2010: The Supreme Court blocks the distribution of Clean Elections for 2010, removing the district court's stay."McComish v. Bennett. United States Supreme Court. 8 June 2010. Print."
August 17, 2010: Plaintiffs lawyers make formal appeal to the Supreme Court.
November 29, 2010: Supreme Court agrees to consider formal appeal."Order List. United States Supreme Court. 29 November 2010. Print"
March 28, 2011: Supreme Court is scheduled to hear oral arguments."Brief for Petitioners. United States Supreme Court. 12 January 2011. Print"
June 27, 2011: Supreme Court reverses Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals' ruling and declares matching funds unconstitutional..
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Legal history of Arizona
Category:Political history of Arizona
Category:United States elections case law
"""

From "Arizona Public Service Co. v. Snead" ==> """
Arizona Public Service Co. v. Snead, 441 U.S. 141 (1979), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a New Mexico tax on the generation of electricity was invalid under the Supremacy Clause of the United States Constitution.  Snead was the director of the New Mexico Taxation and Revenue Department.
 Background 
Most of the electricity generated at the Four Corners Generating Station located in northwest New Mexico is transmitted for export and sold in neighboring states..  In 1975 New Mexico enacted the Electrical Energy Tax Act, which imposed a tax on the amount of electricity generated by power plants. The tax amounted to about 2 percent of the retail value of electricity. The Act further allowed electric companies in New Mexico to credit the amount of this tax against their existing tax liability from an existing 4 percent gross receipts tax on retail sales of electricity, essentially eliminating the effect of the tax upon New Mexico's in-state users of electricity. Electricity generated from in-state power plants but exported for sale to out-of-state customers did not have any gross receipts tax liability to credit the energy tax against.
The five out-of-state electric companies with an ownership interest in the Four Corners Generating Station, Arizona Public Service Company, Southern California Edison, Public Service Company of New Mexico, Salt River Project, Tucson Electric Power, and El Paso Electric, filed an action in the district court of Santa Fe County seeking a declaratory judgment that the New Mexico energy tax was unconstitutional and void. In addition to the ownership interest in the Four Corners Generating Station, Tucson Electric Power also had a part ownership interest in the San Juan Generating Station and El Paso Electric owned and operated the Rio Grande Generating Station, both of which were also located in New Mexico.
While the state district court case was pending, Arizona filed a motion with the U.S. Supreme Court regarding the New Mexico energy tax. The motion requested authorization to file an action against New Mexico under the Court's original jurisdiction. In Arizona v. New Mexico,. the Court denied the motion, noting that the pending state court case was the appropriate forum for litigation of the same issues involving the New Mexico energy tax.
After opposing motions for summary judgment were filed in the district court, the court ruled for New Mexico. The electric companies appealed the case to the New Mexico Supreme Court. While the appeal was pending before the court, the United States Congress enacted the Tax Reform Act of 1976 and included a provision regarding the New Mexico energy tax. The provision, codified at 15 U.S.C. § 391, stated:
The New Mexico Supreme Court issued a ruling in 1978 and found that the state energy tax was valid. The court concluded, if the total tax burden on the electric companies was considered, that since the tax on electricity generated was applicable to both electricity sold in-state and out-of-state, and that the credit against the state gross receipts tax was available to both in-state and out-of-state electric companies, it did not result in a discriminatory tax burden.Arizona Public Service Co. v. O'Chesky, 91 N.M. 485, 576 P.2d 291 (1978). The electric companies then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, claiming that the tax violated the Commerce and Export-Import Clauses of the Constitution and was invalid under 15 U.S.C. § 391.
 Opinion of the Court 
thumb|250px|right|New Mexico attempted to tax the electricity generated and exported out-of-state from the Four Corners Generating Station, shown in a 1972 photograph.
The Supreme Court reversed the New Mexico Supreme Court, holding that the New Mexico energy tax was invalid under the Supremacy Clause since it violated 15 U.S.C. § 391. The Court noted that the statute was directed specifically at a state tax on generation or transmission of electricity and not on the overall tax burden of electric companies. As the New Mexico Electrical Energy Tax on generation ensured locally consumed electricity had no tax burden, it violated that statute. The Court stated that Congress, in enacting the ban on these types of state taxes and against the New Mexico tax in particular, had broad authority under the Commerce Clause to regulate interstate commerce, as the Court had held in cases such as Katzenbach v. McClung,. Heart of Atlanta Motel Inc. v. United States,. and Wickard v. Filburn..
In a concurring opinion, Justice Rehnquist with whom Justice White joins, noted that when 15 U.S.C. § 391 had been discussed by the Senate, it had been stated that the statute had supposedly been drafted to do no more than what the Commerce Clause would accomplish on its own terms. However, the statute did more than that, and forbids the New Mexico energy tax.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1979 in United States case law
Category:United States energy case law
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:Legal history of New Mexico
Category:History of San Juan County, New Mexico
Category:Energy in New Mexico
Category:Coal in the United States
Category:Arizona Public Service
"""

From "Arizona State Legislature v. Arizona Independent Redistricting Commission" ==> """
Arizona State Legislature v. Arizona Independent Redistricting Commission, 576 U.S. 787 (2015), was a United States Supreme Court case where the Court upheld the right of Arizona voters to remove the authority to draw election districts from the Arizona State Legislature and vest it in an independent redistricting commission. In doing so, the Court expressly rejected a nascent version of the independent state legislature theory.
 Background 
The Arizona Constitution (Art. IV, pt. 1, §1) lets voters adopt laws and constitutional amendments by ballot initiative. Arizona voters adopted Proposition 106 in 2000 to address the problem of gerrymandering by creating the Arizona Independent Redistricting Commission (AIRC). The Arizona Legislature sued in 2012, arguing that the creation of the AIRC violated the Elections Clause of the U. S. Constitution, which says “The Times, Places and Manner of holding Elections for Senators and Representatives shall be prescribed in each State by the Legislature thereof; but the Congress may at any time by Law make or alter such Regulations.”
The United States District Court for the District of Arizona, dividing two to one, rejected the Legislature's complaint, finding that prior Supreme Court decisions  “demonstrate that the word ‘Legislature’ in the Elections Clause refers to the legislative process used in [a] state, determined by that state's own constitution and laws,” and that the lawmaking power in Arizona “plainly includes the power to enact laws through initiative”.
 Opinion 
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg delivered the opinion of the Court, in which Justices Anthony Kennedy, Stephen Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor, and Elena Kagan joined. The Court affirmed the District Court's ruling, holding that "[r]edistricting is a legislative function to be performed in accordance with the State’s prescriptions for lawmaking, which may include the referendum, Ohio ex rel. Davis v. Hildebrant, 241 U.S. 565, 567, and the Governor’s veto, Smiley v. Holm, 285 U. S. 355, 369. While exercise of the initiative was not at issue in this Court’s prior decisions, there is no constitutional barrier to a State’s empowerment of its people by embracing that form of lawmaking."
The court also noted that in 1911, Congress amended section 2a(c) of Title Two of the United States Code, which provided for federal redistricting if states fail to act.  Recognizing "that States had supplemented the representative legislature mode of lawmaking with a direct lawmaking role for the people," Congress "replaced the reference to redistricting by the state 'legislature' with a reference to redistricting of a State 'in the manner provided by the laws thereof.'".
In support of its holding, the court cited passages from the Arizona Constitution which read "[a]ny law which may be enacted by the Legislature under this Constitution may be enacted by the people under the Initiative"(A.Z. Const. Art. XXII, §14). The majority also reviewed several dictionaries from the approximate time of the framing of the US Constitution.  Instead of a narrow definition of "legislature" meaning a state's senators and representatives these dictionaries defined "legislature" broadly, as "the power that  makes laws".
Dissents
Chief Justice John Roberts filed a dissenting opinion, joined by Justices Antonin Scalia, Clarence Thomas, and Samuel Alito. Scalia and Thomas each wrote additional dissents which the other joined. Roberts concluded that the term “the Legislature” in the Elections Clause unambiguously refers to a representative body as "confirmed by other provisions of the Constitution that use the same term in the same way. When seeking to discern the meaning of a word in the Constitution, there is no better dictionary than the rest of the Constitution itself."
Justice Scalia explained at length why he would not have granted standing in this case, then added "[n]ormally, having arrived at that conclusion, I would express no opinion on the merits unless my vote was necessary to enable the Court to produce a judgment. In the present case, however, the majority’s resolution of the merits question ('legislature' means 'the people') is so outrageously wrong, so utterly devoid of textual or historic support, so flatly in contradiction of prior Supreme Court cases, so obviously the willful product of hostility to districting by state legislatures, that I cannot avoid adding my vote to the devastating dissent of the Chief Justice."
Justice Thomas contrasted the court's support for direct democracy in this case with the overturning of many state voter referendums opposing same sex marriage in Obergefell v. Hodges,. decided days earlier.
 Impact 
The case has formed the basis of action by the Supreme Court in at least one other case, Hickenlooper v. Kerr.John Hickenlooper, Governor of Colorado v. Andy Kerr, et al., no. 14-460, October 22, 2014 ([ docket]).
Hickenlooper was a petition for certiorari brought by John Hickenlooper in his capacity as governor of Colorado, as part of a long-running litigation over the Taxpayer Bill of Rights. On June 30, 2015, the Court issued a grant, vacate, remand order in the case, in which it granted the petition, vacated the decision below by the Tenth Circuit, and remanded it to the lower court for reconsideration in light of Arizona State Legislature v. Arizona Independent Redistricting Commission.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 576
 Moore v. Harper
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Arizona ballot measures
Category:Legal history of Arizona
Category:Redistricting commissions
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:2015 in Arizona
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
"""

From "Arizona v. California" ==> """
Arizona v. California is a set of United States Supreme Court cases, all dealing with disputes over water distribution from the Colorado River between the states of Arizona and California. It also covers the amount of water that the State of Nevada receives from the river as well.
When a dispute arises between two states, the case is filed for original jurisdiction with the United States Supreme Court. This is one of the very limited circumstances where the Court has original jurisdiction; that is, as a trial court and no lower may hear the case. In all other cases, the Court acts as the highest level appellate court in the United States.
The cases involved were all named Arizona v. California, and were decided in 1931, 1934, 1936, 1963, 1964, 1966, 1979, 1983, 1984, and 2000.
The original decision, , specified the amount of water to which Arizona was entitled under the Colorado River Compact of 1922.
Since then, the case has been relitigated several times because of Arizona's claims of California using more water than it is entitled.
The court determined that the Secretary of the Interior was not bound by Prior-appropriation water rights in allocating water among the states.
 : Arizona argued that the Colorado River Compact was unconstitutional.
 : Arizona requested that the Supreme Court:
specify an amount of Colorado River water for Arizona's use
limit the amount allotted to California
 : The court specified the amount of water to which each state in the Colorado River Compact was entitled.
 : The court adjusted the amounts of water specified in 373 US 546.
 : The court adjusted its previous decree.
 : The court adjusted the specified amounts of water for all parties to the case.
 : The court issued a decree regarding unadjudicated rights of Indian tribes to Colorado River water.
 : The court adjusted its previous decree.
 : The court adjusted the specified amounts of water for several parties to the case.
 : The court approved a consolidated decree.
In summary, as long as at least  of water is available from the Colorado River, California is allocated ; Nevada, ; and Arizona, the remainder.  If more water is available, California is entitled to 50% of the water from the Colorado River, Arizona to 46%, and Nevada to 4%.  If less water is available, the Secretary of the Interior must allocate the water according to various formulas (which were the subjects of the court cases) to ensure that each state receives a specified amount, with California receiving an absolute fixed maximum of  per year (376 U.S. 342)."(3) If insufficient mainstream water is available for release, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, to satisfy annual consumptive use of 7,500,000 acre-feet in the aforesaid three States, then the Secretary of the Interior... may apportion the amount remaining available... but in no event shall more than 4,400,000 acre-feet be apportioned for use in California..." 376 U.S. 440, 442 Some of the adjustments involved rights of the U.S. Government with respect to supplying water to Indian tribes pursuant to Executive Orders signed by the President of the United States as far back as 1907.
The 1962 oral arguments set a modern record for the Supreme Court: 16 hours over four days. 
See also
 Wyoming v. Colorado (1922)
 Florida v. Georgia (2018)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases: volume 283, volume 292, volume 298, volume 373, volume 376, volume 383, volume 439, volume 460, volume 466, volume 531
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 References 
 External links 
 Lawrence Pratt Collection Concerning Arizona v. California and the Colorado River. Yale Collection of Western Americana, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library.
Category:1931 in United States case law
Category:1934 in United States case law
Category:1936 in United States case law
Category:1963 in United States case law
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:1968 in United States case law
Category:1979 in United States case law
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:Colorado River
Category:Environment of Arizona
Category:Environment of California
Category:Flagged U.S. Supreme Court articles
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court original jurisdiction cases
Category:United States water case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Arizona v. City and County of San Francisco" ==> """
Arizona v. City and County of San Francisco, 596 U.S. ___ (2022), was a United States Supreme Court case related to the ability of states to defend federal regulations in court.
 Background 
The Trump administration issued the public charge rule in 2019. The rule was intended to prevent recent non-citizen immigrants to the United States from becoming eligible for public assistance. Before the regulation took effect, various courts enjoined its enforcement. Lawsuits were filed in California, Illinois, New York, Maryland, and other states. The Supreme Court stayed nationwide injunctions issued by district courts in New York and Illinois in January and February 2020. In December 2020, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit held by a 2–1 vote that the public charge rule was unlawful. Certiorari was granted in a case reviewing the similar judgment of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in February 2021. That case, Department of Homeland Security v. New York, was dismissed by an agreement between the Biden administration and the plaintiffs in March 2021. A coalition of states led by Arizona attempted to intervene in defense of the rule in multiple courts across the country and were unsuccessful each time. That coalition then appealed the Ninth Circuit case to the Supreme Court.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case on October 29, 2021. The court heard oral arguments on February 23, 2022. Arizona Attorney General Mark Brnovich argued for the petitioners. On June 15, 2022, the Supreme Court dismissed the petition as improvidently granted. Chief Justice John Roberts concurred.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court leaks
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court per curiam opinions
Category:United States civil procedure case law
"""

From "Arizona v. Evans" ==> """
Arizona v. Evans, 514 U.S. 1 (1995), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court instituted an exclusionary rule exception allowing evidence obtained through a warrantless search to be valid when a police record erroneously indicates the existence of an outstanding warrant due to negligent conduct of a Clerk of Court.
Background
On December 13, 1990, a Justice of the Peace issued a warrant for the arrest of Isaac Evans (respondent), because respondent failed to appear  to answer for several traffic violations. Six days later, respondent appeared by his own volition, and the Justice of the Peace marked respondent's file for the warrant to be "quashed". Under standard court procedure, a justice court clerk informs the Sheriff's Office of a quashed warrant, however this did not take place. Thus the warrant remained on file at the Sheriff's Office even though it was no longer valid.
On January 5, 1991, respondent is observed by Phoenix police officer Bryan Sargent driving the wrong way down a one-way street near the police station. When respondent was asked for his driver's license, respondent informed Sargent that it had been suspended. This prompted Sargent to check the data terminal in his patrol car for respondent's records. The record confirmed the respondent's license was suspended, and also showed the erroneous outstanding warrant for his arrest. Based on this warrant, Sargent proceeds to arrest respondent, and in the process of arrest, respondent drops a "hand-rolled cigarette that the officers determined smelled of marijuana." Sargent then searched respondent's car and discovered a bag of marijuana, and was charged with possession. When the Phoenix Police Department notified the Justice court of the arrest, they discovered the warrant had been quashed, and informed the police.
Respondent argued that his arrest was unlawful since the warrant for his arrest had been quashed 17 days prior, and the discovery of the marijuana would not have happened without said arrest. Therefore, he filed a motion to suppress due to a violation of his Fourth Amendment rights, to which the exclusionary rule is a remedy. Furthermore, he argued that "the purposes of the exclusionary rule would be served here by making the clerks for the court ... more careful about making sure that warrants are removed from the records." The trial court agreed, granting respondent's motion on the grounds that it could find no "distinction between State action, whether it happens to be the police department or not."
Upon appeal, the Arizona Court of Appeals reversed the decision on a divided vote because it "believed that the exclusionary rule [was] not intended to deter justice court employees or Sheriff's Office employees who are not directly associated with the arresting officers or the arresting officers' police department."
The Arizona Supreme Court rejected this distinction, reasoning that the exclusionary rule would force criminal records to be kept more efficiently by those who maintain them, whether police or court staff.
Majority Opinion
The Fourth Amendment guards against unreasonable searches and seizures. The exclusionary rule is not derived from the Fourth Amendment, rather it is the judicial remedy for a violation of the Fourth Amendment. Although the exclusionary rule was originally implemented as a guard for privacy rights, after United States v. Leon, it has been interpreted by the Supreme Court as a tool for deterring police misconduct.
In United States v. Leon, , the Court had ruled that the exclusionary rule did not require the suppression of evidence seized pursuant to a search warrant that was later determined to be invalid.  In Leon, the police's reliance on the validity of the search warrant was objectively reasonable; thus, excluding the evidence seized in that case would not have deterred any future misconduct on the part of the police.  The exclusionary rule does not serve to deter illegal conduct on the part of judges, after all.  For a similar reason, the Court in Evans ruled that the exclusionary rule should not require suppression of the evidence seized in this case.
Because court employees were responsible for the error, applying the exclusionary rule in this case would not deter future errors.  First, the exclusionary rule was historically aimed at preventing police misconduct, not court clerical errors.  Second, there is no evidence that court employees were motivated to "subvert the Fourth Amendment or that lawlessness among these actors requires application of the extreme sanction of exclusion."  There had been testimony at a suppression hearing that the clerical error at issue in this case occurred once every three or four years—although, as Justice Ginsburg pointed out, that same witness had also admitted that the same error occurred three other times the same day.  Finally, because court clerks are not actively involved in law enforcement, applying the exclusionary rule in this case would have little impact on the clerks responsible for entering data regarding outstanding warrants.  Ultimately, there was no evidence that the officer acted unreasonably on the basis of the information he had at hand.
Dissenting Opinions
Justice Stevens took issue with the notion that the exclusionary rule served to deter only police misconduct.  Because the Fourth Amendment constrains the power of the sovereign, the exclusionary rule — the remedy for violating the Fourth Amendment — should "impose[] costs on that sovereign, motivating it to train all of its personnel to avoid future violations."  Nor did Justice Stevens think that the exclusionary rule was an extreme sanction, for there is nothing extreme about allowing the sovereign to profit from its "negligent misconduct."
Stevens also distinguished this case from Leon.  In Leon, there had been a presumably valid warrant issued at the time of the search; in this case there was none.  Furthermore, there was some police conduct involved in maintaining the database on which the officer relied to determine whether there was, in fact, a warrant out for Evans's arrest.  To say that the exclusionary rule did not apply in this situation was, therefore, not entirely accurate for Justice Stevens.  Moreover, Stevens observed that there was no civil remedy under section 1983 for Fourth Amendment violations that result from erroneous information in police databases, either against the individual officer or against the city that employs him.  "The offense to the dignity of the citizen who is arrested, handcuffed, and searched on a public street simply because some bureaucrat has failed to maintain an accurate computer data base strikes me as... outrageous."  The fact that the police happened to find Evans's marijuana as a result of inaccurate information in the database had to be weighed against the interest of law-abiding citizens.
Justice Ginsburg argued that the case was not properly before the Court because it rested on an independent and adequate ground in Arizona law — its statute dealing with good-faith reliance on the validity of warrants.  The Supreme Court's interference would therefore impede on Arizona's ability to act as a laboratory for legal innovations.  The majority observed that part of the Arizona Supreme Court's decision did in fact rest on the exclusionary rule, so that the Court had jurisdiction to review the case.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 514
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
United States v. Leon
External links
Category:1995 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1995 in Arizona
Category:Legal history of Arizona
Category:Phoenix Police Department
"""

From "Arizona v. Fulminante" ==> """
Arizona v. Fulminante, 499 U.S. 279 (1991), was a United States Supreme Court case clarifying the standard of review of a criminal defendant's allegedly coerced confession. The ruling was divided into parts, with various justices voting in different ways on different points of law, but ultimately 1) the defendant's confession was ruled involuntary, 2) the harmless error rule had to be applied, and 3) in this case, use of the confession as evidence was not harmless.
Background
 Factual background 
In 1982, Jeneane Michelle Hunt, the 11-year-old stepdaughter of Oreste Fulminante, was murdered in Mesa, Arizona.State v. Fulminante, 161 Ariz. 237 (1988) Fulminante reported her missing on September 14, and her body was found September 16 with two bullet wounds to the head; the body had decomposed so much that forensic testing couldn't determine whether a sexual assault had happened. Fulminante became a suspect because of inconsistencies in his statements to police, but was not yet charged before he left the state for New Jersey.
In October, police uncovered that he had a felony criminal record, and had traded a rifle for a spare revolver barrel on September 13. After this information was shared with the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, Fulminante was arrested in Newark for illegally possessing a weapon. He would be convicted, serve time in a federal prison in Missouri, be released, then be arrested and convicted on another firearm-possession charge, and then sent to serve his term in Ray Brook Federal Correctional Institution in New York.
While in Ray Brook prison (now in 1983), Fulminante met Anthony Sarivola, a fellow inmate, who was also a confidential informant for the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Rumors had spread that Fulminante had killed a child; Sarivola told Fulminante he had connections to organized crime, and offered Fulminante protection from "rough treatment" in prison in exchange for a confession to the murder of Fulminante's stepdaughter. Fulminante agreed, confessing to Sarivola that he murdered his stepdaughter; he admitted to driving her out to the desert on his motorcycle, sexually assaulting her, choking her, making her plead for her life, and shooting her with his .357 revolver. He also said he'd hidden the weapon at the crime scene. After his release in May 1984, he made a comment in front of Sarivola's wife that "he could not return to his home because he had killed a little girl in Arizona."
 Trial 
After his confessions, Fulminante was charged with the murder, and his confession to Sarivola was used against him at trial. Fulminante was indicted in September 1984, and would be convicted in December 1985. Fulminante made a motion to suppress the confession on the basis that it was coerced—Fulminante had felt he'd have been subject to violence from other inmates had he not confessed—but the trial court denied the motion. Fulminante was sentenced to death.
 Appeal 
Fulminante appealed to the Arizona Supreme Court. Although it denied most of his grounds for reversal, the Court agreed that the first confession was coerced. However, it noted that the second confession, made casually to Sarivola as he was being released, lacked the coercion of the first, and was separate enough not to be implicated by the "fruit of the poisonous tree" doctrine. In its initial ruling, the Court applied the harmless error rule from Chapman v. California, and held that even if the first confession was a problem (and it certainly was), Fulminante would easily have been convicted based on the second confession alone, and thus the use of the first was harmless error.
In a motion for reconsideration, however, Fulminante successfully argued that the harmless error rule should not apply to involuntary confessions. The Court noted in a supplemental opinion that the case law it had relied on was all focused on Miranda warnings, not confessions, and there was other case law that said involuntary confessions could never be harmless. The Court therefore ordered a new trial. The state of Arizona appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
Opinion of the Court
The U.S. Supreme Court affirmed in an oddly-divided 5-4 vote. Justices White, Rehnquist, and Kennedy each wrote opinions. White's opinion was written in 4 parts, with six justices agreeing on Part I (White, Marshall, Blackmun, Stevens, Scalia, and Kennedy), five on Part II (of the six, Kennedy disagreed with this part), and five on Part IV (Scalia disagreed), but only four on Part III (neither Scalia nor Kennedy agreed). Rehnquist's opinion was written in 3 parts, with five justices agreeing on Part II (Rehnquist, O'Connor, Scalia, Kennedy, and Souter), but only three on Part I (Rehnquist, Kennedy, and Souter), and a different three on Part III (Rehnquist, O'Connor, and Scalia). Kennedy's separate opinion is simply a concurrence, and was joined by no one else.
Ultimately, the opinion of the court is constituted by those parts that garnered a majority: Parts I, II, and IV of White's opinion, and Part II of Rehnquist's opinion. Part III of White's opinion counts as a concurrence, because it reaches the same result as the majority, but on different grounds. The result the Court reached was that 1) the confession was ruled involuntary, 2) the harmless error rule had to be applied to the use of involuntary confessions as evidence, and 3) the use of the confession in this case was not harmless.Arizona v. Fulminante, 499 US 279 (1991)
 White's opinion 
 Parts I, II, and IV (joined by a majority) 
Justice White argued that Fulminante was entitled to a new trial, and this was the result that gained five votes. Part I of his opinion recited the factual and procedural background of the case, and stated simply that "[a]lthough a majority of this Court finds that such a confession is subject to a harmless-error analysis, for the reasons set forth below, we affirm the judgment of the Arizona court."
Part II upheld the Arizona Supreme Court's finding that the confession was coerced. It was agreed by all parties that the proper way to review the voluntariness of a confession was a "totality of the circumstances" test (following Schneckloth v. Bustamonte), but the state argued that the Arizona Supreme Court had actually applied a "but-for" test, i.e. that Fulminante would not have confessed except for Sarivola's promise of protection. However, White said that the Arizona court's opinion had properly reviewed an array of relevant factors, and although it was "close," he agreed that Fulminante faced "a credible threat of physical violence."
Although White argued (in Part III) that the harmless error rule did not apply in this case, he wrote in Part IV that, if it were applied, the proper conclusion was that the state of Arizona had failed to prove harmless error. Part IV highlighted three relevant factors. First, the prosecution had emphasized in its opening argument that the confession was the most important evidence. Second, the credibility of Sarivola's wife Donna (who testified about the second confession) was severely undermined without the context and corroboration of the first confession. Third, a variety of other evidence against Fulminante would not have been relevant without the first confession, and therefore could not have been used in court. Since the state had not shown that the first confession did not contribute to the conviction, the error was not harmless, and a new trial was necessary.
 Part III (concurring in the result) 
In Part III, White, joined by Marshall, Blackmun, and Stevens, argued that use of an involuntary confession as evidence can never be harmless error:
 Rehnquist's opinion 
 Part II (joined by a majority) 
In Part II of his opinion, joined by O'Connor, Scalia, Kennedy, and Souter, Chief Justice Rehnquist argued that the harmless error rule should apply to the use of involuntary confessions as evidence. Since the Chapman v. California decision had been issued, which officially declared the federal harmless error rule, a wide variety of errors and constitutional violations had been made subject to it; Rehnquist broadly categorized these all as "trial errors." While it was true that the Chapman decision acknowledged that some violations of the constitution could never be harmless, Rehnquist argued that it did not make sense to lump involuntary confessions in with the others:
 Parts I and III (dissent) 
In Part I of his opinion, Rehnquist (joined by Kennedy and Souter) argued that the first confession was voluntary, and thus there was no problem with its use as evidence. Rehnquist argued that the situation was clearly different from custodial interrogations, where a suspect might fear abuse by police. He also did not see anything in the record that actually stated that Fulminante feared violence at the hands of other inmates, especially since "Fulminante was an experienced habitue of prisons and presumably able to fend for himself."
In Part III, (joined by O'Connor and Scalia), Rehnquist stated that if the first confession were ruled involuntary, he would agree with the initial opinion of the Arizona Supreme Court, namely that the second confession rendered the use of the first harmless error.
 Kennedy's concurrence 
Kennedy agreed with Rehnquist that the confession was voluntary. However, he acknowledged that a majority of justices thought it was involuntary, so he thought it appropriate to give his opinion on whether it was harmless error (assuming it was involuntary), and he felt that it could not be harmless. He thus voted in favor of granting a new trial:
In popular culture
Interpretation of the Fulminante decision is a major plot element in the Law & Order episode "Confession".TV.com Summary of Law & Order "Confession"
See also
 Chapman v. California, 
 Premo v. Moore, (2011)
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1991 in United States case law
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:1991 in Arizona
Category:Legal history of Arizona
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Arizona v. Hicks" ==> """
Arizona v. Hicks, 480 U.S. 321 (1987), held that the Fourth Amendment requires the police to have probable cause to seize items in plain view.
Facts
On April 18, 1984, a bullet was fired through the floor of James Thomas Hicks' apartment, striking and injuring a man in the apartment below. The police arrived and entered Hicks' apartment to search for the shooter, for other victims, and for weapons. While in Hicks's apartment, one of the officers noticed two sets of expensive-looking stereo equipment, "which seemed out of place in the squalid and otherwise ill-appointed four-room apartment." The officer moved the equipment to record the serial numbers, suspecting that the equipment was stolen, and then reported the serial numbers to police headquarters. The officer was informed that the equipment had been taken in an armed robbery, for which Hicks was later indicted.
The state trial court granted Hicks' motion to suppress the stereo equipment, and the Arizona Court of Appeals affirmed.  It was conceded that the police's initial entry into Hicks' apartment was lawful, although it took place without a warrant, because of the emergency created by the shooting.  But moving the stereo equipment was an additional search, the appellate court reasoned, which lacked a warrant and was unrelated to the purpose the police were in Hicks' apartment to begin with.  The appellate court therefore found that the police's actions violated the Fourth Amendment, and affirmed the trial court's granting of the motion to suppress.  The Arizona Supreme Court declined the State's request to review the case, but the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to do so.
Majority opinion
The Fourth Amendment guards against unreasonable "searches" and "seizures." The Court first ruled that when the police officer moved the stereo equipment to record the serial numbers, he conducted a Fourth Amendment "search," unrelated to the initial reason the police were in Hicks's apartment, to search for weapons and the person who fired the bullet through the floor of the apartment.
The Court rejected the "apparent position of the Arizona Court of Appeals that because the officers' action directed to the stereo equipment was unrelated to the justification for their entry into [Hicks's] apartment, it was per se unreasonable." The state was attempting to justify the search under the plain view exception to the warrant requirement. In such cases, the search is by definition unrelated to the initial purpose the police are in the position to view the purported contraband or evidence of criminal activity. The purpose of the plain-view exception to the warrant requirement is rather to spare the police who discover weapons or contraband during the course of an otherwise lawful search the trouble of having to obtain a warrant to seize those weapons or contraband. Warrants are issued only upon a showing of probable cause; thus, probable cause to believe an item in plain view is contraband or evidence of criminal activity must be required to allow the plain-view exception.
There are, of course, other situations in which the police may lawfully seize an object upon less than probable cause, but the state justified the search of the stereo equipment in this case solely on the fact that they were in plain view of the officers who were otherwise lawfully present in Hicks's apartment, and happenstance cannot by itself supplant the requirement of probable cause.
Dissenting opinions
Justice O'Connor disagreed with the majority's characterization of the police actions regarding the stereo equipment as a full-blown search.  Rather, she called it a "cursory inspection," and argued that the police could conduct such a cursory inspection on reasonable suspicion that an object is contraband or evidence of criminal activity.  A "distinction between searches based on their relative intrusiveness — and its subsequent adoption by a consensus of American courts — is entirely consistent with our Fourth Amendment jurisprudence."  In other cases, she argued, the Court had allowed minimally invasive searches under the Fourth Amendment in the face of strong governmental interests.  The government had such an interest in this case, because of the "prevalence of mass-produced goods in our national economy" whose only distinguishing characteristic was a serial number.
Justice Powell wondered what the police should have done in the situation they faced.  The officer's experience told him the stereo equipment was probably stolen, but lacking probable cause, he could not have obtained a warrant to seize it, and he could not have remained in Hicks's apartment to prevent Hicks from removing the stereo equipment after the other officers finished searching.  In the face of the dilemma, Justice Powell worried that the bright-line rule making moving the equipment a "search" requiring probable cause "could deter conscientious police officers from lawfully obtaining evidence necessary to convict guilty persons."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 480
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:1987 in Arizona
Category:Legal history of Arizona
"""

From "Arizona v. Inter Tribal Council of Arizona, Inc." ==> """
Arizona v. Inter Tribal Council of Arizona, Inc., 570 U.S. 1 (2013), is a 2012-term United States Supreme Court case revolving around Arizona's unique voter registration requirements, including the necessity of providing documentary proof of citizenship. In a 7–2 decision, the Supreme Court held that Arizona's registration requirements were unlawful because they were preempted by federal voting laws..
Background
The Arizona voter registration requirements arose from a 2004 Arizona proposition, Arizona Proposition 200 (2004), which was a ballot initiative designed in part "to combat voter fraud by requiring voters to present proof of citizenship when they register to vote and to present identification when they vote on election day." (per curiam). The state law requires, besides other things, persons to provide proof of citizenship to register to vote, and requires voter-registration officials to "reject" any application for registration, including a Federal Form under the National Voter Registration Act of 1993, that is not accompanied by documentary evidence of citizenship.
A group of Arizona residents and a group of nonprofit organizations challenged the Arizona law in court. The District Court of Arizona granted Arizona summary judgment on the respondents' claim that the federal Act preempts Arizona's requirement. In October 2010, the Ninth Circuit Court reversed, holding that the state's requirement of documentary proof of citizenship is invalid as being preempted by the registration provision in the federal NVRA, at least when an applicant uses the National Mail Voter Registration Form (the "Federal Form") to register to vote in federal elections, and that the requirement to provide voter identification at the polling place is valid.
However, in April 2011, the court granted Arizona's petition for en banc review of this ruling, and it heard oral arguments on June 21, 2011.Arizona Attorney General Press Release: "Horne Argues in Favor of Arizona's Law Requiring Proof of Citizenship to Vote"  In April 2012, the en banc court also held that the requirement to provide proof of citizenship to register to vote is invalid as preempted by the NVRA and that the requirement to provide voter identification at the polling place is valid.  The Supreme Court of the United States declined to stay the ruling on June 28, 2012.Arizona, et al. v. Abeytia, et al., No. 11-A-1189 (order), (U.S. Supreme Court, June 28, 2012) In July 2012, Arizona petitioned the Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari to review the Ninth Circuit's ruling.Arizona v. Inter Tribal Council of Arizona, et. al, Petition for Writ of Certiorari (U.S. Supreme Court, July 16, 2012) The Supreme Court granted the petition in October 2012,Arizona v. Inter Tribal Council, Grant of Petition for Writ of Certiorari (U.S. Supreme Court, October 15, 2012) and it heard oral arguments on March 18, 2013.Arizona, et. al., Petitioners, v. The Inter Tribal Council of Arizona, Inc., Transcript of Oral Argument  (U.S. Supreme Court, March 18, 2013)
Opinion of the Court
On June 17, 2013, the Supreme Court ruled against Arizona in a 7–2 decision, which struck down the state law. Justice Scalia wrote the majority opinion, confirming the Ninth Circuit's rulings and holding that the state requirements relating to voter registrations were pre-empted by the federal NVRA law, which mandates states to "accept and use" the Federal Form. Justices Clarence Thomas and Samuel Alito dissented. However, the Court also suggested ways for Arizona to overcome the hurdle. The 7-2 Decision stated “Arizona is correct that the Elections Clause empowers Congress to regulate how federal elections are held, but not who may vote in them. The latter is the province of the states.”  However, because Attorney General Tom Horne’s predecessor as Attorney General had not appealed an adverse decision by the commission, the case was sent back for a new petition to the commission to be appealed.  It was consolidated with a 10th circuit case, which ruled adversely, and the Supreme Court chose not to review a second time. The Court also held that Arizona may petition to have more requirements added to the federal standard.
 See also 
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 570
 References 
External links
 Inter Tribal Council of Arizona official web site
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2012 in United States case law
Category:History of voting rights in the United States
Category:Native American history of Arizona
Category:Arizona elections
Category:United States elections case law
Category:Legal history of Arizona
"""

From "Arizona v. Johnson" ==> """
Arizona v. Johnson, 555 U.S. 323 (2009), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held, by unanimous decision, that police may conduct a pat down search of a passenger in an automobile that has been lawfully stopped for a minor traffic violation, provided the police reasonably suspect the passenger is armed and dangerous.
 Background 
Tucson, Arizona, police officers were patrolling a neighborhood associated with the Crips street gang when they stopped a vehicle because its registration had been suspended.  Officers noticed that Lemon Montrea Johnson, the vehicle's backseat passenger, looked back and kept his eyes on the officers as they approached, that he was wearing a blue bandana (consistent with Crips membership), and that he had a police scanner in his pocket.  While in the car, Johnson stated that he was from a town the officer knew to be associated with the Crips gang, and also admitted that had served a prison sentence for burglary and had been out for about a year.
The police asked Johnson to exit and step away from the car because they wanted to question him and gather gang intelligence; after he complied, the police patted him down because they believed that he was armed and dangerous, based on their observations and Johnson's statements.  The pat down search revealed a gun, and Johnson was arrested.
The trial court denied Johnson's motion to dismiss.  On appeal, the Arizona Court of Appeals reversed, concluding that Johnson's detention had evolved into a consensual encounter, because the police investigation into his gang affiliation was unrelated to the traffic stop.  The Arizona Supreme Court denied review, and the U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari.
 Question presented 
Whether a police officer may search a vehicle stopped for a minor traffic offense, when the officer has no reason to believe the passenger is committing, or has committed a crime, but reasonably suspects the driver is armed and dangerous?
 Opinion of the Court 
The police may lawfully stop and detain an automobile and its occupants pending an inquiry into a minor traffic violation, and may conduct a pat down search of an occupant if the police reasonably suspect that the individual is armed and dangerous
During a traffic stop, the police may order occupants to exit the vehicle pending completion of the stop.   A police officer may pat down a driver once he exits a vehicle if the officer reasonably believes that the driver is armed and dangerous.  Passengers are seized under the Fourth Amendment once the vehicle they're in, when stopped by the police, comes to a complete stop on the side of the road, and therefore have standing to challenge the constitutionality of the traffic stop.
The Court disagreed with the state appeals court's characterization of Johnson's encounter with the police as consensual.  It quoted the dissenting state appellate court judge, who noted that the pat down occurred shortly after the car had been stopped, and that Johnson would not reasonably have felt he was free to leave at the time of the pat down.  
The Court observed that a seizure occurs when the police stop a car for a traffic violation, and the seizure continues and is usually reasonable until the police inform the car's occupants that they're free to leave.  In addition, questioning by the police about a matter unrelated to the traffic stop does not make the stop unlawful, as long as those inquiries do not measurably extend the duration of the stop.
Here, the traffic stop communicated to Johnson that he was not free to leave, and nothing prior to the pat down indicated otherwise.  The police were not required to give Johnson the opportunity to leave without ensuring that he was not armed and dangerous.
The judgment of the Arizona Court of Appeals was reversed, and the case was remanded for further proceedings.
See also
 Michigan v. Long (1983)
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:2009 in Arizona
Category:Legal history of Arizona
Category:Search and seizure case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:History of Tucson, Arizona
"""

From "Arizona v. Maricopa County Medical Society" ==> """
Arizona v. Maricopa County Medical Society, 457 U.S. 332 (1982), was a U.S. Supreme Court case involving antitrust law. A society of doctors in Maricopa County, Arizona, established maximum fees that their members could claim for seeing patients who were covered by certain health insurance plans. Arizona charged them with violations of state antitrust law regarding price fixing. The society tried to rebut the state's charges by claiming that the maximum-fee arrangement was necessary to allow doctors to see these patients, and therefore generated economic benefits. 
On appeal, the Supreme Court rejected this defense, saying that price fixing was not truly necessary here: the society could have used insurance to pool their risk. The society's efficiency justification was either a pretext, or else could have been done through less restrictive means. The Court held that their justifications failed as a matter of fact.
Facts
Maricopa County Medical Society, by agreement of their member doctors, established the maximum fees the doctors may claim in full payment for health services provided to policyholders of specified insurance plans. Arizona filed a complaint against MCMS in Federal District Court, alleging that they were engaged in an illegal price-fixing conspiracy in violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act.
Judgment
In a 4–3 decision, the court held that the maximum fee agreements, as price-fixing agreements, are per se unlawful under § 1 of the Sherman Act.
Significance
The ruling stipulates not just that maximum price fixing among competitors is unlawful, but that it is unlawful per se. This precludes any significant inquiry into potential procompetitive justifications for such an arrangement. According to one author, the result of the decision was to make "antitrust analysis once again confused and haphazard.".
See also
US antitrust law
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 457
Kiefer-Stewart Co. v. Seagram & Sons, Inc.
Albrecht v. Herald Co.
Notes
References
.
.
External links
Category:1982 in United States case law
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:History of Maricopa County, Arizona
Category:1982 in Arizona
Category:Legal history of Arizona
Category:American Medical Association
"""

From "Arizona v. New Mexico" ==> """
Arizona v. New Mexico, 425 U.S. 794 (1976), is an opinion from the United States Supreme Court which denied a motion from the State of Arizona seeking authorization to file suit against the State of New Mexico by invoking the original jurisdiction of the court..
Background
Most of the electricity generated at the Four Corners Generating Station located in northwest New Mexico is transmitted for export and sold in neighboring states.. In 1975 New Mexico enacted the Electrical Energy Tax Act, which imposed a tax on electricity generated by power plants within the state. The tax amounted to about 2 percent of the retail value of electricity. The Act further allowed electric companies in New Mexico to credit the amount of this tax against their existing tax liability from an existing 4 percent gross receipts tax on retail sales of electricity, essentially eliminating the effect of the tax upon New Mexico's in-state users of electricity. Electricity generated from in-state power plants but exported for sale to out-of-state customers did not have any gross receipts tax liability to credit the energy tax against.
Arizona filed a motion seeking to invoke the original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article III Section 2 of the United States Constitution for authorization to file a complaint against New Mexico. Section 2 of Article III states that in cases in which a state is a party, the Supreme Court will have original jurisdiction, meaning that the trial will take place before the court. The complaint alleged that the New Mexico energy tax was invalid as it placed an unconstitutional burden on interstate commerce in violation of the Commerce Clause, denied Arizona due process and equal protection under the law under the Fourteenth Amendment, and abridged the privileges and immunities guarantied by Article IV, Section 2 of the Constitution.
New Mexico in its reply to the motion argued that the Court should deny the motion as the three Arizona electric companies had filed an action in the district court of Santa Fe County seeking a declaratory judgment that the energy tax was invalid, and that the companies had refused to pay the tax.
Decision
thumb|250px|right|A New Mexico tax on electricity exported out-of-state from the Four Corners Generating Station, shown in a 1972 photograph, caused the dispute with Arizona.
The Supreme Court in a per curiam opinion denied the motion of Arizona. The opinion noted, based upon its decisions in Massachusetts v. Missouri, 308 U.S. 1 (1939),. and Illinois v. City of Milwaukee, 406 U.S. 91 (1972),. that the original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court was to be used only in appropriate cases based upon the seriousness of the case and whether another forum was available with jurisdiction over the parties and where the issues could be litigated. By using its discretion and limiting the instances where original jurisdiction was granted, the Court could devote its time and resources to its appellate cases. In this case, the Court concluded that the pending state court case was the appropriate forum for litigation of the same issues involving the New Mexico energy tax.
Justice Stevens filed a concurring opinion noting that the complaint of Arizona failed to allege that the New Mexico tax affects the electric rates paid by Arizona consumers, and that Arizona was not sufficiently affected by the tax to justify the original jurisdiction of the court. Because the Arizona electric companies, including the Salt River Project, which is a unit of the Arizona state government, had access to a state court to litigate the issue, Stevens concurred in the judgment.
Subsequent developments
The case that the three electric companies had filed in state court eventually was appealed to the Supreme Court. In Arizona Public Service Co. v. Snead, 441 U.S. 141 (1979), the Court held that the New Mexico energy tax was invalid under the Supremacy Clause of the Constitution in light of a federal statute prohibiting such a tax. The federal statute had been enacted specifically to prohibit state electric generation and transmission taxes, such as the New Mexico energy tax, that discriminate against interstate commerce.
References
External links
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States judiciary case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Supreme Court original jurisdiction cases
Category:1976 in Arizona
Category:1976 in New Mexico
Category:History of San Juan County, New Mexico
Category:United States energy case law
Category:Energy in New Mexico
"""

From "Arizona v. United States" ==> """
Arizona v. United States, 567 U.S. 387 (2012), was a United States Supreme Court case involving Arizona's SB 1070, a state law intended to increase the powers of local law enforcement that wished to enforce federal immigration laws. The issue is whether the law usurps the federal government's authority to regulate immigration laws and enforcement. The Court ruled that sections 3, 5(C), and 6 of S. B. 1070 were preempted by federal law but left other parts of the law intact, including a provision that allowed law enforcement to investigate a person's immigration status.
 Background 
On April 23, 2010, Arizona Governor Jan Brewer signed into law SB 1070, which supporters dubbed the "Support Our Law Enforcement and Safe Neighborhoods Act". It made it a state misdemeanor crime for an illegal immigrant to be in Arizona without carrying registration documents required by federal law; authorizes state and local law enforcement of federal immigration laws; and penalized those found to be knowingly sheltering, hiring, and transporting illegal immigrants.Arizona SB 1070, §1.
The bill's passage immediately sparked constitutional concerns over potential civil rights violations and encouraging of racial profiling. Tens of thousands of people demonstrated against the law in over 70 U.S. cities on May 1, 2010 (International Workers' Day). A rally in Los Angeles, attended by Cardinal Roger Mahony of the Roman Catholic Church, attracted between 50,000 and 60,000 people, with protesters waving Mexican flags and chanting "Sí se puede." The city had become the national center of protests against the Arizona law. Around 25,000 people were at a protest in Dallas, and more than 5,000 were in Chicago and Milwaukee. Rallies in other cities generally attracted around 1,000 people or so. There and in some other locations, demonstrators expressed frustration with what they saw as the administration's lack of action on immigration reform, with signs holding messages such as "Hey Obama! Don't deport my mama."
The case was filed by the United States Justice Department in the United States District Court for the District of Arizona on July 6, 2010,7.06.10 DOJ Lawsuit http://www.justice.gov/opa/documents/az-complaint.pdf challenging Arizona's Support Our Law Enforcement and Safe Neighborhoods Act as usurping the federal government's authority to regulate immigration laws and enforcement. The plaintiffs also referenced the notion of federal preemption and stated, "The Constitution and the federal immigration laws do not permit the development of a patchwork of state and local immigration policies throughout the country." Additionally, the Justice Department, in its July 6, 2010 motion, requested for the federal courts to issue an injunction to enjoin enforcement of the law before it went into effect.US Motion for Preliminary Injunction http://www.scotusblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2010/07/DOJ-AZ-brief-7-6-10.pdf Arizona responded to the motion.Arizona's response to Motion for Preliminary Injunction http://azgovernor.gov/dms/upload/PR_072010_USvAZDefendantsResponsePlaintiffMotionPI.pdf  The 1976 precedent of De Canas v. Bica was relied upon in Arizona's Motion.
On Wednesday, July 28, 2010, Judge Susan R. Bolton blocked key portions of SB 1070 including "requiring police to check the immigration status of those they arrest or whom they stop and suspect are in the country undocumented would overwhelm the federal government's ability to respond, and could mean legal immigrants are wrongly arrested." Judge Bolton wrote in her ruling:Federal resources will be taxed and diverted from federal enforcement priorities as a result of the increase in requests for immigration status determination that will flow from Arizona
Governor Brewer promised to appeal the ruling by calling it "a temporary bump in the road."
Several states jointly filed a Proposed Brief of Amici Curiae. The brief supported Arizona. The States of Michigan, Florida, Alabama, Nebraska, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, South Dakota, Texas, and Virginia, along with the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, filed their proposed brief on July 14, 2010. The brief stated that it "defends the States' authority to concurrently enforce federal immigration laws, especially in light of the selective and even lack of enforcement of those laws by the Obama administration. Under the current situation, the States have lost control over their borders and are left to guess at the reality of the law."States' July 14 Amici http://www.michigan.gov/ag/0,1607,7-164-46849_47203-240761--,00.html The Latin American countries of Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Mexico, Nicaragua, Paraguay, and Peru filed an amicus brief in support of the United States.
A group of 81 members of the United States Congress also filed a Proposed Brief of Amici Curiae.Trent Franks press release http://franks.house.gov/press_releases/480 Congressmen Amici http://republicans.judiciary.house.gov/Media/PDFs/U%20S%20%20v%20%20Arizona%20Amicus%207%2020%202010.pdf  The brief supported Arizona.
On July 28, 2010, Judge Bolton issued an order denying in part and granting in part the United States' Motion for Preliminary Injunction heard the prior week.Bolton 7.28.10 Injunction Order http://www.foxnews.com/projects/pdf/072810_ArizonaRuling.pdf
Among the provisions that would go into effect are the following: A.R.S. § 11-1051(A): prohibiting Arizona officials, agencies, and political subdivisions from limiting enforcement of federal immigration laws; A.R.S. § 11-1051(C)-(F): requiring state officials to work with federal officials with regard to undocumented immigrants; and, A.R.S. § 11-1051(G)-(L): allowing legal residents to sue any state official, agency, or political subdivision for adopting a policy of restricting enforcement of federal immigration laws to less than the full extent permitted by federal law.
See 7/28/2010 Order
An appeal of the US District Court's 7/28/2010 ruling was filed on July 29, 2010. A motion to expedite the normal appeal schedule was also filed. Arizona gave the following reasons for the motion to expedite:7.29.10 Arizona's Motion to Expedite Appeal http://azgovernor.gov/dms/upload/PR_072910_MotionForExpeditedBriefingSchedule.pdf 
Good cause exists to expedite this appeal under Ninth Circuit Rules 27-12 and 34-3 and 28 U.S.C. § 1657 because it is an appeal of a preliminary injunction enjoining several key provisions of SB 1070 that the Arizona Legislature determined were critical to address serious criminal, environmental, and economic problems Arizona has been suffering as a consequence of undocumented immigration and the lack of effective enforcement activity by the federal government. An expedited briefing schedule will not unreasonably burden the parties because it is consistent with the expedited briefing schedule Plaintiff-Appellee received for the initial ruling on its Motion for Preliminary Injunction, the issues on appeal are narrower than those the district court addressed and have largely been briefed by the parties, and the parties are well represented with sufficient counsel to brief the issues under the schedule Defendants-Appellants have proposed.
Governor Brewer requested the following appeal schedule: opening brief due August 12, 2010, response brief due August 26, 2010, reply brief due September 2, 2010, and oral argument during week of September 13, basically a 30-day schedule, almost twice the schedule allowed for the original motion for preliminary injunction.Defendant's Appeal http://azgovernor.gov/dms/upload/PR_072910_PreliminaryInjunctionAppeal.pdf 
On July 30, 2010, the Appeals Court ordered the following appeal schedule:
 opening brief due August 26, 2010
 response brief due September 23, 2010
 reply brief due 14 days after response
 oral argument (hearing) during first week of November 2010
Ninth Circuit opinion and way to Supreme Court decision
thumb|Recording of oral arguments heard by Ninth Circuit.
On November 1, 2010, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit heard arguments in the case. The three-judge panel was composed of Judges Richard Paez, Carlos Bea, and John T. Noonan. On April 11, 2011, the Ninth Circuit panel upheld the district court's ban on parts of the law taking effect, thus ruling in favor of the Obama administration and against Arizona. Judge Richard Paez gave the majority opinion in which Judge John T. Noonan, Jr. joined, and Judge Carlos Bea dissented in part. Paez agreed with the administration's view that the state had intruded upon federal prerogatives. Noonan wrote in his concurrence: "The Arizona statute before us has become a symbol. For those sympathetic to immigrants to the United States, it is a challenge and a chilling foretaste of what other states might attempt."
On May 9, 2011, Governor Brewer announced that Arizona would appeal directly to the U.S. Supreme Court, rather than request a hearing en banc before the Ninth Circuit; the appeal was filed on August 10, 2011. In response, the Justice Department requested the Supreme Court to stay out of the case by saying that the lower courts actions were appropriate. Observers thought it likely that the Supreme Court would take up the matter, but if it declined to step in, the case most likely would be returned to the trial judge in the District Court to review the case on its merits and determine whether the temporary injunction that blocked the law's most controversial provisions should become permanent. The Supreme Court announced in December 2011 that it would review Arizona's Support Our Law Enforcement and Safe Neighborhoods Act, and oral arguments took place on April 25, 2012.
 Supreme Court decision 
On December 12, 2011, the United States Supreme Court granted certiorari to hear the case. The court heard oral arguments for the case on April 25, 2012. Justice Elena Kagan recused herself from the case, presumably because during her time as the United States Solicitor General under the Obama administration she had defended the federal government's position in the case.
On June 25, 2012, the Court struck down three of the four provisions of SB 1070. The majority opinion was written by Justice Kennedy and was joined by Chief Justice Roberts, Justice Ginsburg, Justice Breyer, and Justice Sotomayor. Justices Scalia, Thomas, and Alito all concurred in part and dissented in part in separate opinions that were joined by no other justice.
Justice Kennedy's majority opinion held that Sections 3, 5(C), and 6 were preempted by federal law.Arizona v. United States, No. 11-182. https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/11pdf/11-182b5e1.pdf The three provisions struck down required legal immigrants to carry registration documents at all times, allowed state police to arrest any individual suspected of being an illegal immigrant, and made it a crime for an illegal immigrant to search for or hold a job in the state.
All justices agreed to uphold the provision of the law allowing Arizona state police to investigate the immigration status of an individual stopped, detained, or arrested if there is reasonable suspicion that the individual is in the country illegally. However, Justice Kennedy specified in the majority opinion that state police may not detain the individual for a prolonged amount of time for not carrying immigration documents, and that cases of racial profiling may proceed through the courts if such cases arise.
Majority opinion
Justice Kennedy's majority opinion identified the question before the Court as "whether federal law preempts and renders invalid four separate provisions of the state law." The four provisions in question were:
 Section 3 of S.B. 1070, which made it a state crime to be unlawfully present in the United States and failing to register with the federal government;
 Section 5, which made it a misdemeanor state crime to seek work or to work without authorization to do so;
 Section 2, which in some circumstances required Arizona state and local officers to verify the citizenship or alien status of people arrested, stopped, or detained; and
 Section 6, which authorized warrantless arrests of aliens believed to be removable from the United States based on probable cause.
Kennedy's opinion embraced an expansive view of the United States Government's authority to regulate immigration and aliens, describing it as "broad" and "undoubted". That authority derived from the legislative power of Congress to "establish an uniform Rule of Naturalization", enumerated in the Constitution,US Constitution, Article I, Section 8, clause 4. as well as the longstanding interpretation of federal sovereignty in areas pertaining to the control and conduct of relations with foreign nations.United States v. Curtiss-Wright Export Corp., 299 U.S. 304, 318 (1936). In this context, federal discretion as to whether or how immigration laws are enforced is an important component of Congressional authority. At the same time, Justice Kennedy's opinion acknowledged the serious concerns experienced by Arizona citizens and officials in dealing with illegal immigration, noting that signs along highways south of Phoenix, Arizona, discourage travel by the public because of dangerous smuggling activities.
The majority opinion analyzed the four provisions in question within the framework of preemption, derived from the Supremacy Clause, requiring federal law to prevail when state and federal laws conflict. The Court held that "the Federal Government has occupied the field of alien registration" and so all state action and "even complementary state regulation is impermissible."Majority Opinion at 9-10 https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/11pdf/11-182.pdf. Therefore, the registration provisions of Section 3 were preempted by federal law. In contrast to Section 3, the criminal provisions of Section 5 had no direct counterpart under federal law, which led the Court to apply the "ordinary principles of preemption" rather than the doctrine of field preemption. Under those principles, Section 5 stood as an obstacle to the objectives of Congress of not imposing "criminal penalties on aliens who seek or engage in unauthorized employment". Therefore, Section 5 was also preempted by federal law.
Section 6 of SB 1070 was also found to be preempted by federal law on the basis that it created an "obstacle to the full purposes and objectives of Congress". The Court noted that it is not generally a crime for a removable alien to be present in the United States and that Section 6 would give state officers "even greater authority to arrest aliens on the basis of possible removability than Congress has given to trained federal immigration officers." Furthermore, the removal process is "entrusted to the discretion of the Federal Government."
The majority upheld Section 2 but did so by reading it in a more restrictive manner. The provisions at issue required Arizona officers to make a "reasonable attempt" to determine the immigration status of any person stopped, detained, or arrested on a legitimate basis if "reasonable suspicion" existed that the person is an alien and is unlawfully present in the United States.Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. §11-1051(B). Additionally, any arrestee's immigration status would have to have been determined before they could be released. Status checks would have been made through Immigration and Customs Enforcement and their databases. Listing several examples, Justice Kennedy wrote that Section 2(B) "likely would survive preemption" if it is interpreted to require only state officers to conduct a status check "during the course of an authorized, lawful detention or after a detainee has been released." Underlining the cautious approach that the majority took to Section 2(B) were Justice Kennedy's final words on the section: "This opinion does not foreclose other preemption and constitutional challenges to the law as interpreted and applied after it goes into effect."
Dissents
Justice Scalia dissented, and said that he would have upheld all four provisions as a valid exercise of concurrent state sovereignty over immigration. He argued that the statute was valid: "As a sovereign, Arizona has the inherent power to exclude persons from its territory, subject only to those limitations expressed in the Constitution or constitutionally imposed by Congress. That power to exclude has long been recognized as inherent in sovereignty." To support his position, Justice Scalia reviewed several cases from the early history of the Supreme Court's Immigration jurisprudence.
Justice Thomas likewise would have upheld the entire law as not preempted by federal law, but for different reasons. He concluded that none of the challenged sections presented an actual conflict with federal law, and so the preemption doctrine did not apply.
Justice Alito agreed with Justices Scalia and Thomas regarding Sections 5(C) and 6 but joined with the majority in finding Section 3 preempted and that Section 2(B) was not preempted. With respect to Section 5(C) Justice Alito argued that "[t]he Court’s holding on §5(C) is inconsistent with De Canas v. Bica, 424 U. S. 351 (1976), which held that employment regulation, even of aliens unlawfully present in the country, is an area of traditional state concern." He also argued that Section 6 was not preempted because "[l]ike §2(B), §6 adds virtually nothing to the authority that Arizona law enforcement officers already exercise. And whatever little authority they have gained is consistent with federal law."
Role of Justice Kagan's recusal
In an article on SCOTUSblog, Stephen Wermiel mentions that Justice Kagan's recusal may have played a role in the 5-3 outcome of the case. Some commentators were surprised by the Chief Justice's vote, and thought that the Chief may have voted with the majority to prevent the case from ending in a 4-4 deadlock.
 Legacy 
Shortly after retiring as Solicitor General of the United States, Donald B. Verrilli, Jr. said in a 2016 interview that it was a high-profile case in 2012, but its consequences were not fully appreciated. In his view, the problem was not so much the "show me your papers" provision of the law at issue "but that the states are trying to supplant the federal government's role in setting immigration policy, and we can't have fifty different immigration policies." After the Supreme Court ruled on the case, its decision helped to deter other states from establishing and enforcing their own immigration policies. Verrilli concluded that the Court had made "a very consequential decision" which meant that an incipient anti-immigrant movement "got stopped dead in its tracks".
 See also 
 Immigration to the United States
 References 
External links
 Justice Department press release
 SB 1070
 HB 2162
Category:2012 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:2012 in Arizona
"""

From "Arizona v. Youngblood" ==> """
Arizona v. Youngblood, 488 U.S. 51 (1988), is a United States Supreme Court case concerning the limits of Constitutional due process in criminal law.
 Background 
A boy was molested and sodomized. The rape kit was preserved in a refrigerator, but the boy's clothes (containing samples of the assailant's semen) were not preserved in a refrigeration unit. At a later date, criminalists were unable to do testing on the clothing because it had deteriorated as a result of not being refrigerated. The boy picked the defendant out of a photo lineup as his assailant.
Next, the case developed as follows:
The defendant claimed that the state disposed of potentially exculpatory evidence by not properly preserving the evidence.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court held that there was no constitutional violation in this case. In the Court's holding, it stated: “[w]e therefore hold that unless a criminal defendant can show bad faith on the part of the police, failure to preserve potentially useful evidence does not constitute a denial of due process of law.”Arizona v. Youngblood, 488 US 51, 58 (1988). The Court relied on United States v. Marion, , United States v. Lovasco, , and other cases for its reasoning.
 Subsequent developments 
On remand to the Arizona Court of Appeals, the court again reversed on state law grounds.State v. Youngblood, 790 P.2d 759, 760 (Ariz. App. 2d Div. 1989), vacated, 844 P.2d 1152 (Ariz. 1993)
In 2000, on request from Youngblood's attorneys, the police department tested the degraded evidence using new, sophisticated DNA technology. Those results exonerated Youngblood, and he was released from prison in August 2000, and charges were dismissed.
Shortly thereafter, the DNA profile from the evidence was entered into the national convicted offender databases. In early 2001, officials got a hit, matching the profile of Walter Cruise, who was then serving time in Texas on unrelated charges. In August 2002, Cruise was convicted of the crime and sentenced to twenty-four years in prison.
 See also 
 Miranda v. Arizona (1966)
 Due Process Clause
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 488
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1988 in United States case law
Category:Brady material case law
Category:1988 in Arizona
Category:Legal history of Arizona
"""

From "Arizonans for Official English v. Arizona" ==> """
Arizonans for Official English v. Arizona, 520 U.S. 43 (1996), was a United States Supreme Court decision that held that Article III required standing for each stage of litigation, rather than just when a complaint is filed..
 Background 
In 1988, ballot initiative Proposition 106, mandating that state employees speak only English on the job passed with 50.5% of the vote. Arizona insurance claims manager Maria-Kelly Yniguez sued to overturn this law because she was concerned that she would be fired for speaking Spanish to claimants. However, on February 6, 1990, judge Paul Rosenblatt of the United States District Court for the District of Arizona ruled that the law violated the free speech clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. The group Arizonans for Official English appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, and on December 7, 1994, that court upheld the Arizona federal court ruling. The U.S. Supreme Court accepted an appeal of the Ninth Circuit ruling on March 26, 1996.
 Opinion of the Court 
Associate Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote for a unanimous court:
Federal courts lack competence to rule definitively on the meaning of state legislation, see, e.g., Reetz v. Bozanich, 397 U.S. 82, 86-87, 25 L. Ed. 2d 68, 90 S. Ct. 788 (1970), nor may they adjudicate challenges to state measures absent a showing of actual impact on the challenger, see, e.g., Golden v. Zwickler, 394 U.S. 103, 110, 22 L. Ed. 2d 113, 89 S. Ct. 956 (1969). The Ninth Circuit, in the case at hand, lost sight of these limitations. The initiating plaintiff, Maria-Kelly F. Yniguez, sought federal-court resolution of a novel question: the compatibility with the Federal Constitution of a 1988 amendment to Arizona's Constitution declaring English "the official language of the State of Arizona"-- "the language of . . . all government functions and actions." Ariz. Const., Art. XXVIII, §§ 1(1), 1(2). Participants in the federal litigation, proceeding without benefit of the views of the Arizona Supreme Court, expressed diverse opinions on the meaning of the amendment. ...
The Ninth Circuit had no warrant to proceed as it did. The case had lost the essential elements of a justiciable controversy and should not have been retained for adjudication on the merits by the Court of Appeals. We therefore  vacate the Ninth Circuit's judgment, and remand the case to that court with directions that the action be dismissed by the District Court. We express no view on the correct interpretation of Article XXVIII or on the measure's constitutionality.Arizonans for Official English, 520 U.S. at 48-49.
Furthermore, the court ruled Yniguez's complaint moot given that she resigned seven years before this decision.
 Subsequent developments 
In 1999, the Supreme Court declined to hear another appeal by Arizonans for Official English in a case in which the Arizona Supreme Court overturned Proposition 106.
In 2006, Arizona voters passed Proposition 103 with 74% of the vote, requiring "all official actions of the government be conducted in English" with exceptions for certain duties.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 520
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1997 in United States case law
Category:1997 in Arizona
Category:Legal history of Arizona
Category:English-only movement
"""

From "Arkansas Best Corp. v. Commissioner" ==> """
Arkansas Best Corporation v. Commissioner, 485 U.S. 212 (1988), is a United States Supreme Court decision that helps taxpayers classify whether or not the sale of an asset is an ordinary or capital gain or loss for income tax purposes..
 Facts 
Arkansas Best, a diversified holding company acquired a large percentage of the stock of the National Bank of Commerce in Dallas, Texas.  When the real estate market in Dallas faltered, Arkansas Best sold a large portion of its stake in the Bank at a loss.  Arkansas Best claimed a deduction for an ordinary loss of nearly $10 million from the sale.  The Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service disallowed the deduction, finding that it was a capital, not ordinary loss.
 Issue 
Was the stock properly a capital asset as defined by I.R.C. § 1221?  Should the Court read § 1221 broadly as it had in Corn Products Refining Co. v. Commissioner, 350 U.S. 46 (1955)?
 Holding 
The Eighth Circuit reversed the Tax Court's determination that the loss was an ordinary loss since the Bank stock fell within the general definition of “capital asset” in I.R.C. § 1221 and did not fall within any of the statutory exceptions in the section.  A taxpayer's motivation in purchasing an asset is irrelevant to its classification.
 Reasoning 
The broad definition of the term “capital asset” explicitly makes irrelevant any consideration of the property's connection with the taxpayer's business.  The motive behind the purchase of the asset is not mentioned as a factor in § 1221.
Congress does not direct the Court to read § 1221 liberally.  Congress intended the specific exceptions explicitly contained in § 1221.
The holding in Corn Products is that hedging transactions that are an integral part of a business’ inventory-purchase system fall within the inventory exclusion of § 1221.  This ruling does not apply to the facts of this case.
The capital stock held by Arkansas Best falls within the broad definition of a “capital asset” in § 1221 and is outside the classes of property excluded from capital-asset status.
 Notes 
 Corn Products Refining Co. v. Commissioner, 350 U.S. 46 (1955) 
The Corn Products case involved discussion of whether income arising from the sale of corn futures by a company that refined corn into other forms and food products were entitled to capital gains treatment.  The company bought corn futures to protect their future corn supply and pricing and would sell the futures if it had excess inventory corn for its processes.  As the corn futures were essentially inventory, they were classified as such property which would “properly be included in the inventory of the taxpayer … in the ordinary course of his trade or business.”  I.R.C. § 1221(a)(1).
 IRC § 1221(a)(7) 
Since the time of Corn Products, IRC §1221(a)(7) was added which specifically excludes from the definition of capital asset "any hedging transaction which is clearly identified as such before the close of the day on which it was acquired, originated, or entered into (or other such time as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe)."
This is essentially a codification of the result in Corn Products and removes the necessity of classifying hedging transactions as "inventory" under IRC § 1221(a)(1).
 Importance 
This case signals that the Court will closely read the exclusions in I.R.C. § 1221 in classifying capital versus ordinary losses.  By sticking with the explicit language of the section the Court clarifies this section for other courts and practitioners interpreting and implementing the Code.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 485
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1988 in United States case law
"""

From "Arkansas Department of Human Services v. Ahlborn" ==> """
Arkansas Department of Human Services v. Ahlborn, 547 U.S. 268 (2006), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States involving the ability of a state agency to claim a personal injury settlement as compensation for Medicaid benefits provided for treatment of the injuries.  The Court ruled unanimously that a federal statutory prohibition against liens on personal property to recover Medicaid expenditures applied to settlements, so that only the portion of the settlement that represented payment for past medical expenses could be claimed by the state.
Background of the case
Injury and settlement
Heidi Ahlborn, a resident of Arkansas, suffered severe and permanently disabling injuries in a car accident on January 2, 1996, and filed suit against those she believed responsible.  Following her accident, Ahlborn was granted Medicaid benefits to pay for her extensive medical treatment.  The Arkansas Department of Human Services (ADHS), which administers Medicaid in Arkansas with state and federal funds, intervened pursuant to Ark. Code § 20-77-310, et seq., which required anyone receiving third-party compensation for Medicaid benefits to assign those rights to the State.  ADHS accordingly sought to claim a lien on any damages Ahlborn might recover from the defendants.
In 2002, an out-of-court settlement was reached, under which the defendants paid a compromised sum of $550,000 to Ahlborn.  Under Arkansas law, Ahlborn's injuries gave rise to five discrete elements of damage, one of which was damages for past medical expenses.  However, no effort was made to allocate by agreement or adjudication the proceeds of the compromise settlement among these elements of damage.
District Court proceedings
ADHS had not asked to participate in the settlement negotiations, nor did it seek to reopen the judgment after the case had been dismissed.  However, the agency subsequently asserted a claim or lien in the amount of $219,156.78 against the settlement proceeds.  Ahlborn subsequently filed a declaratory action in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Arkansas against the agency and its officials, arguing that ADHS could only recover that portion of her settlement representing payment for past medical expenses.Ahlborn v. Arkansas Department of Human Services, et al., No. 02-00607, filed September 30, 2002.  Judge Garnett Thomas Esele presiding.
The parties characterized the sole issue in the case as one of statutory construction.  Federal Medicaid statutes provided for the assignment of rights to third-party payments, but prohibited the placing of a lien on a Medicaid recipient's property..  Ahlborn argued that the settlement was her "property," and that this prohibition accordingly limited the State's recovery to only those portions of the payments made for medical expenses.  The parties stipulated that the State would recover $215,645.30 if it prevailed on the statutory construction issue, representing the total amount the State paid in relation to Ahlborn's care, but only $35,581.47 if Ahlborn prevailed, representing 16.5 percent of the total, which was considered a fair representation of the percentage of the settlement constituting payment by the defendants for past medical care.
The parties filed cross-motions for summary judgment, and the district court granted the State's motion.  The court interpreted the relevant federal statutory provisions to mean that the State may recover from Ahlborn's settlement the sum stipulated as the total amount of Medicaid benefits paid to her, regardless of whether the settlement funds represented payments for the cost of medical services.
Court of Appeal's decision
On appeal, the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed. Judges Morris S. Arnold, William J. Riley, and Steven Colloton comprised the three-judge panel that heard the appeal; the court's decision was written by Colloton.  The court supported Ahlborn's interpretation of "property" in the Medicaid lien-prohibition provision as extending to the right to a settlement.  It observed that the Arkansas assignment statute contemplates that the lien arises only after the injured party receives the settlement, and the court believed that the State could not circumvent this by requiring the assignment of rights before the settlement was liquidated and actually received as personal property.
The court's decision
The U.S. Supreme Court unanimously affirmed the Eighth Circuit's ruling in a decision delivered by Justice John Paul Stevens.  The Court held that federal Medicaid law did not authorize ADHS to assert a lien on Ahlborn's settlement in excess of the stipulated amount for past medical expenses, and that the federal anti-lien provision furthermore affirmatively prohibited it from doing so.  The state has no claim against those portions of a settlement the parties agreed were attributable to pain and suffering or lost wages, the high court ruled.  The Arkansas statutes were therefore unenforceable to the extent they provided for a contrary result.Pursuant to the Supremacy Clause, U.S. Const. art. VI, para. 2, state laws that are contrary to validly enacted federal law are void.
The opinion is also significant because the Court, without discussion, permitted a Medicaid suit to proceed where the cause of action was conferred by the Supremacy Clause. Most federal suits alleging violation of the Medicaid Act – which does not expressly confer a right of action – claim that the right of action is authorized by 42 U.S.C. § 1983. In recent years, the Supreme Court has made it more difficult to sue under § 1983 for statutory violations, requiring that the statutory provision in question unmistakably focus on individual rights. While some Medicaid suits have been permitted under § 1983, certain Medicaid provisions have been held unenforceable.
However, this case shows an alternative route to federal court for public interest litigants.  Where a state statute or regulation conflicts with or is preempted by federal law, the right of action arguably is conferred by the Supremacy Clause of the U.S. Constitution.  Ahlborn implicitly supports this premise.
See also
 Sereboff v. Mid Atlantic Medical Services, Inc., 547 U.S. 356 (2006), a case decided the same term involving the ability of an ERISA plan fiduciary to recover medical costs from a personal injury settlement
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 547
List of United States Supreme Court cases
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Medicare and Medicaid (United States)
Category:2006 in United States case law
"""

From "Arkansas Game & Fish Commission v. United States" ==> """
Arkansas Game and Fish Commission v. United States, 568 U.S. 23 (2012), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States holding that it was possible for government-induced, temporary flooding to constitute a "taking" of property under the Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, such that compensation could be owed to the owner of the flooded property..
The case was brought by an Arkansas state agency, alleging that federal flood control practices along the Black River had damaged valuable timber on state-owned lands. The Commission's lawsuit was supported by advocates for property rights, as well as by fish, forestry and wildlife groups. In opposition, the federal government cited the concern that an adverse ruling could expose it to massive liability for its nationwide flood control efforts.
The Court's decision revitalized the Arkansas agency's lawsuit, which had been reversed on appeal after a $5.7 million judgment had been entered in its favor against the U.S. government. The Supreme Court restricted its holding to the issue of whether temporary flooding was categorically excluded from qualifying as a taking, leaving to the lower appellate court to review the remaining legal issues and merits of the judgment on remand.
Background of the case
The case arose from the management of Clearwater Dam by the United States Army Corps of Engineers. The Corps followed a water control plan under which it released water from the dam at rates depending on the season. Between 1993 and 2000, however, the Corps deviated from this plan at the request of farmers, by releasing water during a period that extended into the timber-growing season of the Dave Donaldson Black River Wildlife Management Area, which is owned and managed by the Arkansas Game and Fish Commission, an Arkansas state agency.Arkansas Game and Fish Commission, 568 U.S. at ___ (slip op., at 2-4).
The Commission sued the United States, arguing that the temporary flooding of its Management Area, and consequent damage of valuable timber, constituted a taking of property for which it was entitled to compensation under the Fifth Amendment's Takings Clause. The Court of Federal Claims ruled in favor of the Commission and awarded it $5.7 million for the lost timber and the cost of reforesting.Summarized at 568 U.S. at ___ (slip op., at 4-6); original decision at Arkansas Game and Fish Comm'n v. United States, 87 Fed. Cl. 594 (2009). The ruling was reversed on appeal by a divided panel of the Federal Circuit, on the basis that there could be no takings claim unless the flooding was "permanent or inevitably recurring."Summarized at 568 U.S. at ___ (slip op., at 6); original decision at Arkansas Game and Fish Comm'n v. United States, 637 F.3d 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2011).
The Supreme Court's decision
The Court only had the issue before it of whether government-induced temporary flooding was categorically exempt from the scope of the Fifth Amendment's Takings Clause. In a unanimous, eight-justice opinion delivered by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg,Justice Kagan did not participate, having worked on the case as Solicitor General prior to her appointment to the Court. See  the Court ruled that there was no basis in its Takings Clause jurisprudence for such an exemption.
After reviewing 140 years of takings clause flood cases, the Court focused its attention on rejecting the United States' argument. The Solicitor General relied primarily on a 1924 case where the Court had stated that to establish liability, an overflow must be the direct result of "an actual, permanent invasion of the land."Arkansas Game and Fish Comm'n, slip. op., at 10 (citing Sanguinetti v. United States, 264 U.S. 146, 150 (1924)). While never going so far as to label the statement dicta, the 2012 Court reasoned that even if the 1924 Court's "passing statement" had established a general limitation, that limitation had been superseded by the temporary takings logic developed in First English Evangelical Lutheran Church of Glendale v. County of Los Angeles, 482 U.S. 304.Id. at 10.  The Court took care not to express an opinion on a theory first advanced at oral argument that the takings clause only applies to flooding upstream, not downstream; or to consider an amicus argument based on water rights.Arkansas Game and Fish Comm'n, slip op., at 13; Tr. of Oral Arg. 30-39; Brief for United States 26-27; http://blog.pacificlegal.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/11-597-bsac-Professors-of-Property-and-Water-Right.pdf . The Court left to the Federal Circuit on remand to decide if either of those issues was preserved, as well as a host of Government challenges to the Court of Federal Claims' fact-findings.Id. at 15.
Reactions
The Arkansas Game and Fish Commission's position was supported by the National Association of Home Builders, the American Farm Bureau Federation, and the American Forest Resource Council, among others. The Pacific Legal Foundation also hailed the Court's decision as an important victory for property rights.
Carrie Severino, writing for National Review, characterized the decision as "yet another unanimous defeat" for the Obama administration before the Supreme Court, which she wrote had "developed a noted pattern of adopting positions that fail to sway even one justice." Severino attributed this in part to the government's "extreme position", that landowners downstream of a federally managed dam knew the risks of flooding and so should never get compensation, which "went beyond what was logically required to make its point.". Lyle Denniston of SCOTUSblog was similarly critical of the government's approach at oral argument, which he derided as the equivalent of "trust us" being offered as a legal standard. Denniston noted that the government's "boldness was something of a jolt to the oral argument ... and left some Justices in wonderment.".
See also
2012 term opinions of the Supreme Court of the United States
2012 term United States Supreme Court opinions of Ruth Bader Ginsburg
References
Further reading
.
.
.
.
External links
 Arkansas Game & Fish Commission v. United States
 Arkansas Game and Fish Commission v. United States (11-597)
 Arkansas Game and Fish Commission v. United States of America
Category:2012 in United States case law
Category:Flood control in the United States
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Black River (Arkansas–Missouri)
"""

From "Arkansas v. Sanders" ==> """
Arkansas v. Sanders, 442 U.S. 753 (1979), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court, which held that absent exigency, the warrantless search of personal luggage merely because it was located in an automobile lawfully stopped by the police, is a violation of the Fourth Amendment and not justified under the automobile exception. Similar to United States v. Chadwick (1977), the luggage was the subject of police suspicion before being placed in the vehicle.
Sanders resolved two distinct lines of cases: on the one hand, Carroll v. United States (1925) laid down the automobile exception which allowed for warrantless searches of automobiles; on the other hand, Chadwick did not allow for a warrantless search of luggage. Sanders declined to extend the automobile exception here, again stressing, as in Chadwick, the heightened expectation of privacy in one's luggage.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 442
United States v. Ross, 
California v. Greenwood, 
External links
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1979 in United States case law
Category:1979 in Arkansas
Category:Legal history of Arkansas
"""

From "Arkansas v. Tennessee" ==> """
Arkansas v. Tennessee, 397 U.S. 88 (1970), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court to settle a dispute between the states of Arkansas and Tennessee as to where a portion of the boundary line between the states should run.
Facts
Arkansas initiated the action on October 13, 1967, with respect to an area extending six miles laterally along the west (Arkansas side) bank of the Mississippi River, encompassing approximately five thousand acres. The area, known as Cow Island Bend in the Mississippi River, was located between Crittenden County, Arkansas, and Shelby County, Tennessee. The case was brought under the court's original jurisdiction under Art. III, § 2, of the Constitution of the United States.
Procedure
On January 15, 1968, the court appointed Gunnar Nordbye, a Senior United States Judge of the District of Minnesota, as Special Master to determine the state line in the disputed area.. Nordbye conducted an evidentiary hearing and viewed the area. He then filed his report with the Supreme Court recommending that all of the disputed area be declared part of the State of Tennessee. 
Result
The parties had agreed that the state line was the thalweg, or steamboat channel, of the Mississippi River as it flows west and southward between the states. Nordbye heard evidence and was presented exhibits and maps which showed that the migration of the Mississippi River northward and west continued until about 1912. At that time, an avulsion occurred leaving Tennessee lands on the west or Arkansas side of the new or avulsive river channel. Nordbye found that, thereafter, because of the avulsion, the water in the thalweg became stagnant, and erosion and accretion no longer occurred. At this time, the boundary between Arkansas and Tennessee became fixed in the middle of the old abandoned channel. The Supreme Court affirmed this finding, quoting from its opinion in an earlier dispute between the same states where it had held:
Nordbye was then further authorized to engage surveyors to determine the exact line of the boundary, with the states to split the cost. A decree establishing the surveyed boundary line was entered on June 23, 1970.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Supreme Court original jurisdiction cases
Category:1970 in United States case law
"""

From "Arlington Central School District Board of Education v. Murphy" ==> """
Arlington Central School District Board of Education v. Murphy, 548 U.S. 291 (2006), was a United States Supreme Court case about experts' fees in cases commenced under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA).  Justice Samuel Alito, writing for the majority, ruled that IDEA does not authorize the payment of the experts' fees of the prevailing parents..  Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg concurred in part, and in the judgment.  Justices David Souter and Stephen Breyer filed dissents.
 Background 
The respondents, Pearl and Theodore Murphy of LaGrange, New York, sued the petitioner, Arlington Central School District, seeking to require them to pay for their child's private school tuition under IDEA.Poughkeepsie Journal, June 27, 2006  The Murphys were successful, and the decision in their favor was upheld on appeal.  The Murphys and their attorney, David Vladeck, then sued to require that the School District pay for the experts' fees incurred in the course of the trial.
The District Court held that part of the fees were covered under the law, and required the School District to pay them.  The Second Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed, but acknowledged that other Circuits had ruled differently.  The Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve the differences between the circuits.
 Issue 
IDEA allows a court to "award reasonable attorneys' fees as a part of the costs." The issue to be decided was whether this includes experts' fees.
 Parties' arguments 
The School District said that the plain language of the statute should govern, i.e. that "attorneys' fees" means only those fees paid for an attorney's services.  The Murphys argued that the word "costs" is more important, and that the plain meaning of "costs" includes the cost of hiring an expert witness.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Alito, writing for the majority, ruled that the ability to award attorneys' fees does not include the ability to award experts' fees.  "Costs," the Court wrote, is a term of art that generally does not include either type of fees.  To add attorney's fees to costs is exceptional under American law, which is why it was written into the statute.  That change of the court's power does not affect its power over experts' fees.
Furthermore, relying on previous cases, the Court said that without clear notice to the states, a statute cannot require that a certain fee shall be assessed against the state.See .  In response to the Murphys' contention that the legislative history suggests that experts' fees should be included, the Court stated that because the statute's actual wording is unambiguous, there is no need to consult outside sources.  In addition, the fact that the Act authorized a GAO study of the effect of awarding costs does not change the actual wording of the Act, which does not so award them.
 Concurrence 
Justice Ginsburg concurred in part with the decision, and concurred in the judgment.  She disagreed with the way the Court applied the "clear notice" requirement, but found the rest of the ruling to be correct.
 Dissents 
 Breyer's dissent 
Justice Breyer dissented from the Court's ruling, and was joined by Justices Stevens and Souter.  Stating that the statute is not unambiguous, and relying on the legislative history, Breyer wrote that the term "costs" was intended by Congress to include the cost of hiring expert witnesses.  He also wrote that the "Act's basic purpose" dictates that the award of all costs, including experts' fees, be allowed.  He rejected the application of the "clear notice" rule.
 Souter's dissent 
Although he had also joined Justice Breyer's dissent, Justice Souter dissented separately to write that certain GAO studies authorized by IDEA give weight to Breyer's arguments and distinguish this case from those the majority cites.
Theoretical Distinction
The majority opinion, written by Justice Alito, followed a textualist statutory interpretation. Textualist judges seek to locate "shared conventions" inherent within the statutory language, often turning to textual "canons of construction" that "reflect broader conventions of language use." 
 Subsequent developments 
In 2009, Congressmen Chris Van Hollen and Pete Sessions introduced the IDEA Fairness Restoration Act, to override Murphy and enable parents to recover their expert fees.IDEA Fairness Restoration Act HR 4188 , introduced June 2009.  The bill was reintroduced in 2011 by Senator Tom Harkin, Chair, Senate Health Education and Labor Committee, and Congressman Chris Van Hollen and Congressman Peter Sessions.AnalysisIFRA Autism National Committee.  Analysis, IDEA Fairness Restoration Act.  Retrieved 18 April 2011.
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States education case law
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:2006 in education
Category:United States disability case law
"""

From "Arlington County Board v. Richards" ==> """
Arlington County Board v. Richards, 434 U.S. 5 (1977), is a United States Supreme Court decision on the application of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution to municipal parking restrictions. In a unanimous per curiam opinion, the Court held that a residential zoned parking system requiring permits for daytime parking in the Aurora Highlands neighborhood of Arlington County, Virginia, with those permits limited to residents, their guests and those who came to their homes for business purposes had a rational basis and was thus constitutional. Its decision overturned the Virginia Supreme Court., hereafter Richards II
The ordinance upheld the first such program in a major U.S. metropolitan area, which had been adopted by the county three years earlier in response to national and local concerns. The former was an effort by urban planners and government agencies to reduce automobile use, and conversely encourage the use of public transit and carpooling to address traffic congestion and air pollution concerns. Locally, Aurora Highlands residents were complaining about increasing spillover parking on their streets by workers commuting to nearby Crystal City from elsewhere in the Washington metropolitan area.
Suit was brought by several plaintiffs. Most were drivers who routinely parked in Aurora Highlands; the lead plaintiff, Rudolph Richards, lived a block outside of the area designated by the ordinance. While he was able to walk to work, he argued that it was unconstitutional since it allowed residents of the designated area to park in front of his house while he could not park in front of theirs. The trial court and the Virginia Supreme Court agreed,, hereafter Richards I but the U.S. Supreme Court, which decided the case purely based on the parties' briefs without granting certiorari, found the law a permissible way of carrying out the stated objectives of preserving the neighborhood character and residents' quality of life and that legal distinctions between residents and nonresidents of a particular area are not necessarily the invidious discrimination it had held to be forbidden by the Fourteenth Amendment.
The decision resolved a difference of opinion among state high courts, as earlier in the year the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court had held a similar scheme in that state to be constitutional, mildly criticizing its Virginia counterpart in the process. After the decision, local governments felt more freedom to impose locally targeted parking and traffic rules. The Court has not revisited Richards since then, although it and other courts have relied on its holding that distinctions on the basis of residency, not just in parking but in taxation policy and responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, do not by themselves offend the Constitution. Legal commentary has accepted this conclusion, but there has been concern in the planning community that it has enabled, through qualifications on the definition of residency, the entrenchment of residential racial segregation in some areas.
Background
Since returning to Virginia as one of the country's smallest counties in the mid-19th century after almost 50 years as part of the District of Columbia, Arlington had largely remained quiet, minimally developed and rural. Suburban development began in southern Arlington County in the 1890s with Addison Heights, the first of three subdivisions platted that would later be combined and resubdivided to become the neighborhood now the  Aurora Highlands Historic District, listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2008. The properties were marketed as easily accessible to downtown Washington via bus and trolley.
left|thumb|Houses in Aurora Highlands, 2013
The area developed slowly over the early 20th century, primarily as a residential neighborhood of modest houses with narrow streets. During World War II, the large office building that became known as The Pentagon for its shape was built to the north of Aurora Highlands to house the main offices of the Department of Defense (DoD). After the war the many civilian and military jobs relocated there, along with the return of many veterans, drove new housing construction, and Aurora Highlands was one of the more popular sites for development, with many small brick Cape Cods going up on small lots resulting from multiple resubdivisions. Few of those houses had driveways, and residents parked in the streets.
By 1960 Arlington's population had increased sevenfold in the preceding 30 years. Three years later, the industrial and auto-related businesses in the area across U.S. Route 1 to the east of Aurora Highlands began being redeveloped into high-rise condominiums and office buildings, the beginnings of today's Crystal City. As soon as it was built, office space was often leased by defense contractors, taking advantage of the proximity of the Pentagon, and DoD itself to handle satellite and spillover functions. Late in the decade the federal government moved the U.S. Patent Office and the Institute for Defense Analysis to Crystal City.
Underlying dispute
thumb|right|Crystal City in the late 20th century, with Aurora Highlands at left
At that time the many workers who came to Crystal City from elsewhere in the D.C. metropolitan area commuted by automobile. While Arlington's zoning code required developers to provide adequate off-street parking for the intended use of their buildings, most such parking in Crystal City charged fees for nonresidents. Commuters looking to save money thus went looking for free parking within walking distance, and found it in abundance on the nearby streets of Aurora Highlands.
This made the streets in the Highlands crowded and difficult to navigate during the day, as well as increasing noise and traffic around morning and evening rush hour. From 1968 onwards, residents complained to county government, which experimented with several sets of restrictions, neither of which were effective in addressing the parking problem and often inconvenienced the residents they were meant to benefit. Fearing that the eventual coming of Washington Metro service to Crystal City would exacerbate the problem, residents and county government persuaded the state legislature to pass a law in 1972 allowing the county to require permits for on-street parking in designated areas and charge higher fees to nonresidents. A six-block area was designated by county ordinance that October, with residents each issued one permit.
Enforcement was soon blocked by an injunction, after a group of commuters brought suit. In December county Circuit Court judge William Winston ruled against the county, finding the ordinance did not provide clear guidelines for its implementation and did not accomplish its stated goals of protecting the environment. The county and its planning department went back to work, initiating a study using free permits issued to residents to determine at what times more than 75 percent of the parking space in Aurora Highlands was occupied and when 25 percent of the cars in them were from outside the neighborhood.
The study showed that in a nine-block area of Aurora Highlands, encompassing 81 buildings, including 101 residences, and 192 parking spaces, 188 were occupied during the day. Of those 188, 156 were occupied by vehicles whose drivers and passengers worked in Crystal City. Based on that data, the county passed a new residential zoned parking ordinance that went into effect in July 1974, declaring a long list of objectives, including protecting residents from unreasonable burdens on access to their homes, and preserving the residential character of the neighborhood, as well as alleviating the earlier environmental concerns. Under it, parking in the nine-block areaRichards I, at 233 was limited to residents and those visiting them between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. on weekdays. Within a short period of its adoption, the streets were as clear during the day as they had been before Crystal City's construction.
The commuters who had brought suit before did so again, this time as a facial challenge to the ordinance on constitutional grounds. The distinction it drew between residents and nonresidents of the designated area, they said, was arbitrary and thus an infringement of their rights to equal protection of the laws under the U.S. Constitution's Fourteenth Amendment, as well as the provision of the state constitution forbidding the passage of "special" legislation.Richards I, at 233 All the plaintiffs drove to work in Crystal City from outside the area, with the exception of Rudolph Richards, the lead plaintiff, who lived in Aurora Highlands one block outside the designated area and walked to work; he argued that the unconstitutionality of the ordinance arose from its practical effect of allowing his neighbors who might live in the permit zone to freely park in front of his house while he could not park in front of theirs. Unlike the previous suit the court did not enjoin the ordinance's enforcement.
Arguments were made before Winston, again hearing the case, in March 1975; he rendered a decision by letter in June and made it final with an order in September. He agreed with the plaintiffs that the ordinance was unconstitutional. The county appealed to the Virginia Supreme Court, citing its obligations under the federal Clean Air Act to develop and implement ways to reduce air pollution; guidance from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency had suggested, among other things, implementing parking limitations to accomplish that goal.
Virginia Supreme Court
The state Supreme Court heard arguments and decided the case in January 1977, affirming the trial court. Justice Richard Harding Poff wrote for a unanimous court that held the ordinance violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, without reaching the state constitutional argument.
Choosing from several theories of how the ordinance created and distinguished among classes, the court found it to be "residence in a selected area". It also agreed with the county that its objectives in passing the ordinance were "a legitimate governmental interest". The only question to decide was whether the distinction between residents and nonresidents of the nine-block area of Aurora Highlands was rationally related to accomplishing the ordinance's objectives.
The county relied on several precedents from Virginia (ordinance limiting parking in defined area to buses and freight vehicles for limited time was valid, served public purpose and did not discriminate in favor of specific operators) and  (ordinance forbidding roadside parking at locations of funerals constitutional) and other states (ordinance limiting parking on streets next to municipal government building to city employees and public vehicles constitutional) and  (legislators-only parking on streets near state capitol constitutional) to support the constitutionality of selectively applicable parking regulations. The court did not find them relevant as none of the challenged classifications involved residence. It similarly rejected a Maine case upholding an overnight parking prohibition since it applied to all motorists. Poff conceded that the county was not required to choose "the least restrictive alternative" in this case since the right at issue was not a fundamental constitutional right. "[B]ut it is never free to adopt an alternative so restrictive that it violates rights secured by the equal protection clause."Richards I, 234
The court saw the issue as one of protecting common public property. The state's statutory grant of zoning authority to local governments, "does not include the power to adopt ordinances which grant residents a parking monopoly in the public streets of their neighborhood." And while state law recognized the right of a property owner to make the same use of any public street or way abutting their property as any other member of the public, "ownership of such property gives the owner no right to the use of the street superior to that enjoyed by the public at large."
The analysis concluded with one reported case the court found highly relevant, as it involved the question of residents-only parking on public roads. In 1970 Ohio's Court of Common Pleas for Scioto County had heard State v. Whisman, an appeal from the New Boston Mayor's Court of a driver ticketed for parking on one of two streets where the village had, like Arlington County, instituted a permit system to limit parking to residents only. There, too, the court had seen the ordinance as impermissibly and arbitrarily granting the residents greater rights over the public streets in front of their houses, and used some of the same language as Poff. its decision cited precedents dating to 1889 holding it beyond a government's constitutional authority to give residents special permission to park vehicles, or forbid them from doing so, on streets near their homes. (city liable when allowing business owner exemption from statute to store carriage on street overnight led to accident) and  (ordinance requiring apartment building residents and employees park on the same side of street as building unconstitutionally arbitrary.)
While the court conceded the ordinance may have solved a legitimate problem, "solutions achieved at the price of invidious discrimination are too dear." Poff noted that a more recent state law, not before the court in the instant case, that allowed local governments to differentiate between the terms of parking permits offered to residents and nonresidents as long as it was open to all motorists.Richards I, 235
U.S. Supreme Court
The county was disappointed with the decision, but did not see any likelihood of appealing it to the U.S. Supreme Court. Board chairman Joseph Wholey told The Washington Post there did not seem to be any federal issues the country's highest court could consider. He said there were "other possibilities", like time limits, to deal with Arlington's parking problem, but while they would have to be implemented before the first Metro stations opened in the county later in the year new laws would not be among them. "Whatever we decide to do we will be treating everyone alike."
Those plans were changed in favor of appealing the case to the Supreme Court shortly afterwards. The EPA took an interest in the case, and the Solicitor General's office offered to argue it. The Virginia Supreme Court's decision seemed to conflict with the Supreme Court's holding three years earlier in Village of Belle Terre v. Boraas, which had upheld a zoning ordinance in a Long Island community that limited residents of houses an area zoned for single-family housing to those related by blood, adoption or marriage, in order to prevent homes from being converted into off-campus rental housing for students at a nearby state university. Vehicles, it was argued, could certainly not enjoy greater rights than people.
Three months later, the argument for the Supreme Court hearing the case grew when the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court handed down Commonwealth v. Petralia, in which the respondent had challenged an ordinance in the city of Cambridge that limited parking in a residential area of the East Cambridge neighborhood to residents with permits every day of the week except Sunday. It, too, was challenged on equal protection grounds. The Massachusetts court considered Whisman and the same precedents it had, but found them "inapplicable to the case before us, which involves a congested urban area which has had substantial traffic and parking problems for years."  
It took note of Richards but noted that the Arlington County Board had not, in passing the ordinance, justified it with environmental concerns as broadly as Cambridge had and that the Virginia Supreme Court "accordingly gives no consideration to the possibility that a parking regulation, seemingly favoring residents of an area, might be justified on broader considerations than those expressed by the local board." It found the distinction between residents and nonresidents to be rationally related and thus constitutional:
Similar cases challenging the constitutionality of residents-only on-street permit parking were also beginning to work their way through courts in Maryland and the District of Columbia, where the first courts to hear them had taken the same position as Virginia.Miller, at 392n8 and 393n12
Instead of granting certiorari, the Supreme Court decided the case based on the briefs. In October the Court returned a short unanimous per curiam opinion vacating the Virginia Supreme Court decision. After recapitulating the facts and history of the case, it devoted two paragraphs to explaining its decision.
Accepting the legitimacy of the ordinance's goal of reducing air pollution and preserving the quality of life in residential neighborhoods, the Court found it reasonable to accomplish that both by limiting the availability of parking to commuters in order to encourage carpooling and the use of mass transit and restricting nonresident parking in residential neighborhoods. "By definition, discrimination against nonresidents would inhere in such restrictions."
That distinction was not inherently unconstitutional, the Court held. "The Equal Protection Clause requires only that the distinction drawn by an ordinance like Arlington's rationally promote the regulation's objectives", it wrote, citing Belle Terre and City of New Orleans v. Dukes, another per curiam case from the year before in which it had upheld an ordinance limiting pushcart food vendors in a public square to those who had been operating those businesses for 20 years or more, overturning a 1957 ruling where it had held such legislation, benefiting a particular business or businesses, violative of the Fourteenth Amendment.
There were no concurrences or dissents by individual justices. A note at the end indicated that Justice Thurgood Marshall would have granted the certiorari petition and scheduled the case for oral argument. At the end of November the Court denied a petition for rehearing.
Aftermath
thumb|Arlington County residential parking permit issued from 1978 to 1985
"The decision appears to be a major step towards more rational transportation planning in urban areas" the William and Mary Law and Environmental Policy Review commented afterwards. "Cities are now free to go forward with efforts to deal intelligently with the role of the automobile and with the environmental problems it brings." Litigation against most other residential parking permit programs was dropped, and cities all over the country moved forward with adopting and implementing them.
Subsequent jurisprudence
Supreme Court
The opinion had observed that "restrictions on the flow of outside traffic into particular residential areas would enhance the quality of life there by reducing noise, traffic hazards, and litter." Four years later the Court decided a case that turned on exactly that issue, when the vacation and closure of part of a Memphis, Tennessee, street, argued to be for those reasons, came before it., hereafter Greene III
Memphis's city council had, in the mid-70s, granted the request of residents of the predominantly residential white Midtown neighborhood of Hein Park, to close off West Drive at its northern terminus, a four-way intersection with Jackson Avenue (Tennessee State Route 14), in order to improve neighborhood's quality of life. After it was granted, opponents sued, arguing the true motive was racial exclusion, to reduce through traffic in Hein Park from the predominantly Black neighborhoods to the north of Jackson. The Western District of Tennessee dismissed the claim, but after being reversed by the Sixth Circuit,, hereafter Greene I 
On remand, the district court held for the city. A divided Sixth Circuit reversed, conceding among other points the language from Richards about street closings, but noting the trial judge's reservations about evidence of racial animus and disparate racial impact. Judges Damon Keith and John Weld Peck II found these strong enough to reverse, but Anthony J. Celebrezze dissented, agreeing that while the closure had disparately impacted the residents of neighborhoods to the north, the plaintiffs had not shown that the decision was racially motivated., herreafter Greene II
The Supreme Court reversed, with Justice John Paul Stevens writing for himself and four other justices who largely agreed with Celebrezze and basing part of their holding, that protecting the tranquility of residential neighborhoods is a legitimate interest, on Belle Terre and Richards. Since many urban neighborhoods often have an ethnic character, they further implied, government actions that benefit one neighborhood at the expense of another may inevitably have racially disparate effects regardless of intent.Greene III, at 127–128 Justice Byron White, concurring, felt the majority had far exceeded the scope of the case's original question, as the Sixth Circuit had in reversing the trial court, and would have remanded for it to better determine the scope of the laws involved.Greene III, 129–135 Marshall, joined by justices William Brennan and Harry Blackmun, argued the Sixth Circuit's majority had found sufficient circumstantial evidence of racial animus behind the decision to leave their decision undisturbed.Greene III, 135–155
In 1985's Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. v. Ward, the Court held 5–4 that an Alabama statute taxing out-of-state insurance companies at higher rates in order to encourage the growth and creation of in-state insurers was an unconstitutional denial of the petitioners' rights under the Equal Protection Clause. Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, writing for the dissenters, cited Richards for its general proposition that discrimination against nonresidents of an area or jurisdiction is not per se unconstitutional.
Other federal courts
Following removal from state court, in 2015 the District of New Jersey heard Martell's Tiki Bar v. Borough of Point Pleasant Beach, a very similar case in which a bar in the defendant Shore town challenged a similar residents-only on-street permit parking plan passed to combat the issues created by the bars and tourist businesses on busy summer nights. The borough had eliminated parking fees and meters at one of its municipal lots to encourage parking there instead of on streets adjacent to the bars and other businesses that drew visitors to Point Pleasant Beach during the season. Only residents of those areas were permitted to park there in the early hours of the morning. In an unpublished opinion, Judge Joel A. Pisano found the case identical to Richards, quoting from it at length, and rejecting the plaintiff's contention that the ordinance did not fulfill the borough's objectives as speculative.Martell's Tiki Bar v. Borough of Point Pleasant Beach , Civil Action No.  13-5676 (D.N.J., 2015)
Five years later, early in the COVID-19 pandemic, the Western District of Pennsylvania relied on Richards to uphold that portion of the state's pandemic restrictions which differentiated between regions of the state, while striking down all the other elements of the plan. "It is well established that states and local governments may impose requirements or restrictions that apply in one region and not in others", Judge William Stickman wrote. "Doing so recognized and respected the differences in population density, infrastructure and other factors relevant to the effort to address the virus." He dismissed complaints that the distinctions between those areas in the state's plan were too subtle as "rational basis does not require the granularity of a neighborhood by neighborhood plan".
State courts
Two years after Richards, the city of Lafayette, California, relied on it to support its plan to gate a through road going into the community at the boundary with surrounding Contra Costa County so that only residents and those with a demonstrated need to use the road could do so. The trial court's holding for the county was affirmed on appeal. Judge Norman Elkington wrote for a unanimous panel that while Richards had held that local restrictions on traffic flow based on residency, at least by prohibiting non-resident parking during business hours through a permit system, were not unconstitutional, that did not reach closing the streets to non-resident or non-essential through traffic. California law reserved authority over public roads to the legislature, except where explicitly delegated, and the state had not granted any local or county government that power.
California's courts approved a permit system similar to Arlington's in 1984. The defendant in People v. Housman, convicted of parking her car in a permit-required residential area of Beverly Hills, argued that since the Constitution guaranteed her right to travel as a fundamental right, she necessarily had the freedom to park her car where she wanted and thus the restrictions should be subject to strict scrutiny rather than the rational-basis test. In rejecting her argument on appeal, Judge James Reese, calling Richards "the sole authority which we have ascertained to be directly in point to the legal and factual issues before us", found none of her cited precedents involved parking, and that none of them established that the freedom to travel guaranteed the freedom to choose the means of travel.
In 1988, New York courts handed down a similar pair of decisions, with a higher court ruling against residential parking preference on the grounds that municipalities lacked authority to implement them, while a lower court upheld one in practice when a defendant challenged his conviction. In the former case, the Court of Appeals, the state's highest court, upheld an appeals court decision striking down Albany's ordinance limiting nonresidents to 90 minutes of parking in residential areas near the city center during weekdays, a measure aimed at curbing parking problems created by a daily influx of white-collar state employees, whose union, the Public Employees Federation, brought the suit. The city had relied partially on Richards, but like the California court that had ruled against Lafayette the Court of Appeals held that the constitutionality of the ordinance was moot where the legislature had not granted local governments the authority to enact those laws.  
Later in 1988, a defendant charged with parking in a residents-only zone in the Long Island village of Bellerose was convicted. The village justice hearing the case relied largely on Richards, finding the facts substantially similar, and distinguished the case from the Albany ordinance by noting that the Court of Appeals had there invalidated the ordinance in part because the city had offered no rationale for it beyond Richards and some broad statutory provisions. Bellerose, by contrast, had based its ordinance on largely the same grounds as Arlington County. In a case involving a different defendant several years later, the Court of Appeals affirmed its earlier ruling and struck down Bellerose's ordinance on the same grounds as Albany's, the municipality's lack of legal authority to impose it.
The issue divided the Pennsylvania Supreme Court in 1991. Chief Justice Ralph Cappy wrote for a majority of five that upheld a Stroudsburg ordinance imposing a time limit on nonresident parking in certain residential neighborhoods. "Neither the stated purpose of the ordinance, nor its application, reveals a tyrannical abuse of authority with no logical intention", he wrote, noting its similarity to the one at issue in Richards.Love, at 326n3 Justice Rolf Larsen, joined by John P. Flaherty Jr., dissented.Love, 326–328
Like his Virginia colleague Poff, Larsen considered the public property interest in the streets foreclosed any preferential treatment for the residents along them. He found the distinction arbitrary in light of the ordinance's stated goals of reducing hazardous traffic conditions:
In addition, Larsen wrote, Pennsylvania's case law required that the police power operate equally on all, which the Stroudsburg ordinance—"penaliz[ing] some for conduct that others may engage in with impunity"—did not.
In 1993, the Montana Supreme Court upheld a similar Missoula ordinance against a challenge by students at the University of Montana. The plaintiffs had relied heavily on similar case law establishing public ownership and use of the streets, but "[t]his exhaustive history is irrelevant where our legislature has granted municipalities the statutory authority to create parking restrictions, and where our constitution grants this authority to municipalities" wrote Chief Justice Jean A. Turnage for a unanimous court of six justices. He cited Richards to dispense with the plaintiffs' equal protection argument, noting that there were other instances where the U.S. Supreme Court had found its state counterparts to have applied tests too stringently in striking down laws under that provision, as Virginia's had in that case.
Analysis and commentary
Constitutional and legal basis
As the Court had offered very little in support of its holding, in 1978 Michelle Miller of the Boston College Environmental Affairs Law Review undertook a more in-depth analysis of her own into the Arlington County ordinance's constitutionality and rational basis along with the Massachusetts Supreme Court's Petralia decision.Miller, at 393
In neither case had the plaintiffs chosen to challenge the ordinance under the Court's much more exacting strict scrutiny standard for equal protection, under which a compelling state interest that can be addressed only by the challenged law. It is reserved only for discrimination against a suspect class or where a fundamental constitutional right is alleged to have been impinged. Miller noted that while some residential parking cases had invoked the right to travel, as recognized during the 1960s by United States v. Guest and Shapiro v. Thompson, (as Housman later would), neither Richards nor Petralia had.Miller, at 398
The Court had, Miller observed, declined in GuestGuest, 758–59 on trying to identify what particular constitutional provisions the right to travel could be derived from, although some lower courts had tried. It had changed its focus on deciding what activities were so fundamental as to be protected by the Constitution from impairment through durational residency requirements as a precondition. In most recent federal cases where it been held that the challenged ordinance impermissibly infringed the right to travel, Miller noted, it had involved, like Shapiro, such a residency requirement and/or interstate travel, neither of which were at issue in the parking cases, making the latter "easily distinguishable." The other cases also involved migration, with the aggrieved parties having chosen to resettle in the jurisdictions they sued, as opposed to regularly traveling there from their residences elsewhere for work.Miller, 400–403 
In another per curiam decision upholding Philadelphia's residency requirement for its employees, the Supreme Court had distinguished that case from Shapiro in that the instant case had involved a regulation that required the job applicant merely be a resident at the time of his or her employment without imposing a minimum durational requirement prior to applying. According to Miller, that case along with Richards had clearly established that residency could not be considered a suspect classification, automatically subject to strict scrutiny.Miller, at 405
Miller then turned to the rational basis for the ordinance. She identified two: air pollution control and preservation of neighborhood character, identified in the preamble to the Arlington ordinance (The Cambridge ordinance at issue had not mentioned pollution, but the city's briefs had). Train v. Natural Resources Defense Council, in interpreting amendments to the Clean Air Act, had placed air pollution control within the limits of governmental police power, and Belle Terre had similarly established a state interest in keeping residential neighborhoods quiet, livable places.Miller, 409–411
That left the question of how the ordinance was rationally related to those objectives. Miller pointed to City of Pittsburgh v. Alco Parking Co. as a precedent establishing that governments could distinguish between residential and non-residential parking, imposing greater burdens on the latter.Miller, at 411 There, the respondents had challenged a tax the city imposed on privately operated parking facilities as imposing an unconstitutional burden on their businesses meant to favor lots the city itself operated. The Court had reversed the Pennsylvania Supreme Court's holding in their favor on the grounds that the power to tax, even prohibitively, was within the state's constitutional prerogative.
The Supreme Court noted that the lower court had accepted as legitimate the city's concerns about the negative effects the abundant supply of private parking had on city life. "By enacting the tax, the city insisted that those providing and utilizing nonresidential parking facilities should pay more taxes to compensate the city for the problems incident to offstreet parking", Justice Byron White wrote for a unanimous Court. "The city was constitutionally entitled to put the automobile parker to the choice of using other transportation or paying the increased tax."Alco, at 378–379 
As for the parking ordinance's relation to air pollution control, Miller looked to the First Circuit Court of Appeals's 1974 decision in South Terminal Corp. v. EPA, which had upheld a challenge to the Metropolitan Boston Transportation Air Quality Control Plan required under the Clean Air Act. The plan had called for several methods of reducing vehicle usage, including restrictions on the creation of new off-street parking spaces and who might use them, with preference given to residents of the areas affected at the expense of commuters to those areas; the Cambridge ordinance that had survived review in Petralia was later incorporated into that overall plan.Miller, at 412
Originally, the EPA had proposed a plan whereby drivers would only be allowed to drive into the core of the Boston metropolitan area, which had the worst transportation-related air quality problems, only on four of every five working days. Reaction to that part of the plan was strongly negative, and the EPA compromised to the parking restrictions. The First Circuit found that while the original plan would have had a greater effect on hydrocarbon pollution, the parking restrictions "seems plainly less disruptive and more acceptable", since there was greater flexibility in how to comply with it. Nor was the restriction arbitrary and capricious in its application to commuters, since trips to and from work accounted at that time for 40 percent of all the vehicle-miles traveled annually in the Boston area.South Terminal, 672-73 
While conceding that the backing of federal legislation by itself gave neither ordinance the guarantee of constitutionality, Miller was content that both courts had adequately established from the Clean Air Act the ordinances' rational basis. The remaining question was why the Virginia Supreme Court had held contrarily in the Arlington County case. She believed it might have been because the ordinance there limited permits only to residents of the area where they were required, giving Richards, who lived just outside of that area, the ability to argue that the law made an arbitrary distinction by denying him the right to park in front of houses in the zone during the applicable hours while their residents could freely park in front of his house at any time. The first version of the Cambridge ordinance had been struck down as unconstitutional by a state appellate court, she recalled, since it only allowed residents of the area where permits were required to obtain those permits; once it was amended to allow all Cambridge residents to get permits, the version challenged by Petralia, it was upheld.Miller, 415–17
As to the Virginia court's holding that the ordinance gave the Aurora Highlands residents an impermissible monopoly over the streets in their neighborhood, Miller pointed to Dukes and the hot dog pushcart vendor oligopoly the Court had found permissible as a way of maintaining the neighborhood character. She rejected the argument that as a purely economic regulation, Dukes necessarily reflected a lower standard of review than Richards, which reached social behavior. The ordinance at issue in Belle Terre, she noted, had directly targeted the latter, and explicitly mentioned it as requiring only a rational basis if it did not impair a fundamental constitutional right.Miller, 418–20 And if even the First Amendment rights had to yield to protecting neighborhood character, as had been the case with the Detroit zoning ordinance upheld in Young v. American Mini Theatres, Inc., which required adult movie theaters to be at least a thousand feet (300 m) from each other, certainly parking would also be subordinate to that interest, Miller argued. The Virginia Supreme Court, in finding that the ordinance achieved its goals at "too dear" a constitutional price, had applied an impermissible balancing test, substituted its judgement for the county board's and exceeded the scope of proper review, she wrote.
Facilitation of racial segregation in neighborhoods
In 2020 Michael Connor, an associate at planning firm Kimley-Horn, posed the question in Parking Today of whether some residential parking zones had abetted racial segregation. Some created in the years since Richards had included more complex requirements, such as a minimum amount of spaces occupied during the daytime. Others had shown a preference for single-family housing over multiple-unit dwellings, to the point of sometimes not allowing any of the latter to be part of a residential permit zone, which tended to disproportionately impact poorer and minority residents. Combined with restrictive zoning and limited off-street parking available to residents of multiple-unit dwellings, residential parking preference can be used to send a message to members of those communities that they are unwelcome in neighborhoods with those provisions.
"This was not what was intended in the U.S. Supreme Court's Arlington County v. Richards decision", Connor wrote. He conceded that such zones are "a necessary evil" for residents in areas such as Aurora Highlands that create high parking demand for adjacent land uses. But "many RPPPs are being utilized on a neighbor vs. neighbor and on a street-by-street basis to preserve valuable curbside parking for single-family residents who mistakenly believe that the portion of roadway in front of their house is part of their property." He noted that Arlington County itself was then under a self-imposed moratorium on the creation of new residential parking zones, and reminded his fellow planners that "it is our responsibility to identify inequities in our parking programs and eliminate them" by keeping in mind the social impacts of parking regulations they might design.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
Notes
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court per curiam opinions
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Parking law
Category:United States land use case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:Crystal City, Arlington, Virginia
Category:1977 in United States case law
"""

From "Armour & Co. v. Wantock" ==> """
Armour & Co v. Wantock, 323 U.S. 126 (1944), is a US labor law case, concerning the minimum wage.
Facts
Wantock and his colleagues claimed they should be paid the minimum wage for time spent on call as firefighters. Armour and Co had a soap factory in Chicago, but was also in insurance, and had a private firefighting force to supplement the City's. Between 8am and 5pm the firefighters had occasional tasks of inspecting, cleaning, and keeping in order the company's firefighting apparatus, which included fire engines, hose, pumps, water barrels and buckets, extinguishers, and a sprinkler system. They remained on call as firefighters. Their tasks took up half an hour a week, and otherwise they had 'cooking equipment, beds, radios, and facilities for cards and amusements with which the men slept, ate, or entertained themselves pretty much as they chose.'
Judgment
Justice Jackson wrote for the majority and held that the firefighters' time on call was working even if chatting or playing cards. Value in having employees ready and limiting free movement.
See also
United States labor law
References
External links
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:1944 in United States case law
"""

From "Army Corps of Engineers v. Hawkes Co." ==> """
Army Corps of Engineers v. Hawkes Co., 578 U.S. ___ (2016), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a Clean Water Act jurisdictional determination issued by the United States Army Corps of Engineers is reviewable under the Administrative Procedure Act because jurisdictional determinations constitute "final agency action"., slip op. at 1, 5 (2016).
Background
The Clean Water Act prohibits the discharge of pollutants into "waters of the United States" without a valid permit.33 U.S.C. §§ 1311(a), 1362(7), 1362(12). Because it is sometimes difficult to determine whether property contains waters of the United States, the United States Army Corps of Engineers issues jurisdictional determinations (on a case-by-case basis) that specify whether property contains waters of the United States.Hawkes, slip op. at 2-3 (citing 33 CFR § 331.2). In this case, the United States Army Corps of Engineers issued a jurisdictional determination, which stated that property owned by peat mine operators in Marshall County, Minnesota included waters of the United States because it contained wetlands that "had a 'significant nexus' to the Red River of the North".Hawkes, slip op. at 3-4. The mine operators filed suit to challenge the Corps's jurisdictional determination under the Administrative Procedure Act, but the district court ruled that it could not exercise subject matter jurisdiction because the jurisdictional determination did not constitute "final agency action". The United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit reversed the district court's ruling, and the Supreme Court of the United States granted certiorari to review the case.Hawkes, slip op. at 4-5.
Opinion of the Court
In a majority opinion written by Chief Justice John Roberts, the Supreme Court rejected The Corps’ contentions that the jurisdictional determination “is not ”final agency action” and that, even if it were, there are adequate alternatives for challenging it in court."Hawkes, slip op. at 5-10. Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote a concurring opinion in which he was joined by Justice Clarence Thomas and Justice Samuel Alito, where he argued that "the Court is right to construe a [jurisdictional determination] as binding in light of the fact that in many instances it will have a significant bearing on whether the Clean Water Act comports with due process."Hawkes, slip op. at 2 (Kennedy, J., concurring). Justice Elena Kagan also wrote a separate concurring opinion in which she argued that jurisdictional determinations are reviewable because "legal consequences will flow" from the Corps' determinations.Hawkes, slip op. at 1 (Kagan, J., concurring) (internal quotations and citations omitted). Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote a separate opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment in which she argued that there was nothing tentative or informal about jurisdictional determinations, and that the Corps' determinations have "an immediate and practical impact."Hawkes, slip op. at 1 (Ginsburg, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment) (citing ) (internal quotations omitted).
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:Marshall County, Minnesota
Category:Red River of the North
Category:Mining in Minnesota
Category:Peat mining
Category:United States Army Corps of Engineers
Category:United States water case law
Category:United States environmental case law
"""

From "Arnett v. Kennedy" ==> """
Arnett v. Kennedy, 416 U.S. 134 (1974), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court rejected a nonprobationary federal civil service employee's claim to a full hearing prior to dismissal over charges he had brought the government into disrepute by recklessly accusing a superior of corruption. The governing federal law prescribed not only grounds for removal but also removal procedures. The employee could only be removed for "cause," but the procedures did not provide for an adversarial hearing prior to termination. The Court also rejected the respondent's claim that his First Amendment rights were violated.
The 6–3 decision was widely criticized by legal scholars for Justice William Rehnquist's controversial conceptualization of Kennedy's due process rights in his plurality opinion, joined by only two other justices and explicitly rejected by the others. Rehnquist reasoned that since the state creates property interests such as that Arnett held in his job through its statutes, any procedures the state creates to allow an employee to appeal a termination are thus sufficient to constitute due process. Thus, he wrote, those with such interests "must take the bitter with the sweet".
Justices Byron White and Thurgood Marshall disapprovingly quoted that line in their separate opinions (White concurring that Kennedy's First Amendment rights had not been violated but dissenting from the rest of the holding, while Marshall dissented entirely, joined by two other justices). Justice Lewis Powell, concurring with another justice, also rejected Rehnquist's theory. A later case, Logan v. Zimmerman Brush Co., held differently without explicitly overruling Arnett; in 1985's Cleveland Board of Education v. Loudermill, the Court held that public employees are entitled to some form of hearing before dismissal and formally rejected his "bitter with the sweet" formulation, with Rehnquist (by then Chief Justice) as the only dissenter. Some legal scholars have argued it should have been retained, or that the Court's subsequent disinterest in engaging this question has been to the detriment of its jurisprudence.
The First Amendment aspect of the holding—that the FFLA's provisions that covered employees could only be dismissed for "such cause as will promote the efficiency of the service" was neither overbroad nor so vague that employees lacked notice that speech such as Arnett's could lead to discipline—remains, although it has not been relied on much. After the case was remanded to the district court, Kennedy was again fired. He appealed that to the federal Civil Service Commission and was reinstated with back pay within a year.   
 Underlying dispute 
Wayne Kennedy, who had begun his career in federal employment with the Internal Revenue Service in 1964, transferred to the Office of Economic Opportunity (OEO), which administered many of the federal grant programs created under the Johnson Administration's Great Society agenda, four years later. He began as a field representative in Chicago and was promoted to branch manager for Indiana. He was also head of the national council of OEO locals for the American Federation of Government Employees. His position as field representative was characterized as "fairly important", since it primarily entailed representing the agency's positions to the Community Action Agencies it gave grants to. He was a GS-12 on the federal civilian employee pay scale, earning $16,000 ($ in modern dollars).
In 1971 Kennedy was suspended for 60 days after having, nearly a year earlier, advised members of a group that OEO had given money to that they should replace their board of directors completely. This violated OEO policy that its field representatives were not to in any way involve themselves in the internal affairs of the community groups the agency worked with. Johnson had already, according to the government, been warned about this after a previous incident; of several charges brought against him, this was the only one that was sustained after he wrote a lengthy written rebuttal.
In April 1972, three weeks after he had been informed of the suspension, further charges were brought against Kennedy, based on allegations he had accused the regional director of violating treaties in his dealings with some Native groups, and that another OEO official had violated the agency's conflict of interest standards by entering into a contract with an insurance agency her husband had an interest in. After he had received that notice, he then claimed at a union meeting that his superior had offered a $100,000 grant to a tribal official if that person would submit a written statement against Kennedy and another employee active in the union. These claims were reported in a newspaper article; Kennedy also held a press conference, with other union leaders, in the lobby of the building that housed OEO's headquarters where he made the same allegations and passed out copies of documents purporting to support those allegations.  
Additional charges were brought against Kennedy. He was, per agency policy, again offered the chance to respond to them within 30 days either verbally or in writing. His entire response was to demand an adversarial hearing, and said the disciplinary proceedings in this instance violated his First Amendment right to free speech. Accordingly, OEO notified him that pursuant to the Lloyd-La Follette Act (LLFA), passed during Progressive Era civil service reform, he was fired. 
Under regulations promulgated by the Civil Service Commission (CSC) and the OEO on how he could reply to the charges and appeal any subsequent dismissal, Kennedy appealed to the CSC and filed suit in federal court for the Northern District of Illinois claiming that the discharge procedures authorized by the Act had denied him and others due process of law since it did not allow for an adversarial hearing prior to termination, naming then-OEO director Philip Sanchez as defendant.
District court
Judge Richard Wellington McLaren stayed the case while Kennedy's CSC appeal was pending. After his CSC appeal was denied, Kennedy added to his suit a claim that his First Amendment right to free speech had been violated, since the FFLA's language was so vague and overbroad as to make it impossible to ascertain what speech might lead to disciplinary proceedings.
McLaren convened a three-judge panel, with Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals judge Walter J. Cummings Jr. and fellow district judge Philip Willis Tone, to hear it. Both Kennedy and the government submitted their evidence, made their arguments and moved for summary judgement in their favor. In October, the panel held for Kennedy.
The government had relied on Cafeteria & Restaurant Workers Union, Local 473 v. McElroy, in which the dismissal of a cook employed at a private concession stand on a naval facility after issues came out that led to the revocation of her security clearance, to support its argument that it could summarily dismiss employees. McLaren responded that "[t]he continuing vitality of this rule is seriously in question today owing to recent Supreme Court decisions in the due process area". In that particular case, he conceded, the national security interest may have allowed such decisive action, but it was not a factor in the instant case, and given that other federal agencies allowed their employees similar hearings it was unconstitutional for OEO not to.Kennedy, at 864–66
McLaren agreed with Kennedy on the First Amendment claim as well. The language of the FFLA, that employees could only be disciplined for "such cause as will promote the efficiency of the service" was in his opinion so broad that "there can be little question that [OEO employees] will be deterred from exercising their First Amendment rights to the fullest extent." He allowed that OEO certainly could regulate its employees' speech, but at the same time enjoined the agency from enforcing any rules against speech under the FFLA's current construction.
The OEO was ordered to reinstate Kennedy and grant him full back pay, which it did. The government appealed the case directly to the Supreme Court, bypassing the Seventh Circuit. Since Alvin Arnett had taken over as OEO director by that time, his name was substituted for Sanchez's as the petitioner.
Oral argument
The Court heard oral argument in the case in November 1973. Daniel Mortimer Friedman, later to serve as a federal judge on the Court of Claims and Federal Circuit, argued for the government; Charles Barnhill argued for Kennedy. The National Association of Letter Carriers filed an amicus curiae brief urging affirmance.
Friedman spent most of his argument outlining the facts of the case and clarifying the procedures involved for the justices. Thurgood Marshall was particularly concerned by the absence of any requirement for a pretermination hearing. He asked if, were an employee to show up to work drunk, the government could fire him simply by writing him a letter. Friedman admitted that it was possible but that was not how things were done. "I know, but if you are wrong on this, you are in a little bit of trouble, aren't you?" Marshall responded; Friedman agreed.
Barnhill began by noting that since Kennedy had been reinstated, he had received positive evaluations and gotten another raise; the 60-day suspension had also been reversed, with back pay. Justice William Rehnquist asked him a question he had tried to get Friedman to answer: since the district court's grant of summary judgement required accepting all the facts the government had pleaded as true, did Kennedy accept them as such? Barnhill replied that since the adversarial hearing his client wanted had not yet been held, he considered the alleged misconduct to be merely charges, not facts, and thus irrelevant.
Later the justices questioned him closely on the argument that Kennedy had a property interest in his job, per Board of Regents v. Roth and Perry v. Sindermann, two other recent precedents which had also involved public employees who alleged due process violations during dismissal procedures they claimed were motivated by speech critical of their superiors. Barnhill said those cases required a hearing prior to Kennedy's termination, a provision Friedman had told the Court was in the regulations of eight other federal agencies at that time. "[I]t seems to me that the purpose of the Lloyd-La Follette Act was to protect government employees from being fired arbitrarily", Barnhill said. "If the procedure ... does not assure that an employee will not be fired for cause then the procedure is defective."
"I think the government's argument is very dangerous", Barnhill continued. "[T]here is no question that states and municipalities may take property ... and if the legislature were allowed to condition the taking of this kind of property on the basis of inadequate procedural safeguards, and that somehow composed a right of those persons, any property could be taken without due process." He added that 24 percent of dismissed employees are subsequently reinstated, arguing that proved the system did not adequately protect against wrongful terminations. "The government has no interest in this system as it stands now."
Lastly Barnhill addressed the First Amendment claim. He pointed to previous lower court cases which had similarly found the CSC regulations overly broad and vague and called on the Commission to rewrite them. "The Administrative Conference of the United States (ACUS) has termed it an open invitation to arbitrary action." Friedman, given time to make a rebuttal argument, pointed to the regulation that forbade OEO employees from any action "affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of OEO and the government."
 Opinion of the Court 
In April 1974, the Supreme Court reversed. Six of the Justices found that the LLFA had created an expectancy of job retention requiring procedural protection under the Due Process Clause. Five of the Justices then concluded that the procedure given the plaintiff satisfied the requirements of due process. Furthermore, the Court concluded that post-termination procedures provided by the Commission and the OEO adequately protected appellee's liberty interest in not being wrongfully stigmatized by untrue administrative charges. Finally, the Court held the Lloyd-La Follette Act was not impermissibly vague or overbroad in its regulation of federal employee speech. Three justices dissented.
left|thumb|Justice William Rehnquist in the early 1970s
Rehnquist, joined by Chief Justice Warren Burger and Potter Stewart, wrote the plurality opinion. After recounting the history of the case and the federal civil service laws, he concluded that since the same statutory provision that had provided that covered employees could only be removed from their jobs for "such cause as will promote the efficiency of the service" also explicitly described removal procedures that did not include an adversary hearing, Kennedy had no right to one.Arnett, at 152
In the 1947 case Fahey v. Mallonee, Rehnquist continued, the Court had "viewed skeptically the action of a litigant in challenging the constitutionality of portions of a statute under which it has simultaneously claimed benefits." He proclaimed that it was past time for the Court to start applying that consistently. "[W]here the grant of a substantive right is inextricably intertwined with the limitations on the procedures which are to be employed in determining that right," Rehnquist wrote, "a litigant in the position of appellee must take the bitter with the sweet ... the property interest which appellee had in his employment was itself conditioned by the procedural limitations which had accompanied the grant of that interest."Arnett, 153–56
Post-termination proceedings, Rehnquist further held, would afford Kennedy an ample opportunity to clear his reputation from the charges. He also found the economic effect of the minimum three-month delay that Kennedy argued was likely in such an event not to reach the level of a due process violation, either. "We assume that some delay attends vindication of an employee's reputation throughout the hearing procedures provided on appeal, and conclude that at least the delays cited here do not entail any separate deprivation of a liberty interest."Arnett, 157–58
Rehnquist further rejected Kennedy's contention, supported by the district court, that "such cause as will promote the efficiency of the service" was so vague as to be unconstitutional. "We do not believe that Congress was confined to the choice of enacting a detailed code of employee conduct, or else granting no job protection at all", he wrote. "[T]he language ... was not written upon a clean slate in 1912, and it does not appear on a clean slate now", as the Civil Service Commission had issued considerable guidance on how to apply it since then. Nor was it so overbroad as to preclude dismissals over employee speech.Arnett, 158–62
Powell concurrence
thumb|right|Justice Lewis Powell in 1976, two years after Arnett
Justice Lewis Powell concurred in a separate opinion, joined by Justice Harry Blackmun. At the outset, he indicated his agreement with the plurality holding that the statute was neither vague nor overbroad. He also agreed that Kennedy's due process rights had not been violated, but on different grounds than the plurality.Arnett, 164–67
In Roth and Perry, Powell reminded the plurality, the protected property interest both plaintiffs had been found to have in their continued public employment entitled them to constitutional due process protections. He did not find that reflected in Rehnquist's opinion. "The plurality opinion evidently reasons that the nature of appellee's interest in continued federal employment is necessarily defined and limited by the statutory procedures for discharge and that the constitutional guarantee of procedural due process accords to appellee no procedural protections against arbitrary or erroneous discharge other than those expressly provided in the statute", Powell wrote. "The plurality would thus conclude that the statute governing federal employment determines not only the nature of appellee's property interest, but also the extent of the procedural protections to which he may lay claim", a conclusion he said was at odds with Roth and Perry.
Powell found that that standard had been met. Kennedy's due-process interest, balanced against the government's in maintaining an efficient workforce, did not justify a pretermination hearing. "Prolonged retention of a disruptive or otherwise unsatisfactory employee can adversely affect discipline and morale in the work place, foster disharmony, and ultimately impair the efficiency of an office or agency. Moreover, a requirement of a prior evidentiary hearing would impose additional administrative costs, create delay, and deter warranted discharges."Arnett, 167–71
As the plurality had, Powell dismissed Kennedy's claims of economic harm. Kennedy had pointed to another recent case, Goldberg v. Kelly, where the lack of a hearing prior to the cutoff of welfare benefits had been held unconstitutional. Powell distinguished the cases, noting that Goldberg had involved welfare recipients with no other means of support likely, whereas in the instant case "a public employee may well have independent resources to overcome any temporary hardship, and he may be able to secure a job in the private sector. Alternatively, he will be eligible for welfare benefits."
Lastly Powell dispensed with Kennedy's argument that the absence of a pretermination hearing increased the risk of wrongful dismissals. He noted that the existing procedures required 30 days notice prior to termination and that the employee be provided with the documentation supporting the termination as well as an opportunity to respond both verbally and in writing. "These procedures minimize the risk of error in the initial removal decision and provide for compensation for the affected employee should that decision eventually prove wrongful."
White opinion
thumb|right|Justice White, in 1976
Justice Byron White wrote a lengthy opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part. He broke the case down to three questions:
He answered the last first, saying he concurred with the plurality and Powell. But as to the others, he began, "I differ basically" with Rehnquist's "bitter with the sweet" formulation. "The rationale of this position quickly leads to the conclusion that even though the statute requires cause for discharge, the requisites of due process could equally have been satisfied had the law dispensed with any hearing at all, whether pretermination or post-termination."Arnett at 177–78
White then began a long review of the Court's case law on due process, going as far back as Dent v. West Virginia, a medical-licensing case from 1889. All of them supported the need for a hearing at some point to satisfy the demands of due process. He then asked if, as the plurality seemed to believe, there was "something different about a final taking from an individual of property rights which have their origin in the public rather than the private sector of the economy".Arnett, 178–80
This led to another review of cases specific to public employment. To White, they, too, indicated a requirement for some process: "These cases only serve to emphasize that where there is a legitimate entitlement to a job, as when a person is given employment subject to his meeting certain specific conditions, due process requires, in order to insure against arbitrariness by the State in the administration of its law, that a person be given notice and a hearing before he is finally discharged."Arnett, at 185
Then White turned to whether this hearing had to be held prior to termination. In recent cases such as Goldberg and Bell v. Burson, where a driver's license suspension was challenged, the Court had required a predeprivation hearing. But older cases held to the contrary. White distinguished some cases, such as Fahey and North American Cold Storage Co. v. City of Chicago, due to the exigent circumstances that required the government not wait till a hearing to take constructive possession of property. Like Powell, he weighed the competing interests, largely agreeing but noting that if a former employee were forced onto the welfare rolls it would be "a partially counter-productive policy" for the government. White, too, concluded the existing procedures were constitutional.Arnett, 187–95
For White, the real problem with the hearing was that it was not impartial. Kennedy's supervisor, who had in his notice terminating him effectively accused him of defamation, may have performed his duties at the hearing impartially, but the appearance to the contrary could not be avoided. White said he would have affirmed the district court's decision regarding Kennedy's job but reversed it on the First Amendment claim.Arnett, 196–99
Dissenting opinions
The three dissenting justices wrote two opinions. William O. Douglas, nearing the end of his long tenure on the Court, wrote a dissent focusing on the free speech issues. He also joined, along with William Brennan, a longer and broader dissent by Marshall.
Douglas
"The federal bureaucracy controls a vast conglomerate of people who walk more and more submissively to the dictates of their superiors", Douglas began. The previous year, he had dissented when the Court, in United States Civil Service Commission v. National Ass'n of Letter Carriers held that the Hatch Act's ban on active participation in political campaigns by federal employees was constitutional. "Today's decision deprives them of other important First Amendment rights."Arnett, 203–06
Douglas reminded his colleagues that, in Pickering v. Board of Education, where the Court had first held that the First Amendment extends to speech by public employees, they had found the petitioner teacher's free-speech interest on a matter of public concern more important than the injury to reputation the school board had claimed to justify dismissing him. Although there it had declined to extend its holding to cases involving speech that adversely reflected on immediate superiors or affected relations among coworkers, Douglas said that was "irrelevant" here as the speech was on a matter of public concern. The Court, by siding with the OEO, had allowed "Peter's Inversion", from the popular management book The Peter Principle, under which employees are rewarded by their superiors for loyalty and submissiveness to the organization over the actual goal of their work, to take hold in the federal government. "It is, of course, none of a court's problem what the employment policies may be", Douglas wrote. "But once an employee speaks out on a public issue and is punished for it, we have a justiciable issue."
Marshall
thumb|right|Justice Marshall in the 1970s
Justice Marshall's dissent addressed every issue. He first considered the hearing question. "We are hardly writing on a clean slate in this area", he observed, citing not just Roth and Perry but other recent cases where the Court had held an adversary hearing was a necessary prerequisite of the adverse government action. Marshall characterized Rehnquist's "bitter with the sweet" as a "wry" phrase, but took exception to the concept, noting that until Goldberg the same standard had been used to limit the due process rights of welfare recipients. Accepting it, as he noted the majority of the justices had not, "would amount to nothing less than a return, albeit in somewhat different verbal garb, to the thoroughly discredited distinction between rights and privileges which once seemed to govern the applicability of procedural due process."Arnett, 206-211
Studies had shown that the stigma of being dismissed from a government job made it very difficult for those in that position to find equivalent private employment, especially when accompanied by allegations of misconduct. "Given the importance of the interest at stake, the discharged employee should be afforded an opportunity to test the strength of the evidence of his misconduct by confronting and cross-examining adverse witnesses and by presenting witnesses in his own behalf, whenever there are substantial disputes in testimonial evidence", Marshall wrote. Thus, as in Goldberg, the government's actions here posed the threat of interrupting the only income a recipient might have, even temporarily.
 Kennedy had not been unaffected—despite his generous salary, he "was nonetheless driven to the brink of financial ruin while he waited. He had to borrow money to support his family, his debts went unpaid, his family lost the protection of his health insurance and, finally, he was forced to apply for public assistance."Arnett, 212-220
Marshall responded harshly to Powell's suggestion that Kennedy need not worry because public assistance would be available:
Even the promise of future back pay could not ameliorate the economic setbacks of a sudden loss of pay. The Court, Marshall reminded his fellow justices, had understood as much in Sniadach v. Family Finance Corp. where it had held an employee facing garnishment of his wages was entitled to a hearing beforehand for that reason.Arnett, 221-22 
The Court had recognized situations such as Cold Storage and Fahee where a compelling governmental interest justified postponing the hearing until after the action, Marshall allowed. But he found neither of the government's cited interests here strong enough. "The applicable statute does not prohibit prior hearings but rather makes them discretionary with the agency", he noted, and ACUS had found that agencies that required pretermination hearings actually finished those proceedings, either way, more quickly. The 30-day period between notice of dismissal and the employee's last day was, to Marshall, more than enough time to schedule a hearing if desired. As to the second reason, the possibility of an employee facing termination becoming disruptive, "he could be put on administrative leave or temporarily assigned to a less sensitive position pending his hearing, as currently provided for by regulation."Arnett, 223–25
Marshall then turned to the First Amendment question. "The 'efficiency of the service' standard would appear to bring within its reach, as permissible grounds for dismissal, even truthful criticism of an agency that in any way tends to disrupt its operation", he observed. "The majority purports to solve this potential overbreadth problem merely by announcing that the standard in the Act 'excludes protected speech' ... [But t]he Court's answer is no answer at all" for it misunderstood how the overbreadth doctrine is applied.Arnett, 229–31
Aftermath
After the case was remanded to the district court, it voided its reinstatement order. OEO fired Kennedy again in October; he once again appealed to the CSC. In April 1975 the commission overturned the dismissal and again ordered him reinstated with back pay.
Subsequent jurisprudence
Lower courts hearing cases in which other public employees had fought their terminations alleging due process violations found Arnett immediately dispositive of the previously unsettled hearing question. Judge Frank A. Kaufman of the District of Maryland relied on Arnett and its "divergent" opinions to deny a plaintiff back pay after having previously ordered the hearing that Arnett had held not required.
Other courts noted the difficulty of clearly interpreting the case and the necessity to read all the opinions to ascertain its holding. One of the first federal courts to consider it complained that "[u]nfortunately, no clear majority opinion emerged from this case and the five separate opinions served merely to obfuscate what had been until that time a relatively settled area of the law ... badly fragmenting whatever precedential value Arnett may have as a basis for a decision in the instant cases". The California Supreme Court, considering the case of a medical consultant challenging his dismissal over long lunch breaks in which he was seen at local bars drinking heavily, noted that "the court's full decision is embodied in five opinions which reveal varying points of view among the different justices" and after reviewing and citing all the opinions in the case along with other precedents concluded that Rehnquist's "bitter with the sweet" had been rejected by the other six justices. It applied the balancing tests they resorted to and held for the plaintiff. Judge Richard Cameron Freeman of the Northern District of Georgia similarly observed that while Arnett was seen as the "leading" case on the issue, "[i]n light of the fact that five separate opinions were filed ... the rationale in that case is by no means clear."
The Court's own Mathews v. Eldridge decision, two years after Arnett, in which Powell's majority opinion had used a balancing test similar to that concurrence to conclude that the respondent was not entitled to a hearing before his disability benefits were terminated, led other courts to favor that approach over the plurality opinion's. In a case where he and his colleagues had unanimously held for a dismissed psychiatric aide at a state hospital, Justice Kenneth J. O'Connell of the Oregon Supreme Court took exception to Powell's contention that requiring pretermination hearings could increase administrative costs and drag disciplinary processes out, given that the ACUS study referred to by Barnhill at oral argument showed that the opposite was true. "In fact," he wrote, "a pre-termination hearing should enhance efficiency by giving the agency an incentive to expedite disposition of the matter, allowing it to get on with its primary functions."Tupper, 1347–48 At the D.C. Circuit, Judge Roger Robb dissented in a case where the court had ordered the petitioner be granted a hearing on his dismissal from both his positions as an Air Force civilian employee and reserve officer, noting that Arnett did not apply to the military.
By 1982, that was effectively settled law. Future Supreme Court justice Anthony Kennedy, then on the Ninth Circuit, observed that recent cases had shown a "strong presumption that a public employee is entitled to some form of notice and opportunity to be heard before being deprived of a property or liberty interest" and in a footnote rebuked the lower court that had relied on the Arnett plurality in upholding the teacher's dismissal in the instant case.Vanelli, at 778n8 "Although there were several separate opinions filed in Arnett v. Kennedy", the Idaho Supreme Court similarly observed the next year in upholding the dismissal of a state college security chief fired for racially tinged remarks to a newspaper, "the United States Supreme Court and the lower federal courts have consistently followed the reasoning of the separate opinion written by Justice Powell", wrote Justice Stephen Bistline.
Not all the lower courts considered it as precedent on the procedural questions. In 1980 An en banc Fifth Circuit divided sharply in Davis v. Williams on whether Arnetts holding that the Pendleton Act's "for such cause as will promote the efficiency of the service" was not impermissibly vague or overbroad applied as well to the similar catchall "making derogatory statements or adversely criticizing department policy, activities, or officers" under which the petitioner had been fired for making remarks critical of a town fire chief in the local newspaper. "[I]ronically, these catch-all provisions, so often attacked on vagueness (due process) and overbreadth (first amendment) grounds", observed Judge Thomas Gibbs Gee, writing for the majority, "probably give the only notice that can practically and effectively be given that the employer thinks itself entitled to impose punishment on grounds that are not set out with particularity." He pointed to Arnett and Parker v. Levy, where the Court had upheld an Air Force physician's criminal conviction at court martial for making remarks urging disobedience of any orders to participate in the Vietnam War, as guiding authorities.
Judge Alvin Benjamin Rubin, in dissent, responded that while such a general edit might constitutionally cover a conduct, it could not so cover speech. The fire department was not, as the majority admitted, a military unit so Parker could not be so readily applied, and he distinguished Arnett by noting that the Pendleton Act's language was supported by longstanding guidance from the CSC and other agencies. "None of these buttresses supports this ordinance", Rubin wrote. "There is no state court interpretation that safeguards constitutionally protected speech, there is no counsel to advise on the ordinance and there is no administrative history."Davis at 1106
Later Supreme Court cases
The differences of opinions among the justices continued as they heard similar cases in the years after Arnett. In Goss v. Lopez, where a 5-4 majority upheld a district court's finding that several Ohio high school students had been unconstitutionally suspended without a prior hearing, Justice White, writing for the majority, invoked his Arnett opinion. But Powell, whose opinion he had also cited, appeared to embrace the plurality theory when writing for the dissenters: "[T]he very legislation which 'defines' the 'dimension' of the student's entitlement, while providing a right to education generally, does not establish this right free of discipline imposed in accord with Ohio law. Rather, the right is encompassed in the entire package of statutory provisions governing education in Ohio—of which the power to suspend is one."Goss, at 586–87 
In 1976's Bishop v. Wood, the Court upheld the firing of a North Carolina police officer who claimed the grounds for his dismissal were fallacious. "A property interest in employment can, of course, be created by ordinance, or by an implied contract", Justice John Paul Stevens, who had replaced Douglas, wrote for a 5-4 majority that affirmed the Arnett plurality. "In either case, however, the sufficiency of the claim of entitlement must be decided by reference to state law." Since the North Carolina Supreme Court had previously decided that a public employee had a right to expect continued employment only if the employer explicitly guaranteed it, and although Bishop had been classified as a permanent employee there was no explicit guarantee, he had no property interest to assert due process over.Bishop, at 344–47
Justices Brennan, White and Blackmun wrote separate dissents, joined by combinations of the other dissenting justices. The first called the majority's reading of the municipal ordinance that Bishop had based his property claim on "strained" and said the Court should have considered whether it was objectively reasonable for him to have expected continued employment before it decided whether there was a property interest.Bishop, 354 White, saying "the decision of the majority rests upon a proposition which was squarely addressed and in my view correctly rejected by six Members of this Court in Arnett", reiterated this at length, joined by all the other dissenters, quoting from Powell's Arnett concurrence as well as his and Marshall's dissents. "The ordinance plainly grants petitioner a right to his job unless there is cause to fire him", he wrote  "Having granted him such a right it is the Federal Constitution, not state law, which determines the process to be applied in connection with any state decision to deprive him of it."Bishop, 355–61
Two years later, the Court heard Memphis Light, Power & Gas Division v. Craft, the appeal of a public utility's proposal to interrupt service to a customer over a disputed portion of their bills. Craft and the other customers argued that they had a property interest in continued service and that was, as with the welfare payments in Goldberg, a basic enough necessity as to require the pretermination hearing the majority had found unnecessary in Arnett. Powell wrote for the majority this time, holding with the customers. "Although the underlying substantive interest is created by 'an independent source such as state law,' federal constitutional law determines whether that interest rises to the level of a 'legitimate claim of entitlement' protected by the Due Process Clause," he wrote.Memphis Light, at 9 While Arnett is cited only twice in the case and not discussed, Thomas W. Merrill, Charles Evans Hughes Professor at Columbia Law School, considers that line to have qualified Arnett in a way that became significant later, by making it clear that any procedures provided by the state in statute or otherwise as a remedy against wrongful deprivation of a property interest still had to meet federal standards.
White stated that much more clearly, and in a way that he later characterized as a rejection of the Arnett plurality's opinion, in 1980's Vitek v. Jones, where a prison inmate challenged his transfer to a psychiatric hospital per state law as nevertheless requiring a preliminary hearing. The state again argued that the plaintiff had adequate procedural protections in the statute. But, White wrote, "These minimum requirements [of procedural due process are] a matter of federal law[;] they are not diminished by the fact that the State may have specified its own procedures that it may deem adequate for determining the preconditions to adverse official action." 
Logan v. Zimmerman Brush Co.
In 1982, after eight years of working out Arnett, the Court heard Logan v. Zimmerman Brush Co. The petitioner, having alleged the respondent fired him due to his disability, had filed a timely complaint with a state administrative agency that was required to hold a fact-finding conference within 120 days. When the respondent noted at the conference that the deadline had been missed by five days, and failed to persuade the agency to dismiss the complaint, it successfully petitioned the Illinois Supreme Court for a writ of prohibition which petitioner appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
Blackmun wrote for a five-justice majority on a court that held unanimously that Logan had a property interest in his discrimination claim and that he had unconstitutionally been denied due process when the state administratively voided the claim due to no fault of his own without considering its merits.Logan, at 432–35 Powell concurred, joined by Rehnquist, but limited his opinion strictly to the unusual facts of the case and saw no need to make sweeping judgements based on it.Logan, 443–44 In rejecting the statutory provisions the state had followed to the letter as sufficient due process, Villanova professor Karen Flax observes that Logan sub silentio overruled Arnett, as Burger joined Blackmun's majority opinion, leaving Rehnquist alone with his Arnett theory of property (Stewart, the other member of that case's plurality, had left the Court the year before Logan).
Cleveland Board of Education v. Loudermill
In 1985 another case of a public employee alleging the lack of a hearing prior to termination was a due process violation came to the Supreme Court on appeal from the Sixth Circuit. A 1980 background check discovered that James Loudermill, a security guard employed in the Cleveland schools through a private contractor the year before, had not disclosed a 1968 grand larceny conviction in response to a question on the application asking if he had any felony convictions when he was hired in 1979. He said he believed the conviction had been a misdemeanor, and stated as such in his response to the termination letter he received. A referee recommended Loudermill be reinstated, but the city's Civil Service Commission rejected it and upheld the firing., hereafter Loudermill I
Loudermill could have sought state judicial review but instead filed a Section 1983 suit in federal court for the Northern District of Ohio, alleging that his rights had been violated when he was dismissed not only without a pretermination hearing but an opportunity to respond. It was dismissed for failure to state a claim, with the court holding to the Arnett precedent that despite his clear property interest in the job he was not entitled to those processes absent statutory language allowing them. Loudermill appealed to the Sixth Circuit, which joined the case with another brought by Richard Donnelly, a school bus mechanic in the Cleveland suburb of Parma who, following his dismissal for failing an eye examination, had gone through the same process (with similar results due to Loudermill's precedent) but had also sought state review, going as far as the Ohio Supreme Court denying his petition for review.
Judge William H. Timbers of the Second Circuit, sitting by designation, wrote for himself and Gilbert S. Merritt Jr. in considering the "seminal" opinions in Arnett. The school districts in both cases urged the court to adopt the plurality opinion, but Timbers said it had "yet to be enshrined in our law" and noted that courts had overwhelmingly preferred to rely on Powell's concurrence. Therefore, the majority distinguished the case from Mathews and held a pretermination hearing was required, vacating that part of the district court's ruling.Loudermill I, at 560–63 Dissenting Judge Harry W. Wellford concurred in some minor aspects of the majority holding but dissented from that view, finding that what Loudermill and Donnelly had received in due process prior to termination was equivalent to what Kennedy had gotten, and none of the majority's precedents were apposite.Loudermill I, at 564–66
Both school districts petitioned the Court for certiorari. Loudermill cross-petitioned, seeking reversal of the parts of the Sixth Circuit's ruling adverse to him. The Court granted all three in 1984 and heard arguments that December., hereafter Loudermill II
The Court issued its decision in March 1985. All the justices save Rehnquist, who by then had replaced Burger as Chief Justice, held for Loudermill and Donnelly. White wrote for the majority, observing that the district court had relied on the Arnett plurality in dismissing the cases. While that had sometimes seemed to have gained acceptance in Goss and other cases, Vitek and Logan to him indicated that the majority of the Court rejected it. So it was time to say so explicitly:Loudermill II, at 540–41
For this reason, White concluded, some form of hearing, not fully adversarial but at least notice and an opportunity to respond to any charges underlying termination, was required of public employers. "The opportunity to present reasons, either in person or in writing, why proposed action should not be taken is a fundamental due process requirement", he wrote. "The tenured public employee is entitled to oral or written notice of the charges against him, an explanation of the employer's evidence, and an opportunity to present his side of the story."Loudermill II, at 546
Marshall concurred in the judgement, but restated his belief that public employees were entitled to a full adversarial hearing if they wanted one prior to termination since they might be facing a potentially catastrophic loss of income, even temporarily. "[I]n requiring only that the employee have an opportunity to respond before his wages are cut off, without affording him any meaningful chance to present a defense, the Court is willing to accept an impermissibly high risk of error with respect to a deprivation that is substantial", he wrote.Loudermill II, 549–50 Brennan, in a separate opinion that concurred in most of the majority opinion, indicated his agreement with Marshall and added his concern that the Court should have been more specific about the level of process required, since even though the respondents here had been satisfied with what the Court granted them other litigants, especially those who disputed their employers' versions of the facts, would benefit from a pretermination adversarial hearing. He also felt the record was insufficient for the majority to have so lightly dismissed the issue of the long delay both respondents faced in getting a hearing after termination and would have remanded the case to district court to better develop the evidence.Loudermill II, 551–59
Rehnquist began his dissent, one of the few times a Chief Justice has been the sole dissenter, by quoting at length from the relevant portion of his Arnett opinion, followed by the statute that outlined what both respondents could have been terminated for. After summarizing the following paragraph and the procedure they were entitled to, he wrote that "in one legislative breath Ohio has conferred upon civil service employees such as respondents in these cases a limited form of tenure during good behavior, and prescribed the procedures by which that tenure may be terminated." Rehnquist then quoted from the words of Justice Potter Stewart, the third member of the Arnett plurality (who had also by then left the Court), in Roth, to the effect of property interests deriving from state law, and exhorted his colleagues "to recognize the totality of the State's definition of the property right in question, and not merely seize upon one of several paragraphs in a unitary statute to proclaim that in that paragraph the State has inexorably conferred upon a civil service employee something which it is powerless under the United States Constitution to qualify in the next paragraph of the statute." By reading the statute so selectively, the majority had made it easier through "somewhat tortured reasoning" to construe the plaintiffs' claims as a property interest.Loudermill II, 560–63
In its absence, the balancing-test approach the Court had been employing had reached results Rehnquist admitted might be 
Analysis and commentary
A comment in the William & Mary Law Review later in 1974 expressed doubt that the case would stand as precedent in other cases involving government employees alleging wrongful termination, even those with minimal factual differences, due to the fractured nature of the opinions. The plurality's "analysis appears vulnerable on several fronts", it said. Strongest among them was the context in which the FFLA was passed:
The comment found further flaws in the other opinions. Marshall had pointed out to the plurality that in other cases where it held a pretermination or predeprivation hearing constitutionally required was the statute held to be an inherent limitation on the property interest. But none of those cases had included statutory provisions for the termination or revocation of that interest, either. And Powell's "legislative grace" remark was, the comment held, a misreading of Rehnquist's formula: "[He] did not claim that the right to due process springs directly from the statute involved; he merely adduced that the right to due process attaches, in the absence of a contract, only if Congress creates a property interest."
"The lack of a uniform rationale among the opinions emphasiz[es] the likelihood that Kennedy perhaps would not be followed were even a slightly different state government employee removal statute to be challenged", the comment concluded. "The Kennedy opinions may be less significant for their approbation of adverse action under the Lloyd-LaFollette Act than for their rejection of the plurality's argument that a statute can limit the entitlement it creates ... Contrasting the relative solidarity of the six Justices on the attachment issue with their lack of agreement on the results of the balancing process indicates that Kennedy will provide only weak authority for upholding other termination procedures that may work even a slight shift in the balance of conflicting interests.""Approbation", at 168  
In a Harvard Civil Rights–Civil Liberties Law Review comment a year later, Philip Byler was unreservedly critical of the plurality. Roth, from which Rehnquist had said it was derived, "did not contemplate legislative definition of the procedures safeguarding property interests free from judicial scrutiny." Instead it proposed the two-part test, which the Court has followed in other cases, of first determining whether a property interest exists, and then if there is what process is necessary. "Rehnquist destroyed the constitutional implications of Roth by collapsing the second stage of the test, determining the appropriate procedural protections, into the first, determining the substantive nature of the interest."
As a practical matter, Byler argued, that would give legislatures "unlimited discretion to define the procedural protections applicable to statutorily created property rights." The only check on that power would be "the political power of the groups adversely affected." Byler suggested instead that the Court renew its commitment to the Roth test, otherwise it would "effectively undermine the legislative-judicial separation of powers that [Rehnquist] had elsewhere been so anxious to protect." He also says Rehnquist ignored the LLFA's legislative history.
Rehnquist was not the only justice whose opinion came in for criticism from Byler. Powell had rejected the use of pretermination hearings by other federal agencies as an argument for requiring one in the instant case, saying their use could not be taken to mean they were constitutionally mandated. But they were cited not to support that argument, instead to show that such hearings need not be as administratively burdensome as skeptics believed. "[He] fails to recognize that the admittedly important government interest in efficiency would not be substantially adversely affected by the procedural safeguards sought by Kennedy."Byler, 492–95
As Marshall had, Byler faulted Powell for his dismissive attitude to some of the hardships that those believing themselves to have been wrongfully terminated may experience while awaiting a post-termination hearing, since they could be remedied if the hearing vindicated the employee. "Reinstatement and back pay may remedy a wrong, but they do not justify it" Byler wrote. "The Court should not embrace the proposition that a wrong may be done if it can be undone."
In a 1982 paper, Emory professor Timothy Terrell said that the Arnett plurality at least acknowledges a reality of property that Logan and later decisions avoided discussing: the connection between substance and procedure. To him the need for due process is strongest in situations like Arnett and Logan where the government is the only available option for dispute resolution.
See also
List of overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
References
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States civil due process case law
Category:United States public employment case law
Category:1974 in United States case law
Category:Whistleblowing in the United States
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
"""

From "Aro Manufacturing Co. v. Convertible Top Replacement Co." ==> """
Aro Manufacturing Co. v. Convertible Top Replacement Co., 365 U.S. 336 (1961), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court redefined the U.S. patent law doctrine of repair and reconstruction.. The decision is sometimes referred to as Aro I because several years later the Supreme Court readdressed the same issues in a second case in 1964 involving the same parties—Aro II..
350px|thumb|right|Convertible Top Assembly of U.S. Pat. No. 2,569,724
 Background 
The specific controversy in Aro concerned the replacement of a fabric top portion of an automobile convertible roof assembly. After some years, the tops became torn or discolored, often as a result of bird droppings,See Convertible Top Care  ("Should you get bird dropping on your top, remove them immediately. They are very acidic and can quickly damage tops."). and owners wished to replace the cloth part without buying an entire new convertible top assembly.This point is illustrated by a colloquy that occurred during the oral argument between Justice Tom Clark, who later joined in the majority opinion, and counsel for the patentee, Elliot Pollack. Justice Clark said that he had given his son Ramsey Clark, then a student and subsequently U.S. Attorney General, his old 1949 Oldsmobile convertible, which had the patented top. Justice Clark had noticed that the cloth had become discolored or corroded, apparently by action of Washington's weather or birds, and although the product was still operative he was dissatisfied with its appearance and yet did not want to have to pay a second patent royalty to fix it. Pollack suggested that Justice Clark or his son could use a needle and thread to sew patches over the bad parts. Justice Clark said that he did not want to do that ("It would not be practical because the leak would come into the sewing the thread and also that it would cost so much to take the top off and -- and sew it, would [make] it cheaper for me to buy another top"), and Pollack felt he could offer no further suggestion. Justice Clark appeared dissatisfied with the answer. See Oral Argument; Written Transcript Text. The patentUS patent 2,569,724 covered the combination of the cloth and a number of metal parts that remained serviceable. Aro was a company that engaged in the supply of replacement cloth tops that fit various car models. Because Aro declined to pay a royalty to the patentee, patent infringement litigation followed.
Previous state of law
Prior to the Supreme Court's decision in Aro I, when a purchaser of a patented product replaced some components of the product (because they were worn or otherwise unsatisfactory to the owner of the product), U.S. lower courts made the decision whether the conduct was permissible repair or impermissible reconstruction of the patented article by using a complex, multi-factor balancing test. The courts weighed against one another factors such as the following, although there was no common denominator for them: the cost of the replaced component or components relative to the cost of the entire article, the number of replaced components versus the total number of components, the relative life spans of the different components, and whether the replaced component was the heart, essence, or “gist” of the invention. Thus the court of appeals had said in its opinion that the fabric "is not a minor or relatively inexpensive component" of the patented combination, or an element that would expectedly wear out after a very short period of use—although its "expectable life span" is shorter than that of the other components—and, for these reasons, it concluded that "an owner would [not] rationally believe that...he was making only a minor repair" in replacing the worn-out fabric, but that, instead, the replacement "would be counted a major reconstruction".See Aro I, 356 U.S. at 343-44.
The Supreme Court's own few precedents, however, tended to paint with a broader brush instead of resorting to the foregoing factor analysis. The Supreme Court stated that “the distilled essence” of the prior case law came from Judge Learned Hand, who ruled in 1948 that "[t]he [patent] monopolist cannot prevent those to whom he sells from...reconditioning articles worn by use, unless they in fact make a new article".See Aro I, 365 U.S. at 343.
Accordingly, the Court rejected the factor analysis approach of lower courts to repair and reconstruction.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court reviewed the prior case law concerning repair and reconstruction, with a principal focus on its own rather than lower court opinions. It rejected the analysis of those lower courts using a many-factor, balancing test and instead held the proper test to be this:
The decisions of this Court require the conclusion that reconstruction of a patented entity,  unpatented elements, is limited to such a true reconstruction of the entity as to "in fact make a new article," after the entity, viewed as a whole, has become spent. In order to call the monopoly, conferred by the patent grant, into play for a second time, it must, indeed, be a second creation of the patented entity. …Mere replacement of individual unpatented parts, one at a time, whether of the same part repeatedly or different parts successively, is no more than the lawful right of the owner to repair his property. Measured by this test, the replacement of the fabric involved in this case must be characterized as permissible "repair," not "reconstruction."Aro I, 365 U.S. at 346.
The Court emphasized that an infringement analysis for making the subject matter claimed in a combination patent could not single out one element of the combination as "essential," but could find infringement only when all elements were made:
No element, not itself separately patented, that constitutes one of the elements of a combination patent is entitled to patent monopoly, however essential it may be to the patented combination and no matter how costly or difficult replacement may be. While there is language in some lower court opinions indicating that "repair" or "reconstruction" depends on a number of factors, it is significant that each of the three cases of this Court, cited for that proposition, holds that a license to use a patented combination includes the right "to preserve its fitness for use so far as it may be affected by wear or breakage."Aro I, 365 U.S. at 345.
On that basis, the replacement of the old fabric top was permissible repair rather than impermissible reconstruction. The opinion for the majority, by Justice Whittaker, largely accepted the arguments that the U.S. Justice Department made as amicus curiae.
UK repair law
A comparable result to that of Aro has been reached under UK law, although the latter goes somewhat further by allowing automobile repair to extend to the replacement of worn out parts subject to intellectual property protection.The fabric top in the Aro case was an unpatented component of a patented combination. In British Leyland Motor Corp v Armstrong Patents Co, the House of Lords held that Leyland could not prevent a third party (Armstrong) from supplying replacement tailpipes to purchasers of Leyland motor cars. despite the existence of an intellectual property right (copyright) in the tailpipe design. To allow Leyland the relief it sought would have the effect of derogating from the title Leyland had conveyed to car owners when they purchased the cars. This rationale is comparable to the doctrine of legal estoppel under US law.
Although Armstrong was a third party not in privity with Leyland, and a stranger to the car purchase transaction, nonetheless Armstrong was permitted to rely on the non-derogation rights of the car owners relative to Leyland (as Aro was permitted to rely on the rights of car owners to repair their property and keep it in good order). In his speech, Lord Bridge stated, “What the owner needs, if his right to repair is to be of value to him, is the freedom to acquire a previously manufactured replacement exhaust system in an unrestricted market.” In this regard, he observed that it was infeasible for the general public to make their own tailpipes or go to the village blacksmith to have them specially made. A comparable principle allowing third-party assertion of another's rights has been recognized in US law when the rights owner is not in a position effectively to assert his rights for himself.See, e.g., .
Commentary
Some commentary approved the Aro decision as providing more certainty and better balance of the public's and original equipment manufacturers' interests. Other commentators disapproved of the decision's "short shrift" for the contributory infringement claims of manufacturers to the exclusive right to sell repair parts for their products.
 Bageman
James C. Bageman explains the issue of repair vs. reconstruction as "another aspect of the problem of how far to extend the patent monopoly," because "to decide whether or not the repair doctrine is a defense to an allegation of contributory infringement is to decide whether the patentee should receive any additional compensation over and above what he received through the initial sale of his invention during the functional life of that device." The Aro test largely denies patentees this source of income. The issue then is providing sufficient incentive to inventors so that they will create and disclose inventions. "Compensation beyond this 'sufficiency' level is arguably unwarranted." Bageman considers it "doubtful that by removing
this source of compensation, prospective inventors will lose the economic incentive to create." He therefore concludes: "The Aro I test seems to provide a dearer, more well-defined standard. The resulting benefit to the producer and consumer of unpatented parts seems to outweigh the risk of loss of creative incentive resulting from the rejection of the [prior, multi-factor] test."James C. Bageman, Note, Contributory Infringement and the "Repair" Doctrine, 38 S.  363, 370–71 (1965).
 Caffrey 
Thomas F. Caffrey sees Aro as setting a standard under which repair will be the usual result and reconstruction a rare case. He observes that Justice Black, concurring in a separate opinion, is quite outspoken in describing the disadvantages of a "several-factor" test found in prior lower court opinions. Black "makes every effort to point up the deleterious effect that the rule advocated by the minority would have on small business enterprises" by "deterring small businessmen from engaging in activities that would have been found, if pursued, to be non-infringing." Caffrey then asks: "is the single test, propounded by the majority, as vague for its simplicity as the 'several-factor' test allegedly is for its complexity?" He responds that "the answer is decidedly no." In his view, inexplicitness is a virtue:
Any attempts to clarify the "making" test, be it by example or description or otherwise, would necessarily have the effect of dispelling any vestiges of simplicity that might surround it. Such attempts would undo all which the Court set out to accomplish in this opinion. . . . Thus, significantly, the Court has laid down an unequivocal test, unhampered by confusing, weakening qualifications. As a result, combination patent holders and small business entrepreneurs will better appreciate the limits of their respective offices, and the courts will less frequently find before them an issue of repair or reconstruction.Thomas F. Caffrey,
Case Note, 7  149, 152 (1961).
Schafran
Julius Schafran criticized the decision because "at present it appears that the rights afforded by a combination patent have been diminished, and it seems likely that findings of forbidden reconstruction will in the future become exceedingly scarce."Julius A. Shafran, Note, 49  988, 993 (1961).
Sease
Edmund Sease reviews the post-Aro case law. He classifies the cases into four categories:
 those cases where the part replaced made the combination patentable over the prior art;
 those cases where the part replaced is of a highly perishable nature and proper use exhausts the life of the part replaced in a short period of time;
 those cases where the part replaced is expected to last as long as the combination but has not done so because of unusual circumstances; and
 those cases where proper use of the combination destroys it.
Each type of case has different equities, he argues, and "therefore it is only fair that the results in cases falling into each of the four categories be different."Edmund J. Sease, Patent Law: Repair-Reconstruction: A Review, Analysis, and Proposal, 20  85, 104 (1970).
In case (1), Sease argues, "where the part replaced made the combination patentable over the prior art, the total contribution of the patentee to the art is his teaching of the combination per se as well as the teaching of the use of one particular element in the combination," Aro would wrongly find repair. But "[s]ince the patent grant, if it is to be meaningful, should protect the patentee's entire patentable contribution to the art, it is submitted that in cases such as this the replacement of the element (assuming it is not perishable), which had never been before used in
the combination, should amount to infringing reconstruction."
In case (2), where the part replaced is of a perishable nature, Sease agrees with Aro that replacement is repair: "The rightful user of a patented combination in most instances pays a fair consideration for that right of use, and to say that his right of use lasts only as long as a perishable element of the combination makes little sense from
either a business or legal point of view."
In case (3), "where the part replaced is expected to last as long as the combination, but because of extenuating circumstances did not, it is submitted that equities lie in favor of holding replacement to be only permissible
repair."
In case (4), "where proper use of the combination necessitates its destruction, it is submitted that equities lie in favor of holding any rebuilding of a combination as infringing reconstruction," because "when consideration was given for the right of use, and both parties knew that proper use dictated destruction, to hold that the rightful user after using and destroying the combination can salvage any single existing element and thereafter remake the combination without liability to the patentee, is certainly contrary to the reasonable intentions of the parties at the time of the bargained-for exchange, as well as a serious dilution of the value of the patent."
Sease claims his proposals are superior to Aro because that case's "sweeping rule fails to distinguish the differing equitable considerations involved where the part replaced made the combination patentable over the prior art and
was not of a perishable nature and was not a part expected to last as long as the combination that was destroyed because of unusual circumstances; the rule of Aro I further fails to distinguish the situation where proper use of the
combination involves a destruction of the combination."
 References 
External links
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1961 in United States case law
"""

From "Arrowsmith v. Commissioner" ==> """
Arrowsmith v. Commissioner, 344 U.S. 6 (1952), is a United States Supreme Court case regarding taxation. The case involves taxpayers who liquidated a corporation in 1937. The taxpayers (properly) reported the income from the liquidation as long-term capital gains, thus obtaining a preferential tax rate. Subsequent to the liquidation in 1944, the taxpayers were required to pay a judgment arising from the affairs of the liquidated corporation. The taxpayers classified this payment as an ordinary business loss, which would allow them to take a greater deduction for the loss than would be permitted for a capital loss..
The "Arrowsmith Doctrine" is a principle of United States Federal Income tax law that holds that financial restorations associated with prior income items take the same tax "flavor" as the prior income items.
The Commissioner of Internal Revenue characterized the payment of the judgment as part of the original liquidation transaction, and therefore the loss was a capital loss and not an ordinary business loss. The Tax Court disagreed with the Commissioner and found it to be an ordinary business loss. The Second Circuit Court of Appeals reversed the Tax Court and held it to be a capital loss. The U.S. Supreme Court agreed with the Second Circuit and held that it was a capital loss.
Allowing the income from the liquidation to be taxed as a capital gain, while allowing loss payments out of that income to be deducted as an ordinary business expense would result in a windfall for the taxpayers.Arrowsmith, 344 U.S. at 11. They would gain a double benefit by paying a lower tax on capital gain income, but would be able to offset high-rate income by using the ordinary loss deduction.
The taxpayers principally relied on the well-settled rule that each tax year stands alone.United States v. Lewis, . However, the Supreme Court held treating the proceeds of the liquidation consistently did not violate this rule, as it in no way attempts to reopen or amend the tax filings from 1937 to 1940.Arrowsmith, 344 U.S. at 9-10.
This case was decided prior to the enactment of Sec. 1341 of the Internal Revenue Code, however that statute would not have changed the outcome in this particular case.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 344
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1952 in United States case law
"""

From "Arthur Andersen LLP v. United States" ==> """
Arthur Andersen LLP v. United States, 544 U.S. 696 (2005), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court unanimously overturned accounting firm Arthur Andersen's conviction of obstruction of justice in the fraudulent activities and subsequent collapse of Enron. The Court found that the jury instructions did not properly portray the law Arthur Andersen was charged with breaking.. Even after the conviction was overturned, the damage to Arthur Andersen's reputation was such that it did not return as a viable business.
 Background 
During the fall of Enron, Arthur Andersen, Enron's accounting firm, instructed its employees to destroy documents relating to Enron after Andersen officials learned they would soon be investigated by the Securities and Exchange Commission. On March 6, 2002, a charge of obstructing an official proceeding of the Securities and Exchange Commission was filed against Arthur Andersen LLP in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas. The indictment was served by Michael Chertoff, who was subsequently appointed Secretary of Homeland Security by President George W. Bush. The jury found Arthur Andersen guilty on June 15. Since federal regulations do not allow convicted felons to audit public companies, Andersen surrendered its CPA license on August 31, effectively putting the firm out of business in the United States.
Andersen appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit. The Fifth Circuit affirmed the district court's decision. Andersen petitioned for a writ of certiorari to the Supreme Court, which was granted..
The issue was whether the jury had been properly communicated the law which Andersen was charged with violating. They were charged under (b)(2)(A) and (B), which made it a crime to "knowingly ... corruptly persuad[e] another person ... with intent to ... cause" that person to "withhold" documents from, or "alter" documents for use in, an "official proceeding". Arthur Andersen believed the instructions given to the jury were not proper. The jury was reportedly told "even if petitioner honestly and sincerely believed its conduct was lawful, the jury could convict". This is not true, held the Supreme Court. The statute they were being charged under used the language "knowingly ... corruptly persuade". Arthur Andersen managers did instruct their employees to delete Enron-related files, but those actions were within their document retention policy. If the document retention policy was constructed to keep certain information private, even from the government, Arthur Andersen was still not corruptly persuading their employees to keep said information private.
 Opinion of the Court 
In a unanimous decision by the Supreme Court, Arthur Andersen's conviction was overturned. Chief Justice William Rehnquist wrote the opinion for the court, and was joined by all associate justices.
In the court's view, the instructions allowed the jury to convict Andersen without proving that the firm knew it had broken the law or that there had been a link to any official proceeding that prohibited the destruction of documents. The instructions were so vague that they "simply failed to convey the requisite consciousness of wrongdoing", Rehnquist wrote. "Indeed, it is striking how little culpability the instructions required." Rehnquist's opinion also expressed grave skepticism at the government's definition of "corrupt persuasion"—persuasion with an improper purpose even without knowing an act is unlawful. "Only persons conscious of wrongdoing can be said to 'knowingly corruptly persuade,' " he wrote.
References
 Further reading 
 External links 
Category:Enron scandal
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Corporate crime
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States federal obstruction of justice case law
