"""

From "NLRB v. Kentucky River Community Care, Inc." ==> """
NLRB v. Kentucky River Community Care, Inc., 532 U.S. 706 (2001), is a US labor law case, concerning the scope of labor rights in the United States..
Facts
Staff working for Kentucky River Community Care, who worked as nurses, petitioned the National Labor Relations Board to be recognized as a bargaining unit to get a collective agreement for their workplace. The employer argued that registered nurses had no rights to bargain, as they were "supervisors" and not "employees" under the National Labor Relations Act of 1935 §2(11).29 USC §152(11)
Judgment
Five members of the Supreme Court held that six registered nurses who exercised supervisory status over others fell into the 'professional' exemption. Justice Scalia gave the opinion of the court, joined in full by Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justices O'Connor, Kennedy and Thomas. He said the following:
Justice Stevens dissented in part, joined by Justices Souter, Ginsburg and Breyer, arguing that if "the 'supervisor' is construed too broadly", without regard to the Act's purpose, protection "is effectively nullified".
See also
 United States labor law
 References 
External links
Category:United States labor case law
Category:National Labor Relations Board litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2001 in United States case law
"""

From "NLRB v. Mackay Radio & Telegraph Co." ==> """
NLRB v. Mackay Radio & Telegraph Co., 304 U.S. 333 (1938), is a United States labor law case of the Supreme Court of the United States which held that workers who strike remain employees for the purposes of the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA).. The Court granted the relief sought by the National Labor Relations Board, which sought to have the workers reinstated by the employer. However, the decision is much better known today for its obiter dictaBrisbin, A Strike Like No Other Strike: Law and Resistance During the Pittston Coal Strike of 1989-1990, 2002.Turner, "Restoring Balance to Collective Bargaining: Prohibiting Discrimination Against Economic Strikers," West Virginia Law Review, Spring 1994.Estreicher, "Strikers and Replacements," Labor Lawyer, 1987. in which the Court said that an employer may hire strikebreakers and is not bound to discharge any of them if or when the strike ends.Mackay, 304 U.S. at 345-346.
The Mackay doctrine, as the striker replacement portion of the ruling is known, is one of the most significant Supreme Court rulings in American labor law,Getman and Kohler, "The Story of 'NLRB v. Mackay Radio & Telegraph Co.': The High Cost of Solidarity," in Labor Law Stories, 2005.Atleson, Values and Assumptions in American Labor Law, 1983.Matheny and Crain, "Disloyal Workers and the 'Un-American' Labor Law," North Carolina Law Review, 2004.Pope, "How American Workers Lost the Right to Strike, and Other Tales," Michigan Law Review, 2004. and has defined collective bargaining in the United States since its publication. "Mackay Radio was more than a decision that provided an instrumental method for a firm to replace economic strikers and to resist their return to employment after a strike. It was also a decision that established important practices that constituted the conduct of union-management bargaining during the post-New Deal Era."Brisbin, A Strike Like No Other Strike: Law and Resistance During the Pittston Coal Strike of 1989-1990, 2002, p. 66.
The ruling is also highly controversial, even more than 80 years later. It is strongly and uniformly condemned by labor unions, and resolutely defended by employers. Among academics in the political sciences and other related disciplines, "the doctrine continues to provoke the notice and the nearly universal condemnation of scholars."Getman and Kohler, "The Story of 'NLRB v. Mackay Radio & Telegraph Co.': The High Cost of Solidarity," in Labor Law Stories, 2005, p. 13.
Background
Company history
The Mackay Radio & Telegraph Company was founded in 1884 by John William Mackay (a wealthy silver mine owner) and James Gordon Bennett as the Commercial Cable Company with the goal of providing transatlantic telegraph service. Mackay next incorporated the Postal Telegraph Company to expand the system across the continental United States. In 1901, Mackay formed the Commercial Pacific Cable Company to provide cable telegraphic service across the Pacific Ocean. Although Mackay died in 1902, his son, Clarence Mackay, continued to head the company. In 1925, Clarence Mackay founded Mackay Radio, and added a radio network to the telegraph business. In 1928, the Mackay Radio & Telegraph Co. merged with its two cable siblings and All America Cables to form the American Cable & Radio Corporation. The majority shareholder in the new company was the International Telephone & Telegraph Co."Clarence Mackay Dies At Home Here," New York Times, November 14, 1938; Coe, Wireless Radio: A Brief History, 1996; Sobel, ITT: The Management of Opportunity 1982.
Legislative background
On June 16, 1933, President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed the National Industrial Recovery Act into law. Section 7(a) of the NIRA guaranteed the right of labor unions to organize, and a wave of unionization swept the country. To administer Section 7(a), the National Labor Board (NLB) was created on August 5, 1933. The three-member NLB quickly adopted two sets of rules to deal with strikes and replacement workers. Whenever a strike occurred because of an employer's violation of Section 7(a), the NLB ordered the reinstatement of striking workers. But if the workers struck for economic reasons (for example, to win a wage increase), then the NLB refused to order the reinstatement of the strikers. Although at least one member of the Board strongly disagreed with the distinction between the two kinds of strikes and the legality of strikebreakers under Section 7(a), striker replacement became accepted federal labor policy.Logan, "The Striker Replacement Doctrine and State Intervention in Labor Relations, 1933-1938," in Industrial Relations Research Association Series: Proceeding of Fiftieth Annual Meeting, 1998.
In 1934, at the behest of the American Federation of Labor, Senator Robert F. Wagner began work on a bill that would have banned the replacement of striking workers. The bill was strongly opposed by the National Association of Manufacturers and other employer groups, which argued that the bill would permanently deprive replacement workers of the right to join a union, participate in a union, or become a full-time employee. Many of Sen. Wagner's legal and labor advisors also made the same arguments. The National Urban League also opposed the bill as since many AFL unions discriminated against African American workers, who were often employed as strikebreakers. The League felt the bill would be racially discriminatory and hinder the League's efforts to open union membership to all.
Wagner's bill never made it out of committee. When Wagner introduced a new version of the bill in 1935, the legislation omitted all reference to striker replacement. Committee staff reports noted that the bill conformed to existing Lochner era law and practice, which gave striking workers protections as employees but permitted striker replacement. The issue of striker replacement received almost no debate in the House or the Senate. The new bill was enacted, and on July 5, 1935, President Roosevelt signed the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) into law.
Section 2(3) of the National Labor Relations Act (29 U.S.C. §§ 151-169) states:
Strike
Labor unions began organizing in the broadcasting industry in the early 1930s. Among the most active of the unions was the American Radio Telegraphists Association (ARTA), later part of the CWA.Tower, "Labor Relations in the Broadcasting Industry," Law and Contemporary Problems, Winter 1958. ARTA would change its name to the American Communications Association and join the Congress of Industrial Organizations. In 1950, the union would be involved in another landmark Supreme Court case, American Communications Association v. Douds,. which upheld the Taft-Hartley Act's requirement that officers of labor unions sign affidavits pledging they were not members or supporters of the Communist Party. In 1966, the ACA merged with the Teamsters."Joseph Selly, 85, Dies," New York Times, March 8, 1991; Rabinowitz, Unrepentant Leftist: A Lawyer's Memoir, 1996. ARTA organized radio operators at Mackay Radio & Telegraph in early 1934. There were two units, one for "point-to-point" operators on land and one for operators at sea. The point-to-point operators were organized into three divisions, covering the three major employers (Mackay Radio, Globe Wireless, and RCA). In June 1935, ARTA members in the land and marine divisions at Mackay Radio decided to coordinate their bargaining so that both groups of workers might win a contract. The talks stalled after Mackay Radio threatened to declare bankruptcy, but the union pressed ahead with its demands in September. ARTA asked for recognition of the union, a written contract, the 48-hour week, and a 14.5 percent wage increase. The ARTA members at Mackay Radio held a vote and authorized a strike if no contract was forthcoming by September 23, 1935. No agreement was reached, and the strike began at 12:01 a.m. on October 5, 1935. In San Francisco, Mackay's primary transmission office on the West Coast, 60 of the 62 operators walked off the job. But the strike was far less successful elsewhere. Workers in Seattle and New York City walked out for only a few hours. In Washington, New Orleans, Chicago, and West Palm Beach, workers either did not strike or walked out in such few numbers as to make the strike ineffective. The company flew in 11 replacement workers from other offices to keep the San Francisco office functioning."Radio Men Call Strike," New York Times, October 5, 1935; "Radio Operators Begin Walkout," New York Times, October 6, 1935; "Reports On Radio Strike," New York Times, October 8, 1935.
By the early morning of October 8, 1935, it was apparent the strike had failed.  At a meeting between the union and a company representative early that day, the company announced that all but 11 men could return to work. The company representative handed the union a list containing the names of the 11 men, and said the 11 could apply for work. The men would be rehired, however, only if positions opened up. Although the list contained the names of some of the strongest union supporters, the union members voted to return to work on the company's terms. The strike ended at 6:00 a.m. that morning.  The 11 men applied for work, and seven were rehired two days later. The four operators not rehired were the most senior and best paid men, as well as the strongest union supporters.
ARTA immediately filed a complaint with the NLRB. The NLRB issued its own complaintA worker's or union's complaint does not automatically initiate NLRB action. Under the procedures of the Board, a Board agent will investigate the issue. If the agent finds that a prima facie case can be made for a violation of the Act, the NLRB will issue its own complaint. This initiates action by the Board or one of its Regional Offices, which will then hear testimony for both sides and issue a ruling. See: National Labor Relations Board, ULP Casehandling Manual, 2003. Because of a lack of legal staff and established agency procedures in 1935, the Board initially required its own General Counsel, Charles H. Fahy, to review and approve complaints before they were issued by Regional Offices. This requirement was not relaxed until January 1936. See: Getman and Kohler, "The Story of 'NLRB v. Mackay Radio & Telegraph Co.': The High Cost of Solidarity," in Labor Law Stories, 2005.Irons, "The New Deal Lawyers," 1982. on November 9, 1935, and a hearing was conducted from December 2 to December 20. The Board transferred authority to issue a ruling from the Regional Office to the national Board on December 19. On February 20, 1936, the NLRB issued its decision in Mackay Radio & Telegraph Co. The Board specifically avoided ruling on whether the replacement workers were strikebreakers and what right they had to their jobs.  Instead, the Board focused almost exclusively on the fact that the employer had discriminated against the four men based on their protected union activities.Mackay Radio & Telegraph Co., 1 NLRB 201, 216.
Legal appeals
Mackay Radio refused to comply with the board's order, and within days the board filed for enforcement with the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. The decision to take the case to the courts was not made lightly. NLRB staff were timing the issuance of decisions carefully, and the legal staff was on the lookout for cases which would enable the board to successfully defend a constitutional challenge to the NLRA. The appellate court heard oral argument on April 16, 1936. On January 11, 1937, the Court of Appeals declined 2-to-1 to enforce the board's order. Writing for the majority, Judge Curtis D. Wilbur held that while the strikers were employees under the NLRA, the NLRA unconstitutionally violated the Fifth Amendment and the constitutionally guaranteed freedom of contract. Judge Clifton Mathews concurred in the result. He found the NLRA constitutional, but concluded that the strikers were no longer employees. Judge Francis Arthur Garrecht concluded the NLRA was constitutional and that the strikers were employees under the meaning of the Act."Labor Bargaining By Law Held Void in Court Decision," New York Times, January 12, 1937.
But then on April 12, 1937, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the NLRA in NLRB v. Jones & Laughlin Steel Corp..
The NLRB asked for a rehearing by the Ninth Circuit in light of the Supreme Court's ruling in NLRB v. Jones & Laughlin Steel. The court agreed to do so.  But on rehearing, the appeals court again refused to enforce the Board's order. Although Judges Mathews and Garrecht held to their original views, Judge Wilbur now conceded the Act's constitutionality. However, he concluded that the strikers were no longer employees as defined by the Act. Only if workers walked off the job to protest an unfair labor practice did they remain employees."Rules Against NLRB," New York Times, October 20, 1937.
On January 15, 1938, Solicitor General Stanley Forman Reed appealed the case to the U.S. Supreme Court."Appeal In Mackay Case," New York Times, January 16, 1938. Certiorari was granted in February,See . and oral argument heard from April 5 to April 6, 1938. Arguing the case for the NLRB was General Counsel Charles H. Fahy. Reed had been nominated to the Supreme Court the day the appeal occurred, so the new Solicitor General, Robert H. Jackson,Three years later, Jackson, too, would be nominated and confirmed to a seat on the Supreme Court. argued the case for the United States. California attorney Louis W. Myers argued the case for Mackay Radio.Myers was a former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of California. Myers' predecessor on the Supreme Court of California had been Judge Curtis D. Wilbur.
Decision
Associate Justice Owen Roberts wrote the decision for a unanimous court. Justice Reed and Justice Cardozo did not participate in the oral argument or decision of the Court.Justice Reed had been Solicitor General until his nomination to the Court on January 15, 1938. He was confirmed on January 25, 1938, but did not participate in the argument or decision of this case. See: "Appeal In Mackay Case," New York Times, January 16, 1938. Justice Cardozo never participated in another oral argument or decision after November 1937. He suffered one heart attack on December 10, 1937, and a second on December 19. He also came down with a case of shingles, which may have precipitated the heart attacks. A stroke on January 8, 1938, left him paralyzed on his left side and blind in his left eye. Incapacitated, he was moved to a friend's home in New York City on April 26, 1938. He suffered a third heart attack on June 25, 1938, and a fourth on July 1. Cardozo died on July 9, 1938. See: Polenberg, The World of Benjamin Cardozo: Personal Values and the Judicial Process, 1997.
Half of Justice Roberts' opinion provides, in great detail, the facts of the case in question, covering the contract talks, the strike, the strike's collapse, the offer to return to work, and the various proceedings before the Court of Appeals.
Roberts began the substantive part of the Court's ruling by asserting the Court's jurisdiction without comment and dismissing Mackay Radio's claim that the appeal had violated federal rules of civil procedure.Mackay, 304 U.S. at 343-344.
Roberts next drew two conclusions. First, he found that a current labor dispute had existed as required under Section 2(3). Mackay Radio had argued that it was not at fault for the failed contract talks, but Justice Roberts concluded that was irrelevant. "The wisdom or unwisdom" of the union's decision to strike did not matter; all that mattered was that a current labor dispute existed.304 U.S. at 344. Second, Justice Roberts implicitly refused to involve the court in assessing whether Section 2(3) constitutionally made striking workers employees. Roberts quoted the relevant section of the NLRA, and concluded the workers were still employees under the plain meaning of the Act.304 U.S. at 345.
Next, Justice Roberts addressed the employer's claim that it was not guilty of an unfair labor practice (ULP). Mackay Radio had asserted that the Board had jurisdiction only over ULP cases, and this was not a ULP case. Justice Roberts agreed that no ULP had been committed in connection with the negotiations. But, in the ruling's most-quoted section, Justice Roberts addressed the question of whether Mackay Radio had committed a ULP for hiring the strikebreakers:
Although section 13 of the act, 29 U.S.C.A. 163, provides, 'Nothing in this Act (chapter) shall be construed so as to interfere with or impede or diminish in any way the right to strike,' it does not follow that an employer, guilty of no act denounced by the statute, has lost the right to protect and continue his business by supplying places left vacant by strikers. And he is not bound to discharge those hired to fill the places of strikers, upon the election of the latter to resume their employment, in order to create places for them.304 U.S. at 345-346.
The Court cited as authoritative National Labor Relations Board v. Bell Oil & Gas Co.NLRB v. Bell Oil & Gas Co., 91 F.2d 509 (5th Cir. 1937), involved an economic strike at a petroleum pumping station and refinery. The issue before the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals was two-fold:  1) Was the employer engaged in "commerce" as defined by the act?; and 2) The mootness of the Board's order requiring the employer to rehire one of the striking workers. The Court of Appeals dismissed the first claim, and ruled the transmission of petroleum and natural gas across state lines was "commerce" under the Act. The Court of Appeals found the Board's order vague, and remanded the case to the Board for clarification. In dicta, however, the appellate court noted that the Board had developed evidence showing that the striking worker had not been rehired due to anti-union animus. The Court of Appeals discussed approvingly the rationale for the order to reinstate. Bell Oil & Gas Co., 91 F.2d at 514. If Mackay Radio had refused to rehire the workers because of anti-union animus, then that would be an unfair labor practice, the court held. Reviewing briefly the evidence generated by the Board during the hearings, Justice Roberts concluded that anti-union animus had motivated the employer and thus reinstatement was proper.Mackay, 304 U.S. at 346-347.
While the employer had claimed that the Board's action violated the due process requirements of the Fifth Amendment. Justice Roberts, citing NLRB v. Jones & Laughlin Steel, concluded that Congress could infringe on property rights for reasonable purposes, including the suppression of labor strife. Hence, the Board's order was not a violation of the Fifth Amendment.304 U.S. at 347-348.
The Court's ruling concluded with a lengthy discussion of the nature of the Board's order. The employer had claimed that the Board's order was arbitrary and capricious. Justice Roberts reviewed at length the Board's evidentiary hearings, the language of the order, and the nature of the charges against Mackay Radio. Mackay Radio's claim, Roberts said, largely turned on whether the Board had failed to define a current labor dispute. But having already dismissed that argument earlier, Roberts concluded that the Board's order was appropriate.304 U.S. at 348-351.
The ruling of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals was reversed and remanded.
Subsequent collective bargaining developments
Collective bargaining at Mackay Radio
Mackay Radio asked for a rehearing by the Supreme Court, but the Court declined this request."Mackay Radio Asks Rehearing of Case," New York Times, June 11, 1938.
After very lengthy negotiations, ARTA members negotiated a contract with Mackay Radio in late 1939. The employer complained strenuously and publicly about the impositions the contract created, but did not commit any unfair labor practices. Implementation of the contract was rocky. Workers engaged in several job actions (such as work slow-downs) before receiving their raises in March 1940."Mackay Messages Subject to Delays," New York Times, January 31, 1940; "Mackay Service Back to Normal," New York Times, February 2, 1940; "Mackay Employes Get Pay Rise," New York Times, March 23, 1940.
ARTA workers struck again at Mackay Radio in 1948. The Supreme Court's ruling in NLRB v. Mackay Radio was used during that strike to deny reinstatement to over 60 striking workers."Labor Ruling Stayed," New York Times, March 19, 1948; "CIO Loses Battle on 'Hot' Traffic," New York Times, June 8, 1948.
Growing use of strikebreakers since 1970
Mackay Radio has had a significant impact on collective bargaining and labor relations in the United States.  As several legal scholars and others have noted, the decision makes the "United States... almost alone in the world in allowing permanent replacement of workers who exercise the right to strike."Quoted in Human Rights Watch, Unfair Advantage: Workers' Freedom of Association in the United States Under International Human Rights Standards, 2000. See also: Abraham, "Individual Autonomy and Collective Empowerment in Labor Law: Union Membership Resignations and Strikebreaking in the New Economy," New York University Law Review, December 1988; and Adams, "The Right to Participate," Employee Responsibilities and Rights Journal, 1992.
Although the Supreme Court permitted strikebreakers to be hired under the Mackay doctrine, replacement workers remained largely unused by employers from the mid-1930s to the early 1970s. Scholars attribute this to a gentlemen's agreement or social contract under which American employers and unions both agreed to seek labor peace. The increased use of strikebreakers began in the late 1960s, and trended significantly upward in the early 1970. President Ronald Reagan's replacement of striking air traffic controllers in 1981 reinforced the trend, perhaps sundering the social contract permanently.Committee on Labor and Human Resources, U.S. Senate, Workplace Fairness Act, S. Rep. No 102-111, 1991; LeRoy, "Regulating Employer Use of Permanent Striker Replacements: Empirical Analysis of NLRA and RLA Strikes 1935-1991," Berkeley Journal of Employment and Labor Law, 1995; Greenhouse, "Strikes Decrease to 50-Year Low...As Threat of Replacement Rises," New York Times, January 29, 1996; McCartin, "'Fire the Hell out of Them': Sanitation Workers' Struggles and the Normalization of the Striker Replacement Strategy in the 1970s," Labor: Studies in Working-Class History of the Americas, Fall 2005.
Some scholars assert that the Mackay doctrine contains too many exceptions to be used effectively and frequently and that strikebreakers are rarely used.Kirshman and Zentz, "Striker Replacements: The Law, the Myths, the Realities," Nevada Lawyer, January 1995. They point out that the use of or threat to use strikebreakers has led to a significant decrease in the number of strikes."Combination of Many Factors Seen Contributing to Decline in Strikes," Daily Labor Report, April 3, 1989. The threat to use strikebreakers may also act as a check on unreasonable union collective bargaining demands.Estreicher, "Collective Bargaining or 'Collective Begging'?: Reflections on Antistrikebreaker Legislation," Michigan Law Review, December 1994.Dau-Schmidt, "A Bargaining Analysis of American Labor Law and the Search for Bargaining Equity and Industrial Peace," Michigan Law Review, December 1992.
However, many scholars and studies draw the opposite conclusion. A 1991 study by the Government Accountability Office based on data from the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service found that, of all strikes from 1985 to 1989, about 10 percent of major and 16 percent of minor strikes involved the use of strikebreakers. The occurrence of replacement workers was three times higher in strikes which lasted at least a month in duration.General Accounting Office, Labor-Management Relations: Strikes and the Use of Permanent Strike Replacements in the 1970s and 1980s, January 1991. Academic studies support this conclusion.Olson, The Use of Strike Replacements in Labor Disputes: Evidence from the 1880s to the 1980s, 1991.LeRoy, "Lockouts Involving Replacement Workers: An Empirical Public Policy Analysis and Proposal to Balance Economic Weapons Under the NLRA," Washington University Law Quarterly, Winter 1996.LeRoy, "The Changing Character of Strikes Involving Permanent Striker Replacements, 1935-1990," Journal of Labor Research, December 1995.Cramton and Tracy, "The Use of Replacement Workers in Union Contract Negotiations: The U.S. Experience, 1980-1989," Journal of Labor Economics, October 1998.Pope, "How American Workers Lost the Right to Strike, and Other Tales," Michigan Law Review, December 2004.
One 1988 survey found that 35 percent of employers said that they would definitely hire replacement workers if struck, while another 45 percent said that they would consider doing so.
Not all strikebreakers permanently replace workers. But when replacement workers are permanent, the duration of the strike lengthens appreciably. The average duration of strikes in which replacement workers are used lengthened as much as 10-fold.Gramm, "Employers' Decision to Operate During Strikes: Consequences and Policy Implications," in Employee Rights in a Changing Economy: The Issue of Replacement Workers, 1991. Permanent replacements also dramatically affect the collective bargaining outcome, with unions settling on much less favorable terms.Gramm and Schnell, "Some Empirical Effects of Using Permanent Striker Replacements," Contemporary Economic Policy, July 1994.
Threats to use strikebreakers are also becoming prominent before a strike occurs. Several studies of collective bargaining tactics have found that management threatens to use strikebreakers more often than unions threaten to strike, and that the frequency of such threats increased.Walton, Cutcher-Gershenfeld and McKersie, Strategic Negotiations: A Theory of Change in Labor-Management Relations, 1994; Cutcher-Gershenfeld, "The Impact on Economic Performance of a Transformation in Workplace Relations," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, January 1991.
Some legal scholars have concluded that the Mackay doctrine has become a tool for allowing employers to engage in bad-faith bargaining. This creates a bargaining impasse, and the threat of strikebreakers coerces unions into accepting an employer's (unlawful) last offer.See also: Bandzak, "The Strike as Management Strategy," Journal of Economic Issues, June 1992.Lambert, "If the Workers Took A Notion": The Right to Strike and American Political Development, 2005.
Presumably, one implication of the Mackay ruling was that employers would seek to avoid unfair labor practice (ULP) strikes, since the Court had clearly given the protection of the law to such strikes. But this has not been borne out in practice. The social contract encouraging employers to refrain from unfair labor practices has broken down. Employers routinely challenge ULP charges in court (leading to lengthy litigation), and the relief offered under the NLRA has proved itself to be ineffective in discouraging employer ULPs. Consequently, "the most remarkable phenomenon in the representation process in the past quarter-century has been an astronomical increase in unfair labor practices by employers." The legal system "must bear a major share of the blame for providing employers with the opportunity and the incentives" to commit ULPs.Weiler, "Promises To Keep: Securing Workers’ Rights to Self-Organization Under the NLRA," Harvard Law Review, 1983, p. 1770 and 1787.
The growing use of strikebreakers under the Mackay ruling might have contributed to the development by unions of extra-legal organizing and collective bargaining tools. Allowing employers the permanent replacement of striking workers leads to union capitulation, not to bargaining or industrial peace, many legal scholars note. Unions subsequently seek ways out of this dilemma. The development of card check and neutrality agreements and the comprehensive campaign are logical outcomes of the breakdown of the organizing and collective bargaining protections of the National Labor Relations Act.Gross, Broken Promise: The Subversion of U.S. Labor Relations Policy, 1947-1994, 2003; Mishel, "Strengths & Weaknesses of Non-Workplace Strategies," Labor Research Review, Fall 1985; Fletcher, "The Corporate Campaign-Labor's Ultimate Weapon or Suicide Bomb?", North Carolina Law Review, 1986.Becker, "'Better Than a Strike': Protecting New Forms of Collective Work Stoppages under the National Labor Relations Act," University of Chicago Law Review, Spring 1994; Pope, "Next Wave Organizing and the Shift to a New Paradigm of Labor Law," New York Law School Law Review, 2005/2006; Heckscher, "Living With Flexibility," in Rekindling the Movement: Labor's Quest for Relevance in the Twenty-First Century, 2001.
Subsequent legal developments
The Supreme Court has extended the Mackay Radio ruling repeatedly since 1938, and the Congress enacted legislation addressing the issue of strikebreakers twice in the two decades after the decision.
In 1945, the Supreme Court issued its first decision on strikebreakers since Mackay Radio. In Republic Aviation Corp. v. NLRB,. the Court held that an employer committed a ULP when it hired strikebreakers because the employer had treated employees differently from how it would have treated them had they not been engaged in union solicitation.
Two years later, Congress passed the Taft-Hartley Act, which significantly affected the use of strikebreakers. One of the innovations of the Taft-Hartley Act provided a mechanism for workers to vote out ("decertify") a union. Section 9(e)(2) of the Taft-Hartley Act created decertification elections, which would permit workers to take a vote on whether they wished to retain existing union representation. Section 9(e)(2) had the intended"In effect, if not in words, Congress codified the Mackay doctrine—with a vengeance. And Congress was fully aware of the impact of allowing permanent replacements and denying strikers eligibility to vote." Silverstein, "If You Can't Beat 'Em, Learn to Lose, But Never Join Them," Connecticut Law Review, Summer 1998, p. 1371. side-effect of disenfranchising striking workers. Employers quickly exploited this loophole by hiring permanent replacement workers and then petitioning for a decertification election. The practice became so common that President Dwight Eisenhower denounced it several times.Krislov, "Union Decertification," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, July 1956; Elliott and Hawkins, "Do Union Organizing Activities Affect Decertification?", Journal of Labor Research, June 1982; Forman and Kraus, "Decertification: Management's Role When Employees Rethink Unionization," Journal of Nursing Administration, June 2003; Nilsson, "The Growth of Union Decertification: A Test of Two Nonnested Theories," Industrial Relations, July 1997; LeRoy, "Severance of Bargaining Relationships During Permanent Replacement Strikes and Union Decertifications: An Empirical Analysis and Proposal to Amend Section 9(c)(3) of the NLRA," University of California, Davis, Law Review, 1996.Silverstein, "If You Can't Beat 'Em, Learn to Lose, But Never Join Them," Connecticut Law Review, Summer 1998.
As the use of strikebreakers increased, the Supreme Court was forced to address several issues arising from the practice. One key issue was motive: Did it matter if the use of strikebreakers was motivated by anti-union animus? In Radio Officers' Union v. NLRB,. the Supreme Court held that proof of motive was indeed required. However, no proof of motive was needed where employer conduct "inherently" encouraged or discouraged union membership. A second issue involved use of the whipsaw strike. As unionization in an industry spread, unions encouraged employers to bargain as a group. To discourage employers from breaking away from the group, unions developed the whipsaw strike—in which the union would strike one employer at a time, one after another. Employer groups would counter the whipsaw strike by locking out all workers at all employers belonging to the group, and using strikebreakers to provide temporary or permanent replacements. The question before the Court was whether the lockout was an unfair labor practice. In NLRB v. Truck Drivers Local 449 ("Buffalo Linen Supply Co."),. This case is more commonly cited as "Buffalo Linen Supply Co." The National Labor Relations Board titles cases based on the ULP filed against the employer or the union.  In this case, the ULP had been filed against the employer, Buffalo Linen Supply Co.  However, complainant Truck Drivers Local 449 appealed the case to the courts. The courts refer to this case as "Buffalo Linen" in order to keep the reference to the original NLRB decision. the Court held that such a lockout was not a ULP.Rosenblum, Copper Crucible: How the Arizona Miners' Strike of 1983 Recast Labor-Management Relations in America, 1998.
In 1959, Congress addressed the inequities created by Section 9(e)(2) of the Taft-Hartley Act.  The Labor Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (also known as the Landrum-Griffin Act) amended the Taft-Hartley Act to permit striking workers to vote in a union decertification election held within one calendar year after the commencement of a strike.
The Supreme Court revisited the Mackay Radio ruling repeatedly from the early 1960s into the late 1980s. Many of the Court's decisions addressed the conditions under which an employer exhibited anti-union animus. In NLRB v. Erie Resistor Corp.,. the Court held that a grant of superseniority to strikebreakers constituted anti-union animus and was a ULP. Building on its ruling in Buffalo Linen Supply Co., the Supreme Court held in American Ship Building Co. v. NLRB,. that an employer may lock out its employees without violating the NLRA if a bargaining impasse has been reached and the lockout is for the purpose of applying economic pressure to support the employer’s bargaining position. However, the employer cannot hire permanent replacements, only temporary ones."The Unanswered Questions of 'American Ship'," Michigan Law Review, March 1966; McWilliams, "An Employer May Lock Out Employees Solely for the Purpose of Supporting His Bargaining Position After a Bargaining Impasse Has Been Reached. American Ship Bldg. Co. v. NLRB, 380 U.S. 300 (1965)," Texas Law Review, 1965. The high court further extended the "Mackay doctrine" in NLRB v. Brown Food Stores,. holding that an employer could lock out its employees in advance of a whipsaw strike so long as the employer only utilized temporary replacements and locked out all workers (not just those who supported the union). These cases did not address the partial lockout, however. The Court addressed that issue in 1967. In NLRB v. Great Dane Trailers, Inc.,. the Supreme Court held that an employer could avoid being charged with a ULP if it could provide a legitimate and substantial business justification for treating union workers differently than its other employees. However, even if the employer could offer such a justification, the NLRB could still attempt to show anti-union animus at trial.See also, variously, Morris, Developing Labor Law: The Board, The Courts, and the National Labor Relations Act, 1983; and Najita and Roberts, Roberts' Dictionary Industrial Relations, 1994.
Many of the Supreme Court's post-Mackay decisions involved balancing the rights of strikebreakers and those who crossed the picket line against the rights of striking workers. This was a logical outcome of the Mackay Radio decision, for the Mackay Court had asserted that strikers remained employees. But the Mackay Court never addressed the legal status of strikebreakers, which it now began to do.  In Belknap, Inc. v. Hale,. the Court held that strikebreakers who were offered permanent employment and then replaced to make room for returning strikers could seek relief in state court for breach of contract and misrepresentation.Stephens and Kohl, "The Replacement Worker Phenomenon in the Southwest: Two Years After Belknap. Inc. v. Hale," Labor Law Journal, January 1986. The Court also began to address the status of union members who crossed picket lines.  The Court upheld a union's ability to fine members who crossed picket lines.Abraham, "Individual Autonomy and Collective Empowerment in Labor Law: Union Membership Resignations and Strikebreaking in the New Economy," New York University Law Review, December 1988. and held that replaced strikers are entitled to reinstatement if the employer expands its workforce after a strike.. However, the Supreme Court held that a union may not compel an employer to fire union members who cross a picket line.. And in NLRB v. Granite State Joint Board,. the Supreme Court held that a union member who crosses a picket line can avoid union sanctions by simply resigning from the union. Upholding the right to freedom of association, the Court also held that unions may not constitutionally prohibit members from resigning in order to avoid sanctions for crossing picket lines.. The right to work, the Court said, even protected an employer's right to entice striking workers back to work with promises of promotions or better pay..
In 1991, the Supreme Court issued the most recent (as of early 2008) of its post-Mackay decisions. That year, the Court held that permanent replacements could not automatically be presumed to oppose an incumbent union. Therefore, use of strikebreakers was not automatically a presumption of anti-union animus..Flynn, "The Costs and Benefits of 'Hiding the Ball': NLRB Policymaking and the Failure of Judicial Review," Boston University Law Review, March 1995.
In 1994, an effort was made in Congress to repeal Mackay Radio. Members of the United Paperworkers' International Union conducted a nationwide strike against International Paper, one of the largest paper manufacturers in the world, in 1987. International Paper utilized permanent replacements as strikebreakers. The labor dispute was particularly bitter at the International Paper plant in the small town of Androscoggin, Maine.  The union was unsuccessful in winning a new contract, and an election held a year later decertified the union. The Maine AFL-CIO asked one of Maine's representatives in the House of Representatives to introduce a bill banning permanent replacements. The bill, known as the "Workplace Fairness Act," easily passed the House. On July 13, 1994, the bill was on the verge of passage in the Senate when it was blocked by a Republican-led filibuster."Senate Kills Bill Banning Strike Replacement Workers," Chicago Tribune, July 14, 1994; Dewar, "Senate Fails to Break Filibuster On Striker Replacement Bill," Washington Post, July 13, 1994.
Another effort to mitigate the effects of Mackay Radio occurred a year later. On March 8, 1995, President Bill Clinton issued Executive Order 12954, which barred the federal government from contracting with employers who permanently replaced striking workers. The United States Chamber of Commerce filed suit in federal court to have the executive order overturned. In Chamber of Commerce v. Reich, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit held that the NLRA preempted the executive order, and ordered that Executive Order 12954 no longer be enforced.Gregoire, "AFL-CIO v. Allbaugh: The D.C. Circuit Limits the President's Authority to Influence Labor Relations," Georgia State University Law Review, Summer 2003; Kimmett, "Permanent Replacements, Presidential Power, and Politics: Judicial Overreaching," Yale Law Journal, 1996.
Continuing legal uncertainty over the implications of Mackay Radio continue. This has affected decisions of the NLRB in particular. For example, in 1997, the National Labor Relations Board held in Target Rock,Target Rock, 324 NLRB 373 (1997), enf'd. 172 F.3d 921 (D.C. Cir. 1998) that advising replacement employees of their at-will employment status implied that the strikebreakers were not permanent replacements. But the Board later overruled Target Rock in 2007 in Jones Plastic & Engineering.Jones Plastic & Engineering, 351 NLRB 61; "Labor Board Clarifies Reinstatement Rights of Striking Employees," HR: Business & Legal Reports, October 8, 2007.
Assessment by academia
General assessment of Mackay Radio
Among political scientists and legal historians, "Mackay Radio" has been one of the most heavily criticized Supreme Court decisions, and the most derided of the Court's labor law rulings.Harris, "Coase's Paradox and the Inefficiency of Permanent Strike Replacements," Washington University Law Quarterly, Winter 2002. It has been called "the worst contribution that the U.S. Supreme Court has made to the current shape of labor law in this country." name="WeilerPrincipledReshaping">Weiler, "A Principled Re-Shaping of Labor Law for the Twenty-First Century," University of Pennsylvania Journal of Labor and Employment Law, 2001, p. 201. Scholars have lashed Mackay Radio for severely undermining the statutorily protected right to strike,Craver, "The National Labor Relations Act Must Be Revised to Preserve Industrial Democracy," Arizona Law Review, 1992.Getman and Marshall, "Industrial Relations in Transition: The Paper Industry Example," Yale Law Journal, 1993.Pollitt, "Mackay Radio: Turn It Off, Tune It Out," University of South Florida Law Review, 1991. calling the decision a "transparent maiming" of the NLRA.Silverstein, "If You Can't Beat 'Em, Learn to Lose, But Never Join Them," Connecticut Law Review, Summer 1998, p. 1371. Some have gone so far as to conclude that Mackay Radio now threatens to undermine the entire statutory scheme of American labor law.
Nearly every criticism of Mackay Radio is aimed at the Court's "duplicitous distinction" between firing and permanently replacing striking workers.Turner, "Restoring Balance to Collective Bargaining: Prohibiting Discrimination Against Economic Strikers," West Virginia Law Review, Spring 1994, p. 685. While some legal analyses concede the ruling might be technically correct under some concepts of the law, the distinction is "a hollow, technical difference" in the real worldSlater, "The 'American Rule' That Swallows the Exceptions," Employee Rights and Employment Policy Journal, 2007, p. 53. which has "rendered the strike useless and virtually suicidal...".Estlund, "The Ossification of American Labor Law," Columbia Law Review, 2002, p. 1527.
The ruling is so poorly decided, some scholars conclude, that only the doctrine of stare decisis can account for its continuing use by the Court.
Internal inconsistencies and problems
A number of problems have been identified in the Mackay Radio ruling itself which have led scholars to heavily criticize the decision.
Primary among these is that Mackay Radio directly contradicts the express language of the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA). Section 7 of the NLRA explicitly protects the right to strike. Section 8(a)(1) makes it an unfair labor practice for an employer "to interfere with, restrain, or coerce employees in the exercise of the rights guaranteed in section 7".National Labor Relations Act, Section 8(a)(1), at 29 U.S.C. §158. But an employer's ability to fire and permanently replace an employee for exercising her statutorily guaranteed right to strike greatly "interferes with" the right to strike. Furthermore, Section 8(a)(3) makes it an unfair labor practice to discriminate "in regard to hire or tenure of employment or any term or condition of employment to encourage or discourage membership in any labor organization..." Yet, an employer who declines to terminate workers who refuse to strike, agrees to retain workers who return to work, declines to fire replacement workers, and refuses to reinstate strikers clearly discriminates, in a most basic and fundamental way, against those who exercise the right to strike.Weiler, "A Principled Re-Shaping of Labor Law for the Twenty-First Century," University of Pennsylvania Journal of Labor and Employment Law, 2001, p. 201.Gorman and Finkin, Basic Text on Labor Law: Unionization and Collective Bargaining, 2004.LeRoy, "Employer Treatment of Permanently Replaced Strikers, 1935-1991: Public Policy Implications," Yale Law and Policy Review, 1995. The Taft-Hartley Act amendments do not alter this conclusion.
Mackay Radio also directly contradicts the NLRA's explicit statutory purpose of encouraging collective bargaining. According to Section 1 of the Act:
It is declared to be the policy of the United States to ... [encourage] the practice and procedure of collective bargaining and by protecting the exercise by workers of full freedom of association, self-organization, and designation of representatives of their own choosing, for the purpose of negotiating the terms and conditions of their employment or other mutual aid or protection.National Labor Relations Act, Section 1, at 29 U.S.C. §151.
Congress sought to redress the "inequality of bargaining power" between employees and employers. But by allowing an employer to permanently replace any worker who strikes, the Court explicitly ignored the explicit declaration of Congressional intent contained in Section 1.Bok, Gorman, Finkin, and Cox, Labor Law: Cases and Materials, 2006; Kilgour, "Can Unions Strike Anymore? The Impact of Recent Supreme Court Decisions," Labor Law Journal, 1990.
Another of the major criticisms of the ruling is its failure to cite sources or provide any reasoning to support the existence of an employer right permanently to replace strikers. The Court presented its conclusion as a series of assertions.  It did not discuss the words of the Act, did not provide logical arguments or rationales for its conclusions, and did not discuss alternative policy or economic or political choices. No policy justification was given for the ruling, and the Court never discussed the Act's legislative history to support the conclusion it reached.
Theoretical weaknesses
Scholars also criticize Mackay Radio on theoretical grounds. Among these are its implicit jurisprudence, its theoretical weaknesses, and the policy outcomes it promoted.
Many scholars see Mackay Radio as one of the last of the Lochner era decisions. From about 1890 to 1937, the Supreme Court tended to apply a strongly libertarian judicial philosophy. By 1937, shifting judicial philosophies within the Court as well as continuing economic and social upheaval led the Court to abandon its Lochner era philosophy.Gillman, The Constitution Besieged: The Rise and Demise of Lochner Era Police Powers Jurisprudence, 1993; Bernstein, "Lochner Era Revisionism, Revised: Lochner and the Origins of Fundamental Rights Constitutionalism," Georgetown Law Journal, November 2003; Cushman, Rethinking the New Deal Court: The Structure of a Constitutional Revolution, 1998; Sunstein, "Lochner's Legacy," Columbia Law Review, June 1987. But the language of Mackay Radio harkens back to Lochner era employment rights philosophies which many thought the Supreme Court had abandoned a year earlier. Mackay Radio implies that the rights the Court intended to protect preexisted the National Labor Relations Act and remained unaffected by the Act. For many legal analysts, it is clear that the Supreme Court relied heavily on and restated Lochner era doctrines developed by the courts and adopted by the NLRB's predecessor agencies.Klare, "Judicial Deradicalization of the Wagner Act and the Origins of Modern Legal Consciousness, 1937-1941," Minnesota Law Review, 1978. Indeed, the NLRB itself had adopted a Lochner era philosophy. The Board had conceded in its Reply Brief that an employer had the right to utilize strikebreakers. "The Act clearly does not forbid him, in the absence of such unfair labor practices, to replace the striking employees with new employees or authorize an order directing that all strikers be reinstated and new employees discharged."Getman and Kohler, "The Story of 'NLRB v. Mackay Radio & Telegraph Co.': The High Cost of Solidarity," in Labor Law Stories, 2005, p. 43, quoting Reply Brief for NLRB in NLRB v. Mackay Radio & Telegraph Co. The Supreme Court's decision not only squared completely with the Board's brief and previous Board decisions, but also reflected the deeply conservative construction of the Act that the NLRB had taken (worried that an assertive reading and application of the NLRA would lead the Court to find the Act unconstitutional). But the Court went much further in its decision than merely deferring to the expertise of the Board. The high court deliberately utilized 19th-century judicial rulings to protect employer prerogatives at the expense of employee rights. Although the intent of the NLRA was to protect strike actions to provide workers with a source of bargaining power, Mackay Radio inverted that dynamic so that the strike became an advantage to employers.
Commentators also point out that, even if the ruling's Lochner era legal analysis is appropriate and correctly applied, Mackay Radio is flawed due to the economic assumptions the Court made. Justice Roberts' opinion assumed perfect competition in labor markets, a lack of monopsony, no statistical discrimination, no information asymmetry, market rationality, and a legal regime which provided a level playing field and equal protection under the law. Some—and possibly all—of these assumptions are incorrect. Worse, however, the Mackay Radio decision fashioned strong incentives which made it rational for one bargainer (management) to refuse to cooperate and opt out of bargaining.
The Court also made assumptions about the business necessity of hiring permanent replacement workers which proved incorrect. Legal scholars, economists and others have pointed out that because most strikes are of an extremely short duration, employers do not need to hire replacements of any kind. Additionally, a large majority of businesses may operate for long periods of time without hiring permanent replacement workers by relying on managerial or supervisory personnel, temporary replacements, or workers loaned from other subsidiaries; contracting out work; or stockpiling inventory.Perry, Kramer, and Schneider, Operating During Strikes: Company Experience, NLRB Policies and Governmental Regulations, 1982; Gillespie, "The Mackay Doctrine and the Myth of Business Necessity," Texas Law Review, 1972; Estreicher, "Collective Bargaining or 'Collective Begging'?:  Reflections on Antistrikebreaker Legislation," Michigan Law Review, December 1994. The Court not only assumed that an employer needed to hire replacements in order continue operations but also that the employer must grant replacement workers permanent status to induce them to work. Not only is this assumption unwarranted, but the Court itself recognized this in later rulings. In Erie Resistor, Great Dane Trailers, and Fleetwood Trailer, the Court held that employer tactics which are "inherently destructive" of employee rights are enough to run afoul of the NLRA, and no legitimate business reasons is a defense. Yet, in Mackay Radio, hiring permanent replacements—perhaps the act most likely to be inherently destructive of those rights—is held not to be an infringement of the law. A few scholars bluntly conclude that there is no way to reconcile Mackay Radio with these three cases.Weiler, "Striking a New Balance: Freedom of Contract and the Prospects for Union Representation," Harvard Law Review, 1984.Brankey, "Prohibited Discrimination in the Replacement and Reinstatement of Strikers Under Section 8(a)(3) of the National Labor Relations Act," American Business Law Journal, December 1985.Getman, Pogrebin, and Gregory, Labor Management Relations and the Law, 1999.Gillespie, "The Mackay Doctrine and the Myth of Business Necessity," Texas Law Review, 1972.
The Court's assumptions, some say, have made the Mackay Radio ruling theoretically unsupportable as a matter of equity. Because the Court assumed that employers must hire permanent replacements as a matter of business necessity, the Court did not find it necessary to require the employer to show the need for permanent replacements. This places the burden on either the Board or unions to prove that the employer had an anti-union animus. But the Supreme Court subsequently held that replacement workers cannot be presumed to be anti-union, so their use is not enough to show animus. Indeed, courts have been reluctant to find support for anti-union animus in any except the most extreme cases. As legal scholars point out, under Mackay Radio, employers can now cloak anti-union animus under the guise of using permanent replacements. They note that it is becoming increasingly common for employers to deunionize using permanent replacements, and nearly impossible for unions to obtain legal redress. This has held to a radical shift in American labor policy which Congress did not intend.Kimmett, "Permanent Replacements, Presidential Power, and Politics: Judicial Overreaching," Yale Law Journal, 1996.
Finally, the changing nature of American federal labor law has made the Mackay Radio doctrine pernicious. When Mackay Radio was announced in 1938, unions were allowed to engage in many kinds of secondary activities. Secondary activities are actions directed at businesses and individuals not directly connected to the labor dispute. These include secondary picketing, sympathy strikes, "hot cargo" strikes (continuing to work but refusing to handle products which come from the struck business), secondary boycotts, and picketing of a struck employer's suppliers or customers. The closed shop was also legal at the time, helping unions ensure that only workers who were bound by union rules were hired. But the Taft-Hartley Act (enacted in 1947) and the Labor Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (also known as the Landrum-Griffin Act, enacted in 1959) outlawed these tactics. Under the federal labor law legal regime which existed in 1937, the hiring of permanent replacement workers was not necessarily destructive of the collective bargaining relationship. But under the post-1959 labor law regime, Mackay Radio has turned (as some scholars conclude) collective bargaining into collective begging.
Implications for international law
Mackay Radio has implications under international law as well.  The International Labour Organization has strongly endorsed the right to strike. The ILO Committee on Freedom of Association concluded that the use of permanent replacements violates this right.
The right to strike is one of the essential means through which workers and their organisations may promote and defend their economic and social interests. The Committee considers that this basic right is not really guaranteed when a worker who exercises it legally runs the risk of seeing his or her job taken up permanently by another worker, just as legally. The Committee considers that, if a strike is otherwise legal, the use of labour drawn from outside the undertaking to replace strikers for an indeterminate period entails a risk of derogation from the right to strike which may affect the free exercise of trade union rights.International Labour Organization, Complaint Against the Government of the United States Presented by the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO), 1991.
The mandate of the Committee on Freedom of Association does not permit the committee to level charges at or condemn national governments. Nonetheless, the Committee has concluded that the Mackay Radio doctrine is contrary to the free exercise of trade union rights.Human Rights Watch, Unfair Advantage: Workers' Freedom of Association in the United States Under International Human Rights Standards, 2000.
See also
US labor law
Notes
References
 Abraham, David. "Individual Autonomy and Collective Empowerment in Labor Law: Union Membership Resignations and Strikebreaking in the New Economy." New York University Law Review. 63:1268 (December 1988).
 Adams, Roy J. "The Right to Participate." Employee Responsibilities and Rights Journal. 5:91 (1992).
 "Appeal In Mackay Case." New York Times. January 16, 1938.
 Atleson, James B. Values and Assumptions in American Labor Law. Amherst, Mass.: University of Massachusetts Press, 1984. 
 Bandzak, Ruth A. "The Strike as Management Strategy." Journal of Economic Issues. 26:2 (June 1992).
 Becker, Craig. "'Better Than a Strike': Protecting New Forms of Collective Work Stoppages under the National Labor Relations Act." University of Chicago Law Review. 61:351 (Spring 1994).
 Bernstein, David E. "Lochner Era Revisionism, Revised: Lochner and the Origins of Fundamental Rights Constitutionalism." Georgetown Law Journal. November 2003.
 Bok, Derek; Gorman, Robert A.; Finkin, Matthew W.; and Cox, Archibald. Labor Law: Cases and Materials. 14th ed. Eagan, Minn.: Foundation Press, 2006. 
 Brankey, Edward W. "Prohibited Discrimination in the Replacement and Reinstatement of Strikers Under Section 8(a)(3) of the National Labor Relations Act." American Business Law Journal. 23:4 (December 1985).
 Brisbin Jr., Richard A. A Strike Like No Other Strike: Law and Resistance During the Pittston Coal Strike of 1989-1990. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2002. 
 Budd, John W. "The Effect of Strike Replacement Legislation on Employment." Labour Economics. 7:2 (March 2000).
 "Case Comment: NLRB v. Curtin Matheson Scientific, Inc.: The Effect of a Nonpresumption as to Striker Replacements' Union Sentiments on the Good-Faith Doubt Defense." Ohio State Law Journal. 52:919 (Summer 1991).
 "CIO Loses Battle on 'Hot' Traffic." New York Times. June 8, 1948.
 "Clarence Mackay Dies At Home Here." New York Times. November 14, 1938.
 "Combination of Many Factors Seen Contributing to Decline in Strikes." Daily Labor Report. April 3, 1989.
 Committee on Labor and Human Resources. United States Senate. Workplace Fairness Act. S. Rep. No 102-111.  102d Congress, 1st Session (1991).
 Coe, Lewis. Wireless Radio: A Brief History. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland & Company, 1996. 
 Cramton, Peter and Tracy, Joseph. "The Use of Replacement Workers in Union Contract Negotiations: The U.S. Experience, 1980-1989." Journal of Labor Economics. 16:4 (October 1998).
 Craver, Charles B. "The National Labor Relations Act Must Be Revised to Preserve Industrial Democracy." Arizona Law Review. 42:397 (1992).
 Cushman, Barry. Rethinking the New Deal Court: The Structure of a Constitutional Revolution. Paperback ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 1998. 
 Cutcher-Gershenfeld, Joel. "The Impact on Economic Performance of a Transformation in Workplace Relations." Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 44:2 (January 1991).
 Dannin, Ellen. Taking Back the Workers' Law. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 2006. 
 Dau-Schmidt, Kenneth. "A Bargaining Analysis of American Labor Law and the Search for Bargaining Equity and Industrial Peace." Michigan Law Review. 91:419 (December 1992).
 Dewar, Helen. "Senate Fails to Break Filibuster On Striker Replacement Bill." Washington Post. July 13, 1994.
 Elliott, Ralph D. and Hawkins, Benjamin M. "Do Union Organizing Activities Affect Decertification?" Journal of Labor Research. 3:2 (June 1982).
 Estlund, Cynthia L. "The Death of Labor Law?" Annual Review of Law and Social Science. 2:105 (December 2006).
 Estlund, Cynthia L. "The Ossification of American Labor Law." Columbia Law Review. 102:1527 (2002).
 Estreicher, Samuel. "Collective Bargaining or 'Collective Begging'?:  Reflections on Antistrikebreaker Legislation." Michigan Law Review. 93:577 (December 1994).
 Estreicher, Samuel. "Strikers and Replacements." Labor Lawyer. 3:897 (1987).
 Finkin, Matthew W. "Labor Policy and the Enervation of the Economic Strike." University of Illinois Law Review. 1990:547 (1990).
 Fletcher III, C. Edward. "The Corporate Campaign-Labor's Ultimate Weapon or Suicide Bomb?" North Carolina Law Review. 65:85 (1986).
 Flynn, Joan. "The Costs and Benefits of 'Hiding the Ball': NLRB Policymaking and the Failure of Judicial Review." Boston University Law Review. 75:387 (March 1995).
 Forman, Harriet and Kraus, Howard R. "Decertification: Management's Role When Employees Rethink Unionization." Journal of Nursing Administration. 33:6 (June 2003).
 General Accounting Office. Labor-Management Relations: Strikes and the Use of Permanent Strike Replacements in the 1970s and 1980s. Report to Congressional Requestors, GAO/HRD-91-2, January 1991.
 Getman, Julius G. and Kohler, Thomas C. "The Story of 'NLRB v. Mackay Radio & Telegraph Co.': The High Cost of Solidarity." In Labor Law Stories. Laura J. Cooper and Catherine L. Fisk, eds. New York: Foundation Press, 2005. 
 Getman, Julius G. and Marshall, F. Ray. "Industrial Relations in Transition: The Paper Industry Example." Yale Law Journal. 102:1803 (1993).
 Getman, Julius; Pogrebin, Bertrand B.; and Gregory, David L. Labor Management Relations and the Law. 2d ed. Eagan, Minn.: Foundation Press, 1999. 
 Gillespie, Hal Keith. "The Mackay Doctrine and the Myth of Business Necessity." Texas Law Review. 50:782 (1972).
 Gillman, Howard. The Constitution Besieged: The Rise and Demise of Lochner Era Police Powers Jurisprudence. New ed. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 1993. 
 Gorman, Robert A. and Finkin, Matthew W. Basic Text on Labor Law: Unionization and Collective Bargaining. 2d ed. Eagan, Minn.: West Publishing Co., 2004. 
 Gramm, Cynthia. "Employers' Decision to Operate During Strikes: Consequences and Policy Implications." In Employee Rights in a Changing Economy: The Issue of Replacement Workers. William Spriggs, ed. Washington, D.C.: Economic Policy Institute, 1991. 
 Gramm, Cynthia L. and Schnell, John F. "Some Empirical Effects of Using Permanent Striker Replacements." Contemporary Economic Policy. 12:3 (July 1994).
 Greenhouse, Steven. "Strikes Decrease to 50-Year Low...As Threat of Replacement Rises." New York Times. January 29, 1996.
 Gregoire, Cheralynn M. "AFL-CIO v. Allbaugh: The D.C. Circuit Limits the President's Authority to Influence Labor Relations." Georgia State University Law Review. 19:4 (Summer 2003).
 Gross, James A. Broken Promise: The Subversion of U.S. Labor Relations Policy, 1947-1994. Paperback ed. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2003. 
 Harris, Seth D. "Coase's Paradox and the Inefficiency of Permanent Strike Replacements." Washington University Law Quarterly. 80:1185 (Winter 2002).
 Human Rights Watch. Unfair Advantage: Workers' Freedom of Association in the United States Under International Human Rights Standards. Washington, D.C.: Human Rights Watch, 2000. 
 Heckscher, Charles. "Living With Flexibility." In Rekindling the Movement: Labor's Quest for Relevance in the Twenty-First Century. Lowell Turner, Harry C. Katz, and Richard W. Hurd eds. Ithaca, N.Y.: ILR Press, 2001. 
 International Labour Organization, Committee on Freedom of Association. Complaint Against the Government of the United States Presented by the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO). Report No. 278, Case No. 1543 (1991).
 Irons, Peter H. "The New Deal Lawyers." Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1982. 
 "Joseph Selly, 85, Dies." New York Times. March 8, 1991.
 Kilgour, John G. "Can Unions Strike Anymore? The Impact of Recent Supreme Court Decisions." Labor Law Journal. 41:259 (1990).
 Kimmett, Charles Thomas. "Permanent Replacements, Presidential Power, and Politics: Judicial Overreaching." Yale Law Journal. 106 (1996).
 Kirshman, Norman H. and Zentz, Robert. "Striker Replacements: The Law, the Myths, the Realities." Nevada Lawyer. January 1995.
 Klare, Karl E.  "Judicial Deradicalization of the Wagner Act and the Origins of Modern Legal Consciousness, 1937-1941." Minnesota Law Review. 62:265 (1978).
 Krislov, Joseph. "Union Decertification." Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 9:4 (July 1956).
 "Labor Bargaining By Law Held Void in Court Decision." New York Times. January 12, 1937.
 "Labor Board Clarifies Reinstatement Rights of Striking Employees." HR: Business & Legal Reports. October 8, 2007.
 "Labor Ruling Stayed." New York Times. March 19, 1948.
 Lambert, Josiah Bartlett. "If the Workers Took A Notion": The Right to Strike and American Political Development. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 2005. 
 LeRoy, Michael H. "The Changing Character of Strikes Involving Permanent Striker Replacements, 1935-1990." Journal of Labor Research. 16:4 (December 1995).
 LeRoy, Michael H. "Employer Treatment of Permanently Replaced Strikers, 1935-1991: Public Policy Implications." Yale Law and Policy Review. 13:1 (1995).
 LeRoy, Michael H. "Lockouts Involving Replacement Workers: An Empirical Public Policy Analysis and Proposal to Balance Economic Weapons Under the NLRA." Washington University Law Quarterly. 74:981 (Winter 1996).
 LeRoy, Michael H. "Regulating Employer Use of Permanent Striker Replacements: Empirical Analysis of NLRA and RLA Strikes 1935-1991." Berkeley Journal of Employment and Labor Law. 16:169 (1995).
 LeRoy, Michael H. "Severance of Bargaining Relationships During Permanent Replacement Strikes and Union Decertifications: An Empirical Analysis and Proposal to Amend Section 9(c)(3) of the NLRA." University of California, Davis, Law Review. 29:1019 (1996).
 Logan, John. "The Striker Replacement Doctrine and State Intervention in Labor Relations, 1933-1938." In Industrial Relations Research Association Series: Proceeding of Fiftieth Annual Meeting. Vol. 1. Paula B. Voos, ed. Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1998.
 "Mackay Employes Get Pay Rise." New York Times. March 23, 1940.
 "Mackay Messages Subject to Delays." New York Times. January 31, 1940.
 "Mackay Radio Asks Rehearing of Case." New York Times. June 11, 1938.
 "Mackay Service Back to Normal." New York Times. February 2, 1940.
 Matheny, Ken and Crain, Marion. "Disloyal Workers and the 'Un-American' Labor Law." North Carolina Law Review. 82:1705 (2004).
 McCartin, Joseph A. "'Fire the Hell out of Them': Sanitation Workers' Struggles and the Normalization of the Striker Replacement Strategy in the 1970s." Labor: Studies in Working-Class History of the Americas. 2:3 (Fall 2005).
 McWilliams, George L. "An Employer May Lock Out Employees Solely for the Purpose of Supporting His Bargaining Position After a Bargaining Impasse Has Been Reached. American Ship Bldg. Co. v. NLRB, 380 U.S. 300 (1965)." Texas Law Review. 44:206 (1965).
 Mishel, Lawrence. "Strengths & Weaknesses of Non-Workplace Strategies." Labor Research Review. Fall 1985.
 Morris, Charles J. Developing Labor Law: The Board, The Courts, and the National Labor Relations Act. 2d ed. Washington, D.C.: BNA Books, 1983. 
 Najita, Joyce and Roberts, Harold S. Roberts' Dictionary Industrial Relations. 4th ed. Washington, D.C.: BNA Books, 1994. 
 National Labor Relations Board. ULP Casehandling Manual. Washington, D.C.: National Labor Relations Board, September 2003.
 Nilsson, Eric A. "The Growth of Union Decertification: A Test of Two Nonnested Theories." Industrial Relations. 36:3 (July 1997).
 Olson, Craig. The Use of Strike Replacements in Labor Disputes: Evidence from the 1880s to the 1980s. Working Paper. Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University, 1991.
 Perry, Charles R.; Kramer, Andrew M.; and Schneider, Thomas J. Operating During Strikes: Company Experience, NLRB Policies and Governmental Regulations. Philadelphia, Pa.: Industrial Research Unit, The Wharton School, 1982. 
 Polenberg, Richard. The World of Benjamin Cardozo: Personal Values and the Judicial Process. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1997. 
 Pollitt, Daniel. "Mackay Radio: Turn It Off, Tune It Out." University of South Florida Law Review. 25:295 (1991).
 Pope, James Gray. "How American Workers Lost the Right to Strike, and Other Tales." Michigan Law Review. 103:518 (December 2004).
 Pope, Jim. "Next Wave Organizing and the Shift to a New Paradigm of Labor Law." New York Law School Law Review. 50:515 (2005/2006).
 Rabinowitz, Victor. Unrepentant Leftist: A Lawyer's Memoir. Urbana, Ill.: University of Illinois Press, 1996. 
 "Radio Men Call Strike." New York Times. October 5, 1935.
 "Radio Operators Begin Walkout." New York Times. October 6, 1935.
 "Reports On Radio Strike." New York Times. October 8, 1935.
 Rosenblum, Jonathan D. Copper Crucible: How the Arizona Miners' Strike of 1983 Recast Labor-Management Relations in America. 2nd ed.  Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1998. 
 "Rules Against NLRB." New York Times. October 20, 1937.
 "Senate Kills Bill Banning Strike Replacement Workers." Chicago Tribune. July 14, 1994.
 Silverstein, Eileen. "If You Can't Beat 'Em, Learn to Lose, But Never Join Them." Connecticut Law Review. 30:1371 (Summer 1998).
 Slater, Joseph E. "The 'American Rule' That Swallows the Exceptions." Employee Rights and Employment Policy Journal. 11:53 (2007).
 Sobel, Robert. ITT: The Management of Opportunity.  New York: Times Books, 1982. 
 Stephens, David B. and Kohl, John P. "The Replacement Worker Phenomenon in the Southwest: Two Years After Belknap. Inc. v. Hale." Labor Law Journal. January 1986.
 Stewart, Frank H. "Conversion of Strikes: Economic to Unfair Labor Practice." Virginia Law Review. 45:1322 (1959).
 Sunstein, Cass R. "Lochner's Legacy." Columbia Law Review. 87:873 (June 1987).
 Tower, Charles H.  "Labor Relations in the Broadcasting Industry." Law and Contemporary Problems. 23:1 (Winter 1958).
 Turner, William D. "Restoring Balance to Collective Bargaining: Prohibiting Discrimination Against Economic Strikers." West Virginia Law Review. 96:685 (Spring 1994).
 "The Unanswered Questions of 'American Ship'." Michigan Law Review. 64:5 (March 1966).
 Walton, Richard E.; Cutcher-Gershenfeld, Joel E.; and McKersie, Robert B. Strategic Negotiations: A Theory of Change in Labor-Management Relations. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Business School Press, 1994. 
 Weiler, Paul C. "A Principled Re-Shaping of Labor Law for the Twenty-First Century." University of Pennsylvania Journal of Labor and Employment Law. 3:177 (2001).
 Weiler, Paul. "Promises To Keep: Securing Workers’ Rights to Self-Organization Under the NLRA." Harvard Law Review. 96:1769 (1983).
 Weiler, Paul. "Striking a New Balance: Freedom of Contract and the Prospects for Union Representation." Harvard Law Review. 98:351 (1984).
External links
 Mackay History – A comprehensive Web site dedicated to the Mackay family, their companies, and the art and mansions they owned.
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:1938 in United States case law
Category:Communications Workers of America
Category:National Labor Relations Board litigation
Category:Laborers' International Union of North America
"""

From "NLRB v. Noel Canning" ==> """
National Labor Relations Board v. Noel Canning, 573 U.S. 513 (2014), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court unanimously ruled that the President of the United States cannot use his authority under the Recess Appointment Clause of the United States Constitution to appoint public officials unless the United States Senate is in recess and not able to transact Senate business. The Court held that the clause allows the president to make appointments during both intra-session and inter-session recesses but only if the recess is of sufficient length, and if the Senate is actually unavailable for deliberation, thereby limiting future recess appointments. The Court also ruled that any office vacancy can be filled during the recess, regardless of when it arose.National Labor Relations Board v. Noel Canning, . The case arose out of President Barack Obama's appointments of Sharon Block, Richard Griffin, and Terence Flynn to the National Labor Relations Board and Richard Cordray as the director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.
 Background 
In Federalist No. 67, Alexander Hamilton wrote that the appointment power was ordinarily confined jointly to the President and the Senate, but considering it unlikely that the Senate would remain continuously in session, the Constitution allowed the President to make temporary appointments when the Senate is in recess. Since the advent of nearly year-round sessions, the United States Senate no longer has long recesses. That has potentially changed the meaning of the Recess Appointment Clause of the Constitution, which has affected the way the Senate and the President interact.
NLRB v. Noel Canning dealt specifically with Noel Canning, a Pepsi distributor affected by a ruling of the National Labor Relations Board, and it had potential implications on the executive branch's power to appoint officials without Senate approval. The NLRB had found that Noel Canning refused to execute a collective bargaining agreement with a labor union, allegedly in violation of federal law. Noel Canning appealed the board's ruling to the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit claiming that three of its five members were invalidly appointed, leaving the board without a quorum of lawfully appointed members. (The Court had previously held in New Process Steel, L.P. v. NLRB that the NLRB could not act without a quorum.) The D.C. Circuit vacated the NLRB's orders.D.C. Circuit In a similar case, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit held that the NLRB could not enforce its orders because of a lack of quorum caused by the ineffectiveness of recess appointments made by President Obama while the Senate was not in recess.Fourth Circuit
 Opinion 
Justice Breyer wrote the opinion of the Court, joined by Justices Kennedy, Ginsburg, Sotomayor, and Kagan. Breyer, writing for the Court, stated, "We hold that, for purposes of the Recess Appointments Clause, the Senate is in session when it says it is, provided that, under its own rules, it retains the capacity to transact Senate business."No. 12–1281 NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD v. NOELCANNING ET AL. , decided June 26, 2014.
The first question the opinion addressed was the scope of the phrase "the recess of the Senate" and whether that is limited to the inter-session recess between the two formal annual sessions of a Congress or extends to intra-session recesses (such as the traditional August recess, etc.). The ambiguity of the specific text of the clause made the Court hold that the clause's purpose is broad, allowing the President to ensure the continued functioning of government even when the Senate is away. However, despite finding that "the recess" means both inter-session and intra-session recesses, the Court added that a recess that is not long enough to require the consent of the House of Representatives is not long enough to trigger the Recess Appointment Clause.
Secondly, the Court addressed the phrase "vacancies that may happen during the recess of the Senate" (emphasis added). Thomas Jefferson admitted that the clause is subject to two constructions, and the Court argued that a narrow interpretation risks undermining powers granted by the Constitution. The opinion found that the phrase applies to both vacancies that occur during a recess and those that occur before and continue to exist through a recess.
Finally, the opinion dealt with the calculation of the length of the Senate's recess. During periods of recess, the Senate meets in pro forma sessions to satisfy the requirement that neither house may adjourn for more than three days without the consent of the other house. While the Solicitor General argued that the Senate was not actually in session despite these sessions, the Court found that pro forma sessions count as sessions, not recesses, consistent with the Constitution's delegation of authority to the Senate to determine how it conducts its own business. However, the deference is not absolute: Giampiero Buonomo, Un sistema a due incognite: autodichia e procedura parlamentare, Forum di Quaderni costituzionali, 13 settembre 2017, p. 8, fn. 37. If the Senate is without the capacity to act (if all senators effectively gave up the business of legislating), it remains in recess even if it says it is not.
 Scalia's concurrence 
Justice Scalia wrote an opinion concurring in the judgment, joined by Chief Justice Roberts, Thomas, and Alito. While it agreed with the conclusion the Court reached, the concurrence chastises the majority opinion for ensuring "that recess appointments will remain a powerful weapon in the President's arsenal. ... That is unfortunate, because the recess appointment power is an anachronism." Scalia argues that the recess appointment power only applies to vacancies that arise while the Senate is in recess.
 Subsequent developments 
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid said that the ruling underscored "the importance of the rules reform Senate Democrats enacted last November". Minority Leader Mitch McConnell agreed with the ruling: "The President made an unprecedented power grab by placing political allies at a powerful federal agency while the Senate was meeting regularly and without even bothering to wait for its advice and consent. A unanimous Supreme Court has rejected this brazen power-grab."
Senator Orrin Hatch, a Republican and former chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, said that the Court had "emphatically rejected President Obama’s brazen efforts to circumvent the Constitution, bypass the people’s elected representatives, and govern above the law [and] reaffirmed the Senate's vital advice-and-consent role as a check on executive abuses."
References
External links
 Transcript of oral argument in NLRB v. Noel Canning
 D.C. Circuit ruling
 Fourth Circuit ruling on a similar case
 Decision by the Third Circuit Court of Appeals expanding the issue to include former Board Member Craig Becker
 "Recess Appointments: Frequently Asked Questions." Congressional Research Service. June 7, 2013
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:National Labor Relations Board litigation
Category:United States Constitution Article Two case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "NLRB v. SW General, Inc." ==> """
NLRB v. SW General, Inc., 580 U.S. ___ (2017), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a person who has been nominated by the President of the United States for a position cannot hold the same job on an acting basis while awaiting Senate confirmation.Slip opinionSCOTUSblog: National Labor Relations Board v. SW General, Inc.
Background
The Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998 requires the executive branch departments and agencies to report to Congress and Government Accountability Office information about the temporary filling of vacant executive agency positions that require presidential appointment with Senate confirmation. It also contains an exception that a nominee can serve on a temporary basis if they previously served for 90 days as a "first assistant" to the person whom they would succeed.
President Barack Obama nominated Lafe Solomon to serve as general counsel at the NLRB in January 2011, which was returned by the Senate in 2013 as it had expired, and again in May 2013.PN86 — Lafe E. Solomon — National Labor Relations Board | 112th Congress (2011-2012) The 2013 nomination was withdrawn in August.PN506 — Lafe E. Solomon — National Labor Relations Board | 113th Congress (2013-2014) SW General, after facing accusations by Solomon’s office of unfair labor practices, brought suit, arguing that Solomon’s service violated the law, which made the complaint void. On August 7, 2015, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit ruled in favor of the company, in which Judge Karen L. Henderson was joined by Judges Sri Srinivasan and Robert L. Wilkins.
The Supreme Court considered whether the precondition in  on service in an acting capacity by a person nominated by the President to fill the office on a permanent basis applies only to first assistants who take office under , or whether it also limits acting service by officials who assume acting responsibilities under  and .No. 15-1251: Question Presented  On November 7, 2016, oral arguments were heard before the Supreme Court, where acting Solicitor General Ian Heath Gershengorn appeared for the government.Oyez: National Labor Relations Board v. SW General, Inc.
Opinion of the Court
On March 21, 2017, the Supreme Court delivered judgment in favor of the company, voting 6-2 to affirm the lower court.The Supreme Court, 2016 Term — Leading Cases, 131 Harv. L. Rev. 353 (2017).  Chief Justice John Roberts wrote that the exception did not cover Solomon, rejected the government's argument that a ruling against it would hamstring future presidents and call into question dozens of temporary appointments made over the years, and dismissed arguments that historical practice supported the government. Since the law was enacted in 1998, three presidents have nominated 112 people for permanent posts who also were serving as acting officials. There was never any objection from Congress.
Justice Thomas' Concurrence
Justice Clarence Thomas concurred, arguing that the Appointments Clause "likely prohibited" the appointment.
Justice Sotomayor's Dissent
Justice Sonia Sotomayor, joined by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, argued that the Senate never objected over the years while more than 100 people served in an acting capacity pending their nomination for a permanent post.
References
External links
Category:2017 in United States case law
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "NLRB v. Truck Drivers Local 449" ==> """
NLRB v. Truck Drivers Local 449 (Buffalo Linen Supply Co.), 353 U.S. 87 (1957), is an 8-0 decision by the Supreme Court of the United States in which the Court held that a temporary lockout by a multi-employer bargaining group threatened by a whipsaw strike was lawful under the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA), as amended by the Taft-Hartley Act.. This case is more commonly cited as "Buffalo Linen Supply Co." The National Labor Relations Board titles cases based on the ULP filed against the employer or the union.  In this case, the ULP had been filed against the employer, Buffalo Linen Supply Co.  However, complainant Truck Drivers Local 449 appealed the case to the courts. The courts refer to this case as "Buffalo Linen" in order to keep the reference to the original NLRB decision."Multi-Employer Lockout Found Lawful Response to Whipsaw Strike," Columbia Law Review, December 1957.Atleson, Values and Assumptions in American Labor Law, 1984.Getman, Pogrebin, and Gregory, Labor Management Relations and the Law, 1999.Gorman and Finkin, Basic Text on Labor Law: Unionization and Collective Bargaining, 2004.Lambert, "If the Workers Took A Notion": The Right to Strike and American Political Development, 2005.
Background
The International Brotherhood of Teamsters had organized truck drivers working for linen supply and laundry companies in and around Buffalo, New York, in the early 1930s. In 1934, eight of the employers formed the Linen and Credit Exchange, a multi-employer association to act as a collective bargaining agent for the employers.  A first contract with the Exchange was negotiated, and successor contracts also agreed to and implemented.
The most recent contract was due to expire on April 30, 1953, but no successor contract was negotiated. Negotiations continued slowly. Finally, the Teamsters engaged in a whipsaw strike against one of the employers, Frontier Linen Supply, on May 26, 1953. The following day, the other seven employers locked out their truck drivers. A week later, a new collective bargaining agreement was signed, the lockout ended, and the locked out workers rehired.
But the Teamsters filed an unfair labor practice (ULP) charge against the seven employers alleging that the lockout violated Section 8(a)(1) and 8(a)(3) of the National Labor Relations Act. The trial examiner, now called administrative law judge, concluded that a ULP had been committed; but, the five-member National Labor Relations Board (Board) overruled the examiner. The Board concluded the lockout was defensive, not retaliatory, and therefore lawful.NLRB v. Truck Drivers Local 449, 353 U.S. at 91-92.
The union appealed the Board's ruling.  The Second Circuit Court of Appeals held (231 F.2d 110) that the strike was an economic strike, not an unfair labor practice strike, and hence not protected by the Section 8 of the NLRA. However, the appellate court concluded that a temporary lockout based on the perceived threat of a strike could be justified only if a strike would impose an unusual economic hardship on the employer. Since none of the seven employers had demonstrated such hardship, the Court of Appeals ruled that the employers had committed a ULP.
The NLRB appealed to the Supreme Court, which granted certiorari..
Decision
Associate Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. delivered the unanimous opinion of the Court.  Justice Charles Evans Whittaker took no part in the oral argument or decision.Justice Stanley Forman Reed retired from the Supreme Court on February 25, 1957. Whittaker was appointed his successor on March 2, after oral argument had already occurred. See: Huston, "Justice Reed, 72, to Retire From the Supreme Court," New York Times, February 1, 1957; "Justice Reed Retires From Supreme Court," New York Times, February 26, 1957; "Federal Judge in Missouri Named to Supreme Court," New York Times, March 3, 1957.
Nearly half of the short decision is taken up by Brennan's review of the collective bargaining history between the Exchange and the Teamsters, the arguments before the NLRB board agent, and the ruling of the Court of Appeals.
Justice Brennan opened his argument by observing that although the NLRA does not mention lockouts, it also does not prohibit them. Citing no evidence, Brennan then asserted that the legislative history of the NLRA did not indicate any intention by Congress to ban lockouts. Inclusion of the term in the Taft-Hartley Act, the majority found, indicated congressional recognition of the lockout and implied that there were circumstances in which a lockout might be legally employed.NLRB v. Truck Drivers Local 449, 353 U.S. at 92-93.
Brennan next addressed the issue before the Court. "The narrow question to be decided," he wrote, "is whether a temporary lockout may lawfully be used as a defense to a union strike tactic which threatens the destruction of the employers' interest in bargaining on a group basis."NLRB v. Truck Drivers Local 449, 353 U.S. at 93.
The Exchange and the Board had argued that preservation of the cohesiveness of the multi-employer association justified use of the lockout. The Court of Appeals had rejected that argument. Reviewing the legislative history of the Taft-Hartley Act, the appellate court found that Congress had deferred judgment on the legality of multi-employer bargaining units to a commission.231 F.2d at 118. Brennan rejected the finding of the Court of Appeals. Reviewing the academic literature on the history of collective bargaining in the 20th century as well as the legislative history of the Taft-Hartley Act, Brennan found that multi-employer bargaining not only pre-dated the Taft-Hartley Act but that Congress had considered and rejected language limiting or banning such bargaining. The "compelling conclusion," Brennan wrote, is that Congress intended to let the NLRB make case-by-case decisions as to the wisdom of permitting multi-employer bargaining.NLRB v. Truck Drivers Local 449, 353 U.S. at 92-96.
In the decision's final two paragraphs, the majority drew an important conclusion from the foregoing.  Citing NLRB v. Mackay Radio & Telegraph Co., 304 U.S. 333 (1938), among others, Brennan held that the NLRA's protection of the right to strike is not absolute. Balancing the rights of union members to strike against the right of employers to preserve the multi-employer bargaining unit,NLRB v. Truck Drivers Local 449, 353 U.S. at 97. Brennan asserted (without additional argument or evidence) that the appellate court had erred in establishing an "economic hardship" test for lockouts. Then the Supreme Court deferred to the Board's ruling, and concluded that "a temporary lockout to preserve the multi-employer bargaining basis from the disintegration threatened by the Union's strike action was lawful."
Additional rulings and assessment
NLRB v. Truck Drivers Local 449 (Buffalo Linen Supply Co.) is one of a number of Supreme Court cases stemming from the Court's 1938 decision in NLRB v. Mackay Radio & Telegraph Co.
Building on its ruling in Buffalo Linen Supply Co., the Supreme Court held in American Ship Building v. NLRB. that an employer may lock out its employees without violating the NLRA if a bargaining impasse has been reached and the lockout is for the purpose of applying economic pressure to support the employer's bargaining position. However, the employer cannot hire permanent replacements, only temporary ones."The Unanswered Questions of 'American Ship'," Michigan Law Review, March 1966; McWilliams, "An Employer May Lock Out Employees Solely for the Purpose of Supporting His Bargaining Position After a Bargaining Impasse Has Been Reached. American Ship Bldg. Co. v. NLRB, 380 U.S. 300 (1965)," Texas Law Review, 1965. The high court further extended its reasoning in NLRB v. Brown Food Stores,. holding that an employer could lock out its employees in advance of a whipsaw strike so long as the employer only utilized temporary replacements and locked out all workers (not just those who supported the union)."Hiring of Replacements by Nonstruck Employers in 'Whipsaw Strike' Context Held Not an Unfair Labor Practice," Columbia Law Review, January 1964; "Limits on Labor & Management," Time, April 9, 1965; LeRoy, "Lockouts Involving Replacement Workers: An Empirical Public Policy Analysis and Proposal to Balance Economic Weapons Under the NLRA," Washington University Law Quarterly, Winter 1996.
Buffalo Linen Supply Co. has not itself been the focus of much academic or legal analysis.  However, it is often referred to in general discussions of the Court's labor relations jurisprudence. Buffalo Linen Supply Co. is one of many post-Mackay Radio rulings criticized as a Court-approved infringement on the right to strike.Pope, "How American Workers Lost the Right to Strike, and Other Tales," Michigan Law Review, December 2004; Estreicher, "Collective Bargaining or 'Collective Begging'?:  Reflections on Antistrikebreaker Legislation," Michigan Law Review, December 1994; Gillespie, "The Mackay Doctrine and the Myth of Business Necessity," Texas Law Review, 1972; Turner, "Restoring Balance to Collective Bargaining: Prohibiting Discrimination Against Economic Strikers," West Virginia Law Review, Spring 1994; Weiler, "A Principled Re-Shaping of Labor Law for the Twenty-First Century," University of Pennsylvania Journal of Labor and Employment Law, 2001.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 353
Notes
References
Atleson, James B. Values and Assumptions in American Labor Law. Amherst, Mass.: University of Massachusetts Press, 1984. 
Estlund, Cynthia L. "The Death of Labor Law?" Annual Review of Law and Social Science. 2:105 (December 2006).
Estreicher, Samuel. "Collective Bargaining or 'Collective Begging'?:  Reflections on Antistrikebreaker Legislation." Michigan Law Review. 93:577 (December 1994).
"Federal Judge in Missouri Named to Supreme Court." New York Times. March 3, 1957.
Getman, Julius; Pogrebin, Bertrand B.; and Gregory, David L. Labor Management Relations and the Law. 2d ed. Eagan, Minn.: Foundation Press, 1999. 
Gillespie, Hal Keith. "The Mackay Doctrine and the Myth of Business Necessity." Texas Law Review. 50:782 (1972).
Gorman, Robert A. and Finkin, Matthew W. Basic Text on Labor Law: Unionization and Collective Bargaining. 2d ed. Eagan, Minn.: West Publishing Co., 2004. 
"Hiring of Replacements by Nonstruck Employers in 'Whipsaw Strike' Context Held Not an Unfair Labor Practice." Columbia Law Review. 64:1 (January 1964).
Huston, Luther A. "Justice Reed, 72, to Retire From the Supreme Court." New York Times. February 1, 1957.
"Justice Reed Retires From Supreme Court." New York Times. February 26, 1957.
Lambert, Josiah Bartlett. "If the Workers Took A Notion": The Right to Strike and American Political Development. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 2005. 
LeRoy, Michael H. "Lockouts Involving Replacement Workers: An Empirical Public Policy Analysis and Proposal to Balance Economic Weapons Under the NLRA." Washington University Law Quarterly. 74:981 (Winter 1996).
"Limits on Labor & Management." Time. April 9, 1965.
McWilliams, George L. "An Employer May Lock Out Employees Solely for the Purpose of Supporting His Bargaining Position After a Bargaining Impasse Has Been Reached. American Ship Bldg. Co. v. NLRB, 380 U.S. 300 (1965)." Texas Law Review. 44:206 (1965).
"Multi-Employer Lockout Found Lawful Response to Whipsaw Strike." Columbia Law Review. 57:8 (December 1957).
Pope, James Gray. "How American Workers Lost the Right to Strike, and Other Tales." Michigan Law Review. 103:518 (December 2004).
Rosenblum, Jonathan D. Copper Crucible: How the Arizona Miners' Strike of 1983 Recast Labor-Management Relations in America. 2nd ed.  Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1998. 
Turner, William D. "Restoring Balance to Collective Bargaining: Prohibiting Discrimination Against Economic Strikers." West Virginia Law Review. 96:685 (Spring 1994).
"The Unanswered Questions of 'American Ship'." Michigan Law Review. 64:5 (March 1966).
Weiler, Paul C. "A Principled Re-Shaping of Labor Law for the Twenty-First Century." University of Pennsylvania Journal of Labor and Employment Law. 3:177 (2001).
External links
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1957 in United States case law
Category:National Labor Relations Board litigation
Category:International Brotherhood of Teamsters
Category:Trucking industry in the United States
"""

From "NLRB v. Washington Aluminum Co." ==> """
NLRB v. Washington Aluminium Co., 370 U.S. 9 (1962), was a US labor law related Supreme Court ruling concerning the right of workers to engage in protected concerted activity. Section 7 of the National Labor Relations Act gives employees the right to "engage in other concerted activities for the purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection." The Supreme Court ruled that a walk-out was protected activity even if workers did not present "a specific demand upon their employer to remedy a condition they found objectionable."
 Background 
Washington Aluminium operated an aluminium fabrication facility in Baltimore, Maryland. The machine shop employed eight workers and one foreman. Employees had complained of the cold temperature prior to January 5, 1959, when the night watchmen was unable to start the gas furnace, which served as the shops primary source of heat, on a particularly cold day. The seven employees decided to leave for the day. The seven employees were fired that day. The National Labor Relations Board ruled that the employee walk out was a protected form of protest under the National Labor Relations Act's section 7, which protects the rights of workers regardless of whether they are in a union to engage in group activity to improve their working conditions, ordering the company to reinstate the workers. The Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that the walk out was not protected because, although the employees left because of the cold, they did not make a specific demand to their employer.
 Opinion of the Court 
In a majority opinion written by Justice Hugo Black, the court overturned the lower court's ruling, arguing that the language defining protected concerted activity "is broad enough to protect concerted activities whether they take place before, after, or at the same time such a demand is made." The opinion also ruled that the workers' prior complaints about temperature in the winter constituted a labor dispute as defined by the National Labor Relations Act..
 See also 
United States labor law
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Warren Court
References
 External links 
Category:1962 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States labor case law
Category:National Labor Relations Board litigation
"""

From "NLRB v. Yeshiva University" ==> """
National Labor Relations Board v. Yeshiva University, 444 U.S. 672 (1980), is a US labor law case, concerning the scope of labor rights in the United States..
Facts
The Yeshiva University Faculty Association (a labor union) asked the National Labor Relations Board to be certified as the official bargaining agent for teaching and professorial staff at Yeshiva University. University management argued that the staff should not qualify as "employees" under the National Labor Relations Act 1935 §2(11) as they had sufficient supervisory authority. The staff contended that, while they managed their teaching and curriculum, they did not have effective authority over managerial power.
Judgment
A majority of the Supreme Court, 5 to 4, held that full-time professors in a university were excluded from collective bargaining rights, on the theory that they exercised "managerial" discretion in academic matters. Justice Powell delivered the majority opinion, which Chief Justice Burger, Justice Stewart, Justice Rehnquist and Justice Stevens joined.
Justice Brennan dissented (joined by Justice Marshall, Justice White and Justice Blackmun). He pointed out that management was actually in the hands of university administration, not professors.
See also
United States labor law
References
External links
Category:United States labor case law
Category:National Labor Relations Board litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1980 in United States case law
Category:Higher education case law
"""

From "Nobelman v. American Savings Bank" ==> """
Nobelman v. American Savings Bank, 508 U.S. 324 (1993), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court disallowed cram-downs (the involuntary imposition by a court of a reorganization plan over the objections of creditors in a bankruptcy proceeding) for primary residences. Michael J. Schroeder argued on behalf of the mortgage creditor, American Savings Bank.
 External links 
Category:1993 in United States case law
Category:United States bankruptcy case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Nollan v. California Coastal Commission" ==> """
In  Nollan v. California Coastal Commission, 483 U.S. 825 (1987), the  United States Supreme Court  ruled that a California Coastal Commission regulation which required private homeowners to dedicate a public easement along valuable beachfront property as a condition of approval for a construction permit to renovate their beach bungalow was unconstitutional. The Coastal Commission had asserted that the public-easement condition was a legitimate state interest of diminishing the "blockage of the view of the ocean" caused by the home renovation, even though the easement wouldn't create any additional public view of the ocean. The Court held that in evaluating such claims, there must be an "essential nexus" between a legitimate state interest and the actual conditions of the permit being issued.. 
In a 5–4 ruling, the Supreme Court ruled that a requirement by the CCC was a taking in violation of the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment, as incorporated against the states by the Fourteenth Amendment.
Facts 
The Nollans owned beachfront property in  Ventura County, and wished to replace a  bungalow which had fallen into disrepair with a  house. As a condition for permits to do so, the California Coastal Commission required that the Nollans dedicate for 20 years a strip of land along the beach in front of their house to allow the public the right of pass and re-pass along the beach (to be enacted only when a public agency agreed to accept management of the ambulatory lateral-access easement). 43 neighbors had granted such easements without litigation; the Nollans, however, believed that the demand was an unconstitutional taking of their property without just compensation, and filed a petition for writ of administrative mandamus asking the Ventura County Superior Court to invalidate the easement stipulation. The CCC argued that the new house would increase blockage of the ocean view and contribute to a “wall of residential structures” which would prevent the public “psychologically from realizing a stretch of coastline exists nearby that they have every right to visit". The Nollans could offset this burden to the public, the CCC argued, by providing additional access to the beach in the form of a dedicated access easement along the beachfront side of their property.Myers, David W. (December 14, 1986) "Court to Decide State's Beach Access Issue" Los Angeles Times The Superior Court ruled in favor of the Nollans, declaring “the Commission could impose access conditions on development permits for replacement homes only where the proposed development would have an adverse impact on public access to the sea, and this requirement was not met" (Mandelker 124).
The property in question is located along Faria Beach in Ventura County, which, at the time was sparsely developed (in contrast to the , three-story homes along the Malibu beaches where development of the "psychological impediment to public access" argument first occurred). Article X, Section 4 of the California Constitution guaranteed access to the beaches, but a prospective beach-goer might have difficulty seeing the beach or finding public access to it. The walling-off effect, the argument went, created a psychological impediment to public access ensuring that no members of the public would be able to utilize a public resource (access to which is guaranteed by the state constitution). The development pattern, in effect, took a public resource supposedly available to anyone and turned it into the private enclave of the wealthy property owners whose houses lined the beach.
The "psychological impediments to public access" became a popular finding in staff reports analyzing projects before the California Coastal Commission, particularly when a proposed development had only a minor physical impact to access by the public but required (for legal adequacy for the staff report and California's Environmental Quality Act and Coastal Act) rational bases for imposition of conditions to help make a proposed development consistent with the environmental laws of the state.
The Nollans' property did not present the same conditions found along beaches in Malibu, being less than 4% developed and having smaller, less-intensive development than that along the Malibu shoreline. The condition for approval of the Nollans' Coastal Development Permit was that the applicants record an offer to dedicate a strip of property (generally  wide and located landward of the mean high tide)—or, more generally, from the actual edge of the water on any particular day during any given tide along the beach.
Prior procedure
The CCC subsequently appealed to the California Courts of Appeal; the court ruled in its favor, finding “imposition of an access condition on a development permit was sufficiently related to burdens created by the project to be constitutional". The court also held that the Nollans' taking claim failed because the condition did not deprive them of all reasonable use of their property. The Nollans appealed to the United States Supreme Court, raising only the constitutional question.
Issue
The issue before the court was whether the imposition by the CCC of the requirement that the Nollans convey a public easement as a condition for granting a land-use permit constituted a taking.
Reasoning
Justice Scalia delivered the decision of the Court: “The lack of nexus between the condition and the original purpose of the building restriction converts that purpose to something other than what it was...Unless the permit condition serves the same governmental purpose as the development ban, the building restriction is not a valid regulation of land use but an out-and-out plan of extortion".
In writing for the Court's majority, Justice Antonin Scalia derided the concept of psychological impediments to public access; he wrote that if a public agency wishes to place conditions of approval on a permit, that those conditions must bear some relation to the public-policy concerns purported to be resolved through the imposition of conditions of approval. For example, if a project eliminates  of public parkland, an appropriate condition would be to require replacement in-kind of the  to maintain the size of public parkland. In short, there had to be a nexus between the public-policy issue and the condition of approval which sought to address it. Justice Scalia then pointed out that under the ruling, a public-access condition did not meet that nexus test by compensating for the slight loss of public view across the Nollans' property; he then stated that if loss of public views across the Nollans' property was truly the issue, then an appropriate condition of approval would have been "construction of a public viewing platform on the roof of the Nollans' house".
The public had no right of passage with the existing bungalow in place, so it would be unaffected by the larger structure replacing it. The Court specified that a “close nexus” must be shown between the regulatory condition imposed and the development impacts of concern, and that the regulatory action must “substantially advance legitimate state interests” (AADASDF p 53).  Although the case appears to deal primarily with takings, the principles are applied to the exaction and impact-fee debate as well. The Court struck down California’s policy of “anything goes” for exaction requirements, and created the rational-nexus standard for states across America.Nollan v. California Coastal Commission—Case Brief Retrieved 2011-08-13.
Later implications
In Dolan v. City of Tigard,. the Court evaluated further the degree of the connection required. In that case, the City of Tigard, Oregon required any business owner seeking to substantially expand onto property adjacent to a floodplain to create a public greenway and bike path from private land in order to prevent flooding and traffic congestion. The Supreme Court ruled that the city’s requirement would be a taking if the city did not show that there was a reasonable relationship between the creation of the greenway and bike path and the impact of the development. "Without question, had the city simply required petitioner to dedicate a strip of land along Fanno Creek for public use, rather than conditioning the grant of her permit to redevelop her property on such a dedication, a taking would have occurred", the Court held. “Such public access would deprive petitioner of the right to exclude others, one of the most essential sticks in the bundle of rights that are commonly characterized as property".
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 483
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:United States land use case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1987 in the environment
Category:1987 in United States case law
"""

From "Norfolk Shipbuilding & Drydock Corp. v. Garris" ==> """
Norfolk Shipbuilding Drydock Corporation v. Garris, 532 U.S. 811 (2001), is a Supreme Court case addressing whether the a cause of action for negligence exists under maritime law. 
Facts
Christopher Garris was a harbor worker who died as a result of a drydock company's employee's negligence. Garris's mother brought an action as administratrix of his estate against the company, Norfolk Shipbuilding & Drydock Corporation, invoking federal admiralty jurisdiction and seeking damages under general maritime law. The United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia dismissed the claim for want of a cause of action. The United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit reversed and remanded, and the Supreme Court granted certiorari. 
Opinion
The Court considered the history of common law torts as it applies to maritime law. The Court ultimately held that a negligent breach of the general maritime duty of care was actionable when it caused death. In doing so, the Court extended the application of its holding in Moragne v. States Marine Lines, Inc. which had overruled a prior holding in The Harrisburg, and analyzed the phrase “violation of maritime duties” in Moragne to determine whether the complained-of conduct fell within its scope. The Court held that developments in maritime law, including the emergence of state wrongful death statutes and the passage of both Death on the High Seas Act (DOHSA) and the Jones Act, had undermined its decision in The Harrisburg.
References
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Norfolk Southern Railway Co. v. James N. Kirby, Pty Ltd." ==> """
Norfolk Southern Ry. v. James N. Kirby, Pty Ltd., 543 U.S. 14 (2004), was a United States Supreme Court case that dealt with the extent to which maritime bills of lading cover non-maritime portions of a shipment, together with connected clauses for exclusion of liability.
 Background 
In August 1997, James N. Kirby, Pty Ltd., an Australian manufacturer, hired International Cargo Control Pty Ltd. (ICC) as a shipping intermediary to arrange a shipment of goods from Milperra, New South Wales to Athens, Alabama. The total shipment consisted of fifty containers, of which forty were routed through the port of Long Beach, California and the rail terminal in Memphis, Tennessee. The remaining ten oversized containers, because of logistical constraints, were routed through the port of Savannah, Georgia. For these ten containers, ICC Ltd. arranged for carriage by truck from Milperra to Sydney, by sea from Sydney to Savannah, by rail from Savannah to Huntsville, Alabama, and by truck from Huntsville to Athens. ICC subcontracted with motor carriers for the truck movements in Australia and Alabama and subcontracted with an ocean carrier for the sea and rail movements.
ICC issued Kirby a bill of lading, which invoked liability limitations provided by the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act (COGSA), as well as a Himalaya clause which extended ICC's limitations of liability to companies ICC hired. ICC hired Hamburg Süd to transport the goods, and Hamburg Süd issued ICC a bill of lading that also invoked COGSA protections and included a Himalaya clause.
The limitation specified in COGSA was:
Hamburg Süd carried the goods on a ship to Savannah, Georgia and subcontracted Norfolk Southern Railway to transport the goods inland to Alabama. In October 1997, the train derailed near Littleville, Alabama. Kirby sued Norfolk Southern in October 1998 to recover the $1.5 million in damages he claimed the derailment caused his goods.
The courts below
The United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia ruled Norfolk Southern could limit its liability to Kirby on the basis of the Himalaya clause in the Hamburg Süd contract. As the Himalaya clause in the Hamburg Süd bill incorporated COGSA, which specified that liability was limited to $500 per package, and the shipment was packed in ten containers, Norfolk Southern's total liability was therefore $5000. On the joint motion of the parties, the district court certified its order for interlocutory appeal.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit reversed and ruled the Hamburg Süd bill did not limit Norfolk Southern's liability to Kirby because Kirby was not bound by its terms. The 11th Circuit observed that previous jurisprudence supported the proposition that Himalaya clauses did not extend to inland carriers that had not been in privity with ICC when ICC issued the bill.:
The issues on appeal
Did federal law govern the interpretation of the ICC and Hamburg Süd bills of lading?
Was Norfolk entitled to the protection of the liability limitations in both bills?
Decision of the Supreme Court
thumb|right|Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, writer of the opinion.
In a unanimous opinion delivered by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, the Court held that federal law controlled the interpretation of both bills, because they were maritime contracts and the dispute was not inherently local. The Court also held that the 11th Circuit misinterpreted the bills as not protecting Norfolk.
In summary, it was held:
 Federal law governs the interpretation of the ICC and Hamburg Süd bills. 
  When a contract is a maritime one, and the dispute is not inherently local, federal law controls the contract interpretation.
 The bills at issue are maritime contracts. To ascertain a contract's maritime nature, this Court looks not to whether a ship or vessel was involved in the dispute, or to the place of the contract's formation or performance, but to the nature and character of the contract.
 The case is not inherently local, and there is a concern for the uniform meaning of maritime contracts. The same liability limitation in a single bill of lading for international intermodal transportation often applies both to sea and to land, as is true of the Hamburg Süd bill. Likewise, a single Himalaya Clause can cover both sea and land carriers downstream, as in the ICC bill. In protecting the uniformity of federal maritime law, this Court also reinforces the liability regime Congress established in COGSA.
 Norfolk is entitled to the protection of the liability limitations in both bills of lading.
 The ICC bill's broadly written Himalaya Clause limits Norfolk's liability. Since Huntsville, Alabama is some  inland from the discharge port, the parties must have anticipated using a land carrier's services for the contract's performance. Because it is clear that a railroad was an intended beneficiary of the ICC bill's broadly written clause, Norfolk's liability is limited by the clause's terms.
 Norfolk also enjoys the benefits of the Hamburg Süd bill's liability limitation. When an intermediary contracts with a carrier to transport goods, the cargo owner's recovery against the carrier is limited by the liability limitation to which the intermediary and carrier agreed.
In Particular, the Court held that the 11th Circuit misinterpreted the Court's previous ruling in Robert C. Herd & Co. v. Krawill Machinery Corp.Robert C. Herd & Co. v. Krawill Machinery Corp.,   Herd simply says that contracts for carriage of goods by sea must be construed like any other contracts: by their terms and consistent with the intent of the parties. If anything, Herd stands for the proposition that there is no special rule for Himalaya Clauses:
 Subsequent developments 
In 2010, Kirby was extended to cover domestic rail shipments for which bills of lading had been issued by domestic rail carriers with respect to shipments originating overseas, in the Supreme Court's ruling in Kawasaki Kisen Kaisha Ltd. v. Regal-Beloit Corp.Kawasaki Kisen Kaisha Ltd. v. Regal-Beloit Corp.,  This effectively overruled the Carmack Amendment, which was previously considered to apply in such circumstances.
The Supreme Court rarely takes on appeals in maritime law cases such as Kirby and Regal-Beloit  in fact, there were none in between these two with respect to a through transport situation, so it is advisable to study both of these cases to assess the current position of the Court. It is also a reason to heed the parting words of Justice O’Connor in Kirby:
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Norfolk Southern Railway
Category:Railway litigation in 2004
Category:2004 in United States case law
"""

From "Norris v. Alabama" ==> """
Norris v. Alabama, 294 U.S. 587 (1935), was one of the cases decided by the Supreme Court of the United States that arose out of the trial of the Scottsboro Boys, who were nine African-American teenagers falsely accused of raping two white women in 1931.  The Scottsboro trial jury had no African-American members.  Several cases were brought to the Supreme Court to debate the constitutionality of all-white juries. Norris v. Alabama centered around Clarence Norris, one of the Scottsboro Boys, and his claim that the jury selection had systematically excluded black members due to racial prejudice.
Decision
On April 1, 1935, an 8–0 Supreme Court decision authored by Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes reversed the conviction of Clarence Norris on the grounds that evidence proved that African-Americans were unlawfully excluded from the jury.  The lack of dissent characterizes the shift of national opinion on the ideas of race within the criminal justice system. The Court's opinion states that though Alabama had no direct laws prohibiting African-American involvement in juries, its practices essentially accomplished this discrimination.
The Supreme Court held that the systematic exclusion of African Americans from jury service violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The case was a significant advance in the Supreme Court's criminal procedure jurisprudence. Building on the existing precedent of Strauder v. West Virginia (1880) and Neal v. Delaware (1882), the Supreme Court addressed an Alabama statute that was facially neutral, but held that a criminal defendant could establish a prima facie (that is, accepted as true unless proven otherwise) claim of discrimination by showing that a substantial number of African Americans live in a community and that African Americans have been excluded from serving on juries. The prima facie evidence in this case was the disproportionality in the number of African-Americans who lived in the county compared to the number of African-Americans represented on juries.
Clarence Norris
Clarence Norris, though sentenced to death twice, died of old age in the year 1989.  He was paroled in 1943 and pardoned by Alabama Governor George Wallace in 1976.  He spent 15 years in prison and 30 years as a fugitive running from his parole. During this period as a runaway, Norris worked in New York as a warehouse employee.  He was forced to change his name upon arrival because the stigma of being a Scottsboro Boy was too difficult to live with.  Also during his time in New York, Norris unsuccessfully fought for $10,000 in reparations for the injustices against him. Though each of the Scottsboro Boys but the youngest received the death penalty, none of them was actually executed. Clarence Norris was the last survivor out of the group of nine.
Impact
The ultimate impact of the Norris v. Alabama case is its direct effect on how racial discrimination is viewed constitutionally. Prior to this judgment, all-white juries were commonplace and not considered unconstitutional.  This Supreme Court opinion made racial diversity and proportionality an expectation in the courtroom. It relied upon the principles of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution, the Equal Protection Clause, which states that the law should protect every American in an equal manner.
 References 
External links
Category:1935 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:Legal history of Alabama
Category:United States equal protection and criminal procedure case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "North American Co. v. SEC" ==> """
North American Co. v. Securities and Exchange Commission, 327 U.S. 686 (1946), is a United States Supreme Court case holding that a Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) order under the Public Utility Holding Company Act (PUHCA) directing a public utility holding company to divest its securities of all companies except for one electric company did not violate the Commerce Clause or the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution..
Background
PUHCA was one of a number of trust-busting and securities regulation initiatives that were enacted in response to the Wall Street Crash of 1929 and ensuing Great Depression, including the collapse of Samuel Insull's public utility holding companies. By 1932, the eight largest utility holding companies controlled 73 percent of the investor-owned electric industry. Their complex, highly leveraged, corporate structures were very difficult for individual states to regulate. PUHCA required electric company holding companies to register with the SEC, and authorized the SEC to limit a holding company to a single integrated electric system through the divestiture of its other public utility and unrelated companies.
The North American Company, formed in 1890, was a holding company in a system that by 1940 contained 80 companies operating in seventeen states and the District of Columbia. These included the Union Electric Company, which operated an electric system around St. Louis, Missouri, and subsidiaries in Illinois and Iowa, the Washington Railway and Electric Company, and the North American Light and Power Company with systems in Kansas, Missouri, Illinois, and Iowa and its subsidiaries Cleveland Electric Illuminating Company, Pacific Gas and Electric, and Detroit Edison Company. In addition, North American also owned an investment trust company and West Kentucky Coal Company. Together the various electric systems served more than 3,000,000 customers in a service territory of 165,000 square miles.
North American initially challenged the constitutionality of PUHCA and requested an injunction against its enforcement, but the Supreme Court in Landis v. North American Co., held that the case was premature and that North American should register and then litigate the constitutionality of PUHCA after the SEC conducted its proceeding. North American then registered in 1937 as a holding company with the SEC, reserving its right to challenge the validity of the remaining portions of PUHCA. After initiating an administrative proceeding, the SEC issued an order requiring divestiture of North American's securities in companies other than the Union Electric Company. North American appealed, but in 1943 the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit upheld the order. Arguing that ownership of securities was not interstate commerce within the meaning of the Commerce Clause and that the divestiture ordered by the SEC was a taking in violation of the Fifth Amendment, North American appealed to the Supreme Court, which granted certiorari.
Opinion
The opinion by Justice Murphy first concluded that North American was engaged in interstate commerce and through its substantial stock ownership dominated its subsidiaries. The opinion then noted that North American's argument that PUHCA's divestiture provision was invalid because ownership of securities was not commerce had been previously rejected by the Court in the anti-trust case of Northern Securities Co. v. United States. Under its authority under the Commerce Clause, Congress could regulate to protect the freedom of interstate commerce using any means that were lawful and not prohibited by the Constitution. Under Northern Securities, Congress could deal with and affect the ownership of securities to protect the freedom of commerce, which it did in fashioning the divestiture remedy in PUHCA.
Lastly, the Court dismissed the takings argument, noting that Congress had weighed the benefit to shareholders of efficient, common management of diversified companies against the actual and potential harm to the public, investors, and consumers from the use of pooled investments, and determined that the economic advantages of a holding company atop an unintegrated, sprawling electric system were not commensurate with the resulting economic disadvantages. In addition, it was not clear that there would be a loss necessary for a takings claim under the Fifth Amendment. PUHCA does not require the dumping or forced liquidation of the securities on the market for cash, so the stock of the companies ordered divested could be distributed to the shareholders or sold under a plan that protects shareholder rights. The Court determined that it could not conclude that North American shareholders were disadvantaged by the operation of the divestiture provision of PUHCA.
Justices Reed, Douglas and Jackson did not participate in the consideration of the case. Although Chief Justice Stone had initially recused himself for a disclosed reason, but when he discovered that his disqualification plus those of the other justices would result in the lack of a quorum, he reversed his position.
Subsequent events
PUHCA was repealed by the Energy Policy Act of 2005 effective February 8, 2006.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 327
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States energy case law
Category:U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission litigation
Category:1946 in United States case law
"""

From "North American Cold Storage Co. v. City of Chicago" ==> """
North American Cold Storage Co. v. Chicago, 211 U.S. 306 (1908), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that no hearing was necessary prior to the seizure, condemnation, and destruction of food which was unwholesome and unfit for use..
Facts
A Chicago ordinance allowed inspectors to inspect cold storage facilities for rotten food and summarily destroy unfit food.  Chicago inspectors ordered the destruction of plaintiff’s poultry.  The Company refused the order and sought an injunction.
Issue
Whether the provisions in the cold storage ordinances of Chicago for destruction of unsafe and unwholesome food are unconstitutional as depriving persons of property without due process of law because they do not provide for notice and opportunity to be heard before such destruction.
Holding
Under its police power, the state has the right to seize and destroy food which is unwholesome and unfit to use, and, in exercising such a power, due process of law, within the meaning of the Fourteenth Amendment, does not require previous notice and an opportunity to be heard; the party whose property is destroyed has a right of action after the act which is not affected by the ex parte condemnation of the state officers.
Where, under the police power of the state, the legislature may enact laws for the destruction of articles prejudicial to public health, it is, to a great extent, within its discretion as to whether any notice and hearing shall be given, and the fact that the articles might be kept for a period does not give the owners a right to notice and hearing.
Importance
Wrongful loss of a property interest can always be made whole, unlike a liberty interest.
See also
Justice Rufus Wheeler Peckham
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 211
Chicago - the defendant
North American Cold Storage - the plaintiff
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States civil due process case law
Category:1908 in United States case law
"""

From "North American Oil Consolidated v. Burnet" ==> """
North American Oil Consolidated v. Burnet, 286 U.S. 417 (1932), was a landmark decision by the United States Supreme Court that established the claim of right doctrine..
Background
Facts
This case involved the North American Oil Consolidated (hereinafter North American Oil) company which operated several properties in 1916.Burnet, 286 U.S. at 420.  One of the properties was a section of oil land, and the United States held the legal title to the property. The income earned from the property in 1916 was recorded in North American Oil's books as income.
In 1915, the United States government filed a suit to remove North American Oil from the property, and on February 2, 1916, the court appointed a receiver to operate the property and hold the income derived from the property while litigation ensued.Burnet, 286 U.S. at 420-21.
In 1917, North American Oil was paid the 1916 profits which were acquired during the receivership by order of the District Court.Burnet, 286 U.S. at 421.  The government appealed, but it was not until 1920 that the Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the District Court’s decision.  Finally, in 1922, a further appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court was dismissed by stipulation.
In 1918, North American Oil filed an amended tax return including the profits from the receivership in its 1916 taxable income. The IRS filed a deficiency, claiming that the income North American Oil gained from receivership should have been taxed in 1917 when they achieved control of it. The Board of Tax Appeals found that the money was taxable to the receiver in 1916. On appeal, the Circuit Court of Appeals held that the profits were taxable to the company as income in 1917. North American Oil appealed on the basis that the income was taxable either in 1916 when it was earned, or 1922 when the final decision regarding the land was made, and was granted a writ of certiorari.
Issue
Whether the profits paid to North American Oil in 1917 were taxable income for that particular year.
Analysis
The Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) argued that the 1916 profits should be included in the 1917 taxable year.  North American Oil had not entered the profit as income in 1916 but did include it in an amended return for 1916 in 1918.
North American Oil appealed the IRS’ decision, and the Board of Tax Appeals held that the profits were taxable to the receiver as income in 1916 and made no finding whether the company’s accounts were kept on the cash receipts and disbursements basis or on the accrual basis.  The Circuit Court of Appeals held that the profits were taxable to North American Oil as income in 1917 regardless of whether the company’s returns were made on the cash or on the accrual basis.Burnet, 286 U.S. at 421-22.
The United States Supreme Court affirmed the Circuit Court of Appeals.Burnet, 286 U.S. at 424.  The Court analyzed the facts and arrived at three main conclusions:
 The 1916 profits received by the receiver in 1916 were not income to the receiver.Burnet, 286 U.S. at 422-23.
 The 1916 profits were not taxable to North American Oil as income in 1916 because it did not know, at that point, whether it would ever actually receive the money.Burnet, 286 U.S. at 423.  North American Oil had no accession to wealth, or control of the income at that point.The Court would later articulate its position on what constitutes income. See  (noting that income is determined by: (1) undeniable accession to wealth; (2) clearly realized; (3) over which the taxpayer has complete dominion).  Through 1916, it was uncertain who was entitled to the profits.
 The 1916 profits were not income in the year 1922—when the final judgment was entered and the litigation was finally terminated.  North American Oil had a right to the 1916 profits in 1917, by order of the District Court. The Court held, “If a taxpayer receives earnings under a claim of right and without restriction as to its disposition, he has received income which he is required to return, even though it may still be claimed that he is not entitled to retain the money, and even though he may still be adjudged liable to restore its equivalent.” It was in 1917 that the profits became entitled to them, and they achieved access to and control of the gains. If the 1922 decision had ruled in favor of the government, North American Oil would have been entitled to a deduction in the amount of those lost profits.
Holding
The U.S. Supreme Court affirmed the Circuit Court of Appeals.  The 1916 profits were taxable income to North American Oil in 1917 when the District Court determined that the company had a claim of right to the profits, even though litigation was ongoing at that time.
Impact
This case is significant for all taxpaying individuals, even into the 21st century, because the court articulated a claim of right doctrine. This doctrine generally states that when a taxpayer receives income for which they have a claim of right, it is then included as income in that year, when that claim of right is established. Later, if it turns out that the taxpayer must return the income, then the taxpayer will generally be entitled to take a deduction for the returned amount.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 286
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1932 in United States case law
Category:Oil and gas law
Category:United States energy law
"""

From "North Carolina State Board of Dental Examiners v. FTC" ==> """
North Carolina State Board of Dental Examiners v. Federal Trade Commission, 574 U.S. 494 (2015), was a United States Supreme Court case on the scope of immunity from US antitrust law. The Supreme Court held that a state occupational licensing board that was primarily composed of persons active in the market it regulates has immunity from antitrust law only when it is actively supervised by the state. The North Carolina Board of Dental Examiners had relied on the Parker immunity doctrine, established by the Supreme Court case Parker v. Brown, which held that actions by state governments acting in their sovereignty did not violate antitrust law.
 Background 
North Carolina legislation had designated the North Carolina State Board of Dental Examiners (NCBDE) to be "the agency of the State for the regulation of the practice of dentistry" and required that six of the eight members of the Board must be licensed, practicing dentists. Acting upon complaints by dentists, the Board issued cease-and-desist orders to non-dentists offering tooth whitening services and teeth whitening product manufacturers, often warning that the practicing without a license of dentistry is a crime. These orders prompted many non-dentists to stop offering these services in North Carolina.
On June 17, 2010, the Federal Trade Commission filed a complaint to the FTC administrative court alleging that the Board's actions were anti-competitive and unlawful under the Federal Trade Commission Act. An administrative law judge refused to dismiss the complaint on the Board's claim that they had state-action immunity and later ruled that the Board's concerted action constituted an unreasonable restraint of trade and a method of unfair competition, falling afoul of antitrust law. The ruling was sustained by the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit and the United States Supreme Court granted certiorari. Oral arguments were held on October 14, 2014.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court ruled 6–3 that a state licensing board that is composed primarily of active market participants has state action immunity from antitrust law only when it is actively supervised by the state. Justice Anthony Kennedy begins his opinion for the Court by extolling the Sherman Antitrust Act as "a central safeguard for the Nation's free market structures."North Carolina State Board of Dental Examiners v. FTC, 135 S. Ct. 1101 (2015). That said, Justice Kennedy notes that the States' power to regulate would be "impermissibly burdened" if they had to obey United States antitrust law.135 S. Ct. 1101 citing Frank H. Easterbrook, Antitrust and the Economics of Federalism, 26 J. Law & Econ. 23, 24 (1983). To address this, the Court in Parker v. Brown (1943) granted California immunity from federal antitrust laws after the state created a New Deal raisin cartel. Statehouses happily delegated Parker immunity to trade associations and when attorneys began using this delegation to set a price floor the Court in Goldfarb v. Virginia State Bar (1975) found Parker immunity required what Justice Kennedy calls “more than a mere facade of state involvement”.
Because the Sherman Act was designed to break private monopolies,135 S. Ct. 1101 citing Einer Elhauge, The Scope of Antitrust Process, 104 Harv. L. Rev. 667, 672 (1991). Justice Kennedy does not accept that the "congressional judgment" was to allow the States to delegate their immunity to a private monopoly.135 S. Ct. 1101 citing Merrick Garland, Antitrust and State Action: Economic Efficiency and the Political Process, 96 Yale L. J. 486, 500 (1986). After California delegated price fixing authority directly to wine merchants, the Court in California Retail Liquor Dealers Ass'n v. Midcal Aluminum, Inc. (1980) began limiting immunity to where the State has articulated a clear anticompetitive policy and the State provides active supervision of the anticompetitive conduct.The Supreme Court—Leading Cases, 129 Harv. L. Rev. 371 (2015).
North Carolina did not claim it had set any policy regarding teeth whitening nor did it claim it exercised any supervision over the Dentists Board. Nevertheless, because a city received Parker immunity without active State supervision in Hallie v. Eau Claire, , the Dentists Board claimed that active State supervision is unnecessary for any state agency. Unimpressed, Justice Kennedy writes that "Parker immunity does not derive from nomenclature alone" but rather from accountability to voters in elections. Because dentists control the Dentists Board, Justice Kennedy finds the need for the antitrust laws "applies to this case with full force, particularly in light of the risks licensing boards dominated by market participants may pose to the free market."135 S. Ct. 1101 citing Arron Edlin & Rebecca Haw, Cartels by Another Name: Should Licensed Occupations Face Antitrust Scrutiny? 162 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1093 (2014). However, Justice Kennedy declines to define when a board is dominated or what State involvement is needed, writing “It suffices to note that the inquiry regarding active supervision is flexible and context-dependent.”
The Dentists Board further argued that denying it antitrust immunity would remove the main incentive for dentists to serve on the board. Justice Kennedy responds by citing the Hippocratic Oath, writing “those who pursue a calling must embrace ethical standards that derive from a duty separate from the dictates of the state.”135 S. Ct. 1101 citing Steven H. Miles, The Hippocratic Oath and the Ethics of Medicine (2004). R. Rotunda & J. Dzienkowski, Legal Ethics: The Lawyer's Deskbook on Professional Responsibility (2014); Robert Baker, Before Bioethics: A History of American Medical Ethics From the Colonial Period to the Bioethics Revolution (2013).
Dissent 
Justice Samuel Alito, joined by Justice Scalia and Justice Thomas, dissented. Justice Alito begins by noting "there is nothing new about the structure of the North Carolina Board"135 S. Ct. 1101 fn.1 citing S. White, History of Oral and Dental Science in America 197– 214 (1876) (detailing earliest American regulations of the practice of dentistry). and that self-serving by such boards is, likewise, not new.135 S. Ct. 1101 fn.2 citing e.g., R. Shrylock, Medical Licensing in America 29 (1967) (detailing the deterioration of licensing regimes in the mid-19th century, in part out of concerns about restraints on trade); Walter Gellhorn, The Abuse of Occupational Licensing, 44 U. Chi. L. Rev. 6 (1976); Lawrence Shepard, Licensing Restrictions and the Cost of Dental Care, 21 J. Law & Econ. 187 (1978). Justice Alito then recalls that when the Sherman Act was enacted, Congress's Commerce Clause power was much smaller and that at the time the States frequently set price controls.135 S. Ct. 1101 fn.3 citing Milton Handler, The Current Attack on the Parker v. Brown State Action Doctrine, 76 Colum. L. Rev. 1, 4–6 (1976). As such, Justice Alito believes denying the Dentists Board antitrust immunity “diminishes our traditional respect for federalism and state sovereignty”.
For Justice Alito, the Dentists Board is clearly a state agency. As support, he includes the North Carolina statutes referring to the Dentists Board as a list of bullet points. Justice Alito also attacks Justice Kennedy for not articulating a clear standard of when a state agency is privately controlled. To underline this point, Justice Alito provides three full paragraphs of open questions. Finally, Justice Alito deplores of using the Court to address regulatory capture, speculating that even the FTC has been captured.135 S. Ct. 1101 fn.6 citing e.g., Roger Noll, Reforming Regulation 40–43, 46 (1971); James Q. Wilson, The Politics of Regulation 357–394 (1980). See Edward F. Cox, The Nader Report on the Federal Trade Commission vii–xiv (1969); Richard Posner, Federal Trade Commission, Chi. L. Rev. 47, 82–84 (1969).
References
External links
On SCOTUSblog
FTC enforcement summery In the Matter of The North Carolina Board of Dental Examiners
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:Anti-competitive practices
Category:Licensing
Category:Dentistry in the United States
Category:Federal Trade Commission litigation
"""

From "North Carolina v. Alford" ==> """
North Carolina v. Alford, 400 U.S. 25 (1970), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States affirmed that there are no constitutional barriers in place to prevent a judge from accepting a guilty plea from a defendant who wants to plead guilty while still protesting his innocence under duress as a detainee status.  This type of plea has become known as an Alford plea, differing slightly from the nolo contendere plea in which the defendant agrees to being sentenced for the crime, but does not admit guilt.  Alford died in prison in 1975.
Case
Trial and appeals
Henry Alford was a black man in the South at the height of the civil rights movement. He had visited a sex worker at a bar and allegedly got into a fight with Nathaniel Young. Young was later killed from a shotgun blast. Henry Alford was indicted for first-degree murder in North Carolina in December 1963.  His attorney, having graduated just a few years previously, interviewed several witnesses and was convinced of Alford's guilt. Despite Alford's claims of innocence and no eyewitness to the crime, witnesses saw him retrieve his gun, shortly before the murder, stated he was going to kill the victim, and then upon returning home, stated that he had carried out the act. Alford also had a lengthy criminal history, including a prior conviction for murder. The attorney believed that Alford would probably be convicted in a trial, and thus recommended Alford plead guilty to the lesser charge of second-degree murder in order to avoid the death penalty. Ultimately, however, the decision  was up to Alford.  Before the plea was entered, the court heard sworn testimony from three witnesses. There were no eyewitnesses to the murder, but witnesses swore that Alford had taken his gun from his house and declared he was going to kill the victim, and upon returning, stated that he had killed the victim.  Alford pleaded guilty to second-degree murder but declared to the court that he was in fact innocent, and was pleading guilty only to avoid the death penalty, which might have been applied had he been convicted of first-degree murder.
The judge sentenced Alford to the maximum second-degree murder penalty of 30 years in prison. Alford appealed on the constitutional ground that his plea was "the product of fear and coercion", in violation of his constitutional rights.  A federal appeals court ruled that the plea was involuntary because it was motivated by fear of the death sentence, and the court should have rejected the guilty plea. The federal appeals court vacated the sentence of the lower court.
Supreme Court ruling
Majority
Justice Byron White wrote that the Court had accepted the case for review because some states authorized conviction only for a crime “where guilt is shown,” including by means of a guilty plea that included an actual admission of guilt; but “others have concluded that they should not ‘force any defense on a defendant in a criminal case,’ particularly when advancement of the defense might ‘end in disaster...’” and therefore would accept a guilty plea in Alford's circumstances.
White wrote that courts may accept whatever plea a defendant chooses to enter, as long as the defendant is competently represented by counsel; the plea is intelligently chosen; and “the record before the judge contains strong evidence of actual guilt.”  Faced with “grim alternatives,” the defendant's best choice of action may be to plead guilty to the crime, White wrote, and the courts must accept the defendant's choice made in his own interests.
Dissent
In the dissent, Justice William Brennan stated that capital punishment in the United States was unconstitutional, and wrote that the actual effect of this unconstitutional threat to Alford was to induce a guilty plea.  He concluded the plea should have been vacated and Alford should have been retried, writing: "the facts set out in the majority opinion demonstrate that Alford was 'so gripped by fear of the death penalty' that his decision to plead guilty was not voluntary but was "the product of duress as much so as choice reflecting physical constraint."
Commentary
Stephanos Bibas (who would be appointed as a federal judge by President Donald Trump in 2017) has spoken out against the Alford plea on the moral ground that it undermines public confidence in the accuracy and fairness of the criminal justice system, sending some people to jail who profess innocence; and that it dodges the "morality play" aspect of a criminal trial, in which the community sees that the guilty are punished.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 400
Brady v. United States, 
Frendak v. United States
References
Further reading
External links
Issue: Effect of Alford Plea of Guilty, Issues In NY Criminal Law, Volume 4, Issue 11.
Transcript Of Plea Form, North Carolina, with question about Alford plea
Court cases
US v. Szucko, case cited by United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
US v. Bierd, case cited by United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:1970 in United States case law
Category:Alford plea
"""

From "North Carolina v. Pearce" ==> """
North Carolina v. Pearce, 395 U.S. 711 (1969), is a United States Supreme Court case that forbids judicial “vindictiveness” from playing a role in the increased sentence a defendant receives after a new trial.  In sum, due process requires that a defendant be “free of apprehension” of judicial vindictiveness..  Time served for a new conviction of the same offense must be “fully credited,” and a trial judge seeking to impose a greater sentence on retrial must affirmatively state the reasons for imposing such a sentence.
 Background 
The United States Supreme Court considered two respondents’ writs for habeas corpus in their decision. The first respondent, Pearce, was convicted of assault with intent to rape and sentenced to twelve to fifteen years. His first conviction was reversed in a state court proceeding because his involuntary confession was improperly admitted in his first trial.State v. Pearce, 266 N.C. 234, 145 S.E.2d 918 (1966).  On retrial, he was convicted and sentenced to an eight-year prison term. Both the state and Pearce agreed that this sentence, combined with his previous time served, amounted to a harsher sentence than he had originally received. His conviction was affirmed on appeal to the Supreme Court of North Carolina.  Pearce then brought a habeas proceeding in federal court, and the federal district court as well as the Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit both declared that Pearce's new sentence was “unconstitutional and void.” When the state failed to resentence him after sixty days, the federal court ordered Pearce to be released. At this point, the Supreme Court granted certiorari.
The second respondent, Rice, pleaded guilty to four counts of second-degree burglary, and he was sentenced to ten years in prison. The judgment was set aside in a state court proceeding two and a half years later, after Rice successfully argued his constitutional right to counsel was violated at trial. He was retried in Alabama state court, convicted, and sentenced to twenty five years in prison, with no credit given for the time he had already served.  In his habeas corpus petition, the federal district court and Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit declared that the increased sentence was a violation of due process and “unconstitutional.”  The Supreme Court granted certiorari.
Majority opinion
Justice Potter Stewart delivered the majority opinion for the Court,  answering the question “[w]hen at the behest of the defendant a criminal conviction has been set aside and a new trial ordered, to what extent does the Constitution limit the imposition of a harsher sentence after conviction upon retrial?” The Court broke this question into two issues: (i) whether the Constitution requires credit for time already served and (ii) whether the Constitution limits imposing a more severe sentence upon retrial.
The Court quickly dealt with the first issue, and it determined that time previously served must be credited upon resentencing because the Double Jeopardy Clause of the Fifth Amendment prohibits “multiple punishments” for the same offense.
Turning to the second issue regarding the constitutional limits of increased sentences upon reconviction, the Court found that neither the Double Jeopardy Clause of the Fifth Amendment nor the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment precludes a trial judge from increasing a sentence upon reconviction.  Since a trial judge is not “constitutionally precluded…from imposing a new sentence, whether greater or less than the original sentence,” the trial court is free to consider issues that have emerged after the original trial that have “thrown new light upon the defendant's ‘life, health, habits, conduct, and mental and moral propensities.’” As a result, the Court did not impose “an absolute constitutional bar” to an increased sentence upon retrial, since these considerations may properly justify an increased sentence.  Nonetheless, the Court held that the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment imposes limits on the trial judge's ability to increase sentences.  The Court reasoned that it would be a “flagrant violation” of due process for a state court to follow a policy of increasing sentences upon every reconvicted defendant, and it would be a violation of due process for trial courts to impose that type of punishment on defendants who successfully exercise their constitutional rights. The Court further extended this protection to a defendant who prevails on statutory (rather than constitutional) claims, to ensure that a defendant who exercises his right of appeal "be free and unfettered.” Thus, vindictiveness, or choosing to punish a defendant who exercises his right to appeal, must not be considered when a judge imposes a new sentence.
To ensure that vindictiveness does not play a role in sentencing, the Court required for a judge to affirmatively state his justification for an increased sentence.  A trial judge must base his reasoning on “objective information concerning identifiable conduct on the part of the defendant occurring after the time of the original sentencing proceeding.”  This “factual data” must be made part of the record so it can be reviewed on appeal. Because both of the state courts for Rice and Pearce imposed more severe sentences without providing such affirmative justifications.
 Concurring opinion
Justice William O. Douglas, joined by Justice Thurgood Marshall, concurred in the judgment and agreed with the majority's due process analysis. Both Justices, however, went further than the majority.  They would have held that “if for any reason a new trial is granted and there is a conviction a second time, the second penalty imposed cannot exceed the first penalty, if respect is had for the guarantee against double jeopardy.”
Justice Byron White concurred in part, but he would have allowed an increased sentence based on any “objective, identifiable data not known to the trial judge” at the original sentencing.
 Concurring and dissenting
Justice Hugo Black agreed with the majority that Rice's increased sentence indicated that the state trial judge was motivated by a desire to punish Rice for appealing his original trial decision. However, Justice Black disagreed that any evidence indicated that Pearce's sentence was motivated by vindictiveness. He was particularly concerned with the majority's requirement that a trial judge affirmatively state the reasons for an increased sentence.  While he argued that impermissible motivations for increased trial sentences (such as in Rice's case) are unconstitutional, he disagreed that it is the role of the Court—instead of the legislature—to impose a specific remedy of requiring a judge to affirmatively state his reasoning for justifying an increased sentence.See Pearce, 395 U.S. at 741 (“[T]he Court does not explain why the particular detailed procedure spelled out in this case is constitutionally required, while other remedial devices are not. This is pure legislation if there ever was legislation.”).
Justice John Marshall Harlan II agreed with the majority's reasoning as it applied to the Fourteenth Amendment. However, he dissented as to the reasoning of the Court because he disagreed with the holding in Benton v. Maryland, 395 U.S. 784 (1969), which holds that the Double Jeopardy Clause of the Fifth Amendment applies to the states through the Fourteenth Amendment.
 Aftermath 
About twenty years after Pearce was decided, the Court implicitly overruled Pearce in Alabama v. Smith.. As a result, current jurisprudence interprets Pearce's holding to provide a defendant with a “rebuttable presumption of vindictiveness.”Joshua Dressler & George C. Thomas. Criminal Procedure: Principles, Policies, and Perspectives. St. Paul, MN: West, 4th ed. 2010.See .  This doctrine of a rebuttable presumption of vindictiveness, absent an affirmative indication of objective facts justifying an increased sentence, is referred to as the Pearce Principle.Robert M. Strasnick (1997). "Judicial Vindictiveness in the Resentencing of Criminal Defendants: Massachusetts Expands the Pearce Principle as a Matter of Common Law". New England Journal on Criminal and Civil Confinement 23: 529.
 References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:1969 in United States case law
"""

From "North Dakota State Board of Pharmacy v. Snyder's Drug Stores, Inc." ==> """
North Dakota State Board of Pharmacy v. Snyder's Drug Stores, Inc., 414 U.S. 156 (1973), held that a state statute, under which Snyder's had been denied a pharmacy operating permit because it was not majority owned by pharmacists, did not violate the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.. The court overruled the decision of the North Dakota Supreme Court, which relied on the 1928 decision in Liggett Co. v. Baldridge. to hold the statute unconstitutional.
The questions which were raised by the case were: (1) Does the U.S. Supreme Court have jurisdiction to decide the case, e.g. is it final; (2) was the statute in question constitutional.  The Supreme Court answered both questions in the affirmative.
With respect to point (1), the State Board of Pharmacy, being a state agency, is bound by the decisions of the State Supreme Court.  Absent an appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court, it has to abide by what its State's Supreme Court says regarding the constitutionality of a state law.  While the State Supreme Court had remanded the case back to the Pharmacy Board for further proceedings, this did not mean the case was nonappealable.   State law allows any party aggrieved by the decision to appeal it in court.  The problem is, the board itself is not a party to the decision, but is the tribunal making the decision.  Thus, under the law of its state, the Board's only options to be able to raise the constitutional question are either to defy its own state's Supreme Court and refuse to grant the license, thus causing respondent Snyder's to go back into court again, or for the Board to appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court.  Thus, since the Board really had nowhere to go to obtain relief, the U.S. Supreme Court does have standing to hear the case.
With respect to point (2), the case in Liggett regarded a state law that required 100% ownership by pharmacists. The law in this case required a licensee wanting to operate a pharmacy be either a pharmacist or a corporation where the majority of the stockholders were pharmacists.  The owner of Snyder's Drug Stores was Red Owl, a supermarket chain, and it was not shown if the majority of the stockholders of Red Owl were pharmacists.  It was a decision regarding substantive due process.  However, the court's reasoning on substantive due process was not completely clear and not all of the justices agreed on how to decide the cases.  As the point in requiring a pharmacy to be majority owned by pharmacists was to provide a higher degree of care and concern over the operation of a pharmacy, the court found the statute to be a constitutional use of legislative power which "bears a real and substantial relation to the public health, safety, morals, or some other phase of the general welfare,"
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 418
References
External links
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1973 in United States case law
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:1973 in North Dakota
Category:Legal history of North Dakota
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "North Haven Bd. of Educ. v. Bell" ==> """
thumb|Broader School District that houses North Haven
North Haven Bd. of Educ. v. Bell, 456 U.S. 512 (1982), was a U.S. Supreme Court decision where the Court ruled that Title IX protections against sex-based discrimination applied to school employees as well as students within a federal funded education setting. Critically, this decision was made in contrast to many previous court rulings on the application of Title IX to individuals other than students. The decision of North Haven Board of Education v. Bell ushered in an understanding of Title IX that protects anyone interacting with the school system including “parents and guardians, students, applicants and employees." The employee protection of Title IX extends to both full and part-time faculty, dictating that equal pay must be given to men and women for the same work.  
Prior to the 1982 decision, the judicial system of the United States was operating with the understanding that Title IX was exclusively designed for students, or “participants or beneficiaries” of educational programs. Teachers, therefore, were not viewed as a part of either of these categories.
 Background 
After the implementation of Title IX, multiple cases of sex-based discrimination against employees of federally funded educational institutions were heard by various circuit courts. In cases such as Isleboro School Committee v. Califano (593 F.2d 424), Junior College District of St. Louis v. Califano (597 F.2d 119), and Romeo Community Schools v. HEW, (600 F2d 581), the interpretation that employees were not protected against sex-based discrimination by Title IX was upheld.
 First case 
In 1978, a complaint with the U.S. department of Health, Education and Welfare (HEW) was filed against the North Haven Board of Education, a school district in Connecticut, by a former teacher of the district named Elaine Dove. Dove was a tenured teacher in the North Haven public school system who was not rehired after a one-year maternity leave. HEW began to investigate the North Haven school system asking for the school board’s policies on hiring, tenure, and leaves of absence. The North Haven School Board refused to comply, prompting HEW to threaten financial sanctions on the school district. The board of education responded by filing suit in the United States District Court for the District of Connecticut, stating that HEW was overstepping its authority to investigate employment practices using Title IX because Title IX only applied to students.
 Second case 
The previous year, HEW began to investigate the complaint of another faculty member, Linda Potz, against Trumbull, another school district within Connecticut. When HEW declared that Trumbull must take corrective action, Trumbull filed suit in the United States District Court for the District of Connecticut. 
For both cases, the district court sided in favor of the school districts, finding that Title IX was meant to only apply to students. The two filings were then combined on appeal. After appeal, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second District overturned the district courts' decisions.
 Supreme Court Decision 
When the question “Do the protections against gender discrimination of Title IX apply to employees of schools?” was brought before the U.S. Supreme Court, it was a 6-3 decision ruling against the school boards, declaring that Title IX does protect employees of schools from gender discrimination.
This ruling declared that the U.S. Congress had intended Title IX to cover all individuals within the education system, meaning the regulations of HEW were constitutional.
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1982 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "North v. Russell" ==> """
North v. Russell, 427 U.S. 328 (1976), is a United States Supreme Court case which held that a non-lawyer jurist can constitutionally sit in a jail-carrying criminal case provided that the defendant has an opportunity through an appeal to obtain a second trial before a judge who is a lawyer.North v. Russell, 427 U.S. 328, 339 (1976)
Background
In the American judicial system, many states have courts of limited jurisdiction, presided over by a magistrate, a justice of the peace or other non-judicial officer, who hears criminal arraignments and tries petty offenses and small civil cases. These courts are sometimes called police courts.
In July 1974, Lonnie North was convicted of a DWI charge by a police court in Kentucky. The presiding judge, C.B. Russell, was a coal miner with a high school education and without any legal training. Russell later testified that he had not received any training concerning rules of evidence and that he was not familiar with the Kentucky statutes relating to jury trials, with the Kentucky rules of criminal procedure, or with the rights guaranteed to a defendant in a criminal case under the Fourteenth Amendment.
Russell sentenced North to 30 days in jail, a sentence which he was unauthorized to impose. North was also fined $150 and had his drivers' license temporarily revoked. In Kentucky's two-tiered trial system, the first trial is a non-jury trial. If convicted, the defendant may appeal to have a jury trial and must be afforded one. In appearing for the court, North had asked for a jury trial, which, contrary to the applicable statute, was denied him.
North filed a habeas corpus petition in the district court, challenging the statutory scheme under which he had been convicted. He argued that his Fourteenth Amendment rights to due process and equal protection had been violated because he had been tried and convicted in a court presided over by a judge without legal training. The district court denied relief, as did the Kentucky Court of Appeals. The case was appealed to the Supreme Court which vacated and remanded to the appeals court on an issue of jurisdiction. The appeals court sustained the federal constitutional issue, and the case was again appealed to the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court's decision
In a 6-2 decision, the Court upheld the statute as constitutional under the Fourteenth Amendment. Chief Justice Warren Burger wrote the majority opinion. The first claim made by the appellant was that the due process clause requires a law-trained judge in all trials where confinement is a possible penalty, and that this requirement is not affected by the opportunity to obtain a trial de novo before a lawyer-trained judge. Burger contended that a court with the power to impose this penalty should be subjected to judicial scrutiny. However, the Kentucky arrangement for dealing with less serious offenses had not been shown to disadvantage the defendant any more or less than trials conducted in a court of general jurisdiction in the first instance, as long as the later was always available. Furthermore, Burger pointed to several advantages with the police court system:
Proceedings in the inferior courts are simple and speedy, and, if the results in Colten's case are any evidence, the penalty is not characteristically severe. Such proceedings offer a defendant the opportunity to learn about the prosecution's case and, if he chooses, he need not reveal his own. He may also plead guilty without a trial and promptly secure a de novo trial in a court of general criminal jurisdiction.North, 427 U.S. at 336 (quoting Colten v. Kentucky, 407 U.S. 104, 118-19 (1972))
This line of reasoning was quoted from Colten v. Kentucky (1972), a prior Supreme Court case dealing with Kentucky's two-tier trial system. In regard to the judge's lack of legal training, Burger concluded in reference to a previous line of cases that the use of non-judicial officers to perform judicial functions was permitted insofar as "independent, neutral and detached judgement" was secured. These concerns outweighed the need for legal training.
The appellant's second claim was that the Kentucky statute violated the equal protection clause as it allowed for non-trained judges to preside in some cities of the state and not in others. This determination depended on the population size of the different cities. In response, Burger noted that all people within a given city and within cities of the same size were treated equally. Moreover, the Kentucky Court of Appeals had articulated the reasons for this classification scheme, which included varying financial resources of different cities and the power of the state to regulate its internal affairs. Burger cited Missouri v. Lewis (1880), in which the Court held that a state may establish disparate court systems in different cities, as long as all people within the classified area are treated equally. To this end, the Kentucky statute satisfied the constitutional guarantees. The appeals court decision was affirmed.North, 427 U.S. at 339
Concurrence
Justice William J. Brennan concurred in the result, but did not write separately.North, 427 U.S. at 339
Dissent
Justice Potter Stewart dissented, joined by Justice Thurgood Marshall. Stewart began by recounting the circumstances of North's conviction, and the constitutional issues it raised:
Lonnie North was haled into a Kentucky criminal court and there tried, convicted, and sentenced to a term of imprisonment by Judge C. B. Russell. Judge Russell is a coal miner without any legal training or education whatever. I believe that a trial before such a judge that results in the imprisonment of the defendant is constitutionally intolerable. It deprives the accused of his right to the effective assistance of counsel guaranteed by the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments, and deprives him as well of due process of law.
Stewart continued by tracing the development of the right to counsel, which evolved from being afforded only in capital cases (Powell v. Alabama, 1932), to defendants charged with a felony (Gideon v. Wainwright, 1963), and finally also in trials for misdemeanors (Argersinger v. Hamlin, 1972). This evolution "firmly established that a person who has not been accorded the constitutional right to the assistance of counsel cannot be sentenced to even one day of imprisonment." But the integrity of the constitutional right, Stewart said, equally depended on the judge's competence. If the judge was ignorant of the law, the quality of counsel would be made moot:
 In a trial before such a judge, the constitutional right to the assistance of counsel thus becomes a hollow mockery "a teasing illusion like a munificent bequest in a pauper's will."North, 427 U.S. at 343 (Stewart, J., dissenting) (quoting Edwards v. California, 314 U.S. 160, 186 (1941))
Stewart noted that Russell had denied North his request of a trial by jury, despite it being clearly afforded to him by Kentucky law. Moreover, the sentence imposed on North was unauthorized by the statute. Even if no proof of incompetence could be demonstrated, Stewart contended, a sentence of imprisonment imposed by a lay judge was on its face violative of the due process clause:
(...)  I think that any trial before a lay judge that results in the defendant's imprisonment violates the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The Court has never required a showing of specific or individualized prejudice when it was the procedure itself that violated due process of law.  "[A]t times a procedure employed by the State involves such a probability that prejudice will result that it is deemed inherently lacking in due process."North, 427 U.S. at 343 (Stewart, J., dissenting) (quoting Estes v. Texas, 381 U.S. 532, 542-543 (1965))
Stewart further addressed the issue of a trial de novo as a remedy of previous mistakes. He cited Ward v. Village of Monroeville (1972), in which the Court held that "the State's trial court procedure (cannot) be deemed constitutionally acceptable simply because the State eventually offers a defendant an impartial adjudication. Petitioner is entitled to a neutral and detached judge in the first instance." This case had been distinguished in the majority opinion as reflecting the need for neutral judgement on part of the judge as opposed to legal training. Stewart argued that this reasoning was untenable: "(...) surely there can be no meaningful constitutional difference between a trial that is fundamentally unfair because of the judge's possible bias, and one that is fundamentally unfair because of the judge's ignorance of the law."North, 427 U.S. at 345 (Stewart, J., dissenting)
Stewart criticized Burger's citing of the Colten case on the point that the defendant, to vindicate his right of a trial de novo, only had to plead guilty. This, Stewart said, assumed that the defendant had been informed of this right, would nonetheless incur the temporal and financial burden of multiple court appearances, and would "turn what should be a solemn court proceeding (...) into nothing more than a sham."North, 427 U.S. at 346 (Stewart, J., dissenting) Also, it would interfere with the conscience of the innocent defendant:
In short, I cannot accept the suggestion that, as a prerequisite to a constitutionally fair trial, a defendant must stand up in open court and inform a judge that he is guilty when in fact he believes that he is not.North, 427 U.S. at 346 (Stewart, J., dissenting)
In conclusion, Stewart cited a passage from the Magna Carta:
At Runnymede in 1215 King John pledged to his barons that he would "not make any Justiciaries, Constables, Sheriffs, or Bailiffs, excepting of such as knows the laws of land . . . ." (...) Today, more than 750 years later, the Court leaves that promise unkept.North, 427 U.S. at 346 (Stewart, J., dissenting)
Subsequent developments
Two days after announcing the decision in North v. Russell, the Court upheld a similar Massachusetts trial system in Ludwig v. Massachusetts. Edward Soto, in an essay for the Columbia Human Rights Law Review, argued that both decisions "will have far reaching effects on criminal procedure in the United States since they serve to approve many two-tier systems used in other states, several of which have recently rejected similar claims regarding their own procedures."
While this ruling was a victory for Kentucky, it ended up having little effect on the state's courts. This is because while this case was being adjudicated, Kentuckians passed an amendment to the state constitution in November 1975 that resulted in a major overhaul of the state's judicial system. One of the major tenets of this reform was the elimination of police courts and Justice of the Peace courts in local communities, replacing them with a countywide trial court of limited jurisdiction. Judges on the newly created District Courts are, similar to their counterparts on the Circuit Court (Kentucky's trial courts of general jurisdiction), required to be attorneys who are members in good standing of the Kentucky Bar. The new unified Kentucky Court of Justice, including the new District Courts, officially came into existence in 1976.Kentucky Court of Justice: The Judicial Branch at a Glance
References
External links
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Northern Insurance Co. of New York v. Chatham County" ==> """
Northern Insurance Company of New York v. Chatham County, 547 U.S. 189 (2006), is a United States Supreme Court case addressing whether state counties enjoyed sovereign immunity from private lawsuits authorized by federal law. The case involved an admiralty claim by an insurer against Chatham County, Georgia for its negligent operation of a drawbridge. The Court ruled unanimously that the county had no basis for claiming immunity because it was not acting as an "arm of the state."
Except for per curiams, this was the first Supreme Court decision in which Justice Samuel Alito participated.
 Background 
Chatham County, Georgia owned, operated, and maintained the Causton Bluff Bridge, a drawbridge over the Wilmington River. On October 6, 2002, James Ludwig requested that the bridge be raised to allow his boat to pass. The bridge malfunctioned, and a section fell and collided with Ludwig's boat, causing damages in excess of $130,000. The Ludwigs submitted a claim for those damages to their insurer, Zurich Insurance,Zurich was the initial named plaintiff in the lawsuit. Northern Insurance Company of New York, a subsidiary of Zurich, was substituted for Zurich as the named plaintiff after the Supreme Court granted certiorari, but prior to oral argument and decision. which paid in accordance with the terms of their insurance policy.
 District Court proceedings 
Zurich then sought to recover the costs of the Ludwigs' claim by filing suit in admiralty against the county in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Georgia.Because the claim was for damage to a boat while in the water, admiralty law, also called maritime law, applied to the lawsuit. The District Court granted the County's motion for summary judgment on the ground that the suit was barred by sovereign immunity. Though the County conceded that Eleventh Amendment immunity did not extend to counties, it nonetheless contended that it was immune under "the universal rule of state immunity from suit without the state's consent."Defendant's Brief in Support of Motion for Summary Judgment. The District Court agreed, relying on the Fifth Circuit case Broward County v. Wickman195 F.2d 614 (5th Cir. 1952) to conclude that sovereign immunity extends to counties and municipalities that, as here, "exercise power delegated from the State."
 Court of Appeals decision and petition for certiorari 
The Eleventh Circuit, which was bound to follow Wickman as Circuit precedent,The Eleventh Circuit was split from the Fifth Circuit on October 1, 1981. All Fifth Circuit decisions prior to that date are accordingly considered binding precedent in the Eleventh. affirmed. The court acknowledged that the county could not assert an Eleventh Amendment immunity defense because, under Circuit precedent, the county did not qualify as an arm of the state. However, the court nonetheless concluded that a "residual immunity" had been carved out by American common law that protected political subdivisions such as Chatham County.
The Supreme Court granted certiorari to consider "whether an entity that does not qualify as an 'arm of the State' for Eleventh Amendment purposes can nonetheless assert sovereign immunity as a defense to an admiralty suit."Zurich Ins. Co. v. Chatham County, 546 U.S. 933, amended by 546 U.S. 959 (2005). The U.S. Solicitor General was granted leave to participate in oral argument,Motion granted, Northern Ins. Co. of N.Y. v. Chatham County, 546 U.S. 1148 (2005). and argued for the county's immunity.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Clarence Thomas delivered the Court's unanimous opinion, which reversed the decision of the Eleventh Circuit. The Court ruled that the county was not entitled to immunity from Northern's suit because it had failed to demonstrate that it was acting as an "arm of the state" when it operated the bridge.
The Court first observed that states retained the sovereign immunity they enjoyed prior to ratification of the Constitution except to the extent altered by the Constitution itself or its amendments. Accordingly, the phrase "Eleventh Amendment immunity" was merely a "convenient shorthand," because the amendment itself was not the source of the sovereign immunity of the states. The relevant consequence of this was that only states and "arms of the state" possessed immunity from suits authorized by federal law. The Court had repeatedly refused to extend sovereign immunity to municipalities (of which counties are a class), even when they exercised delegated state power.
The county argued that Court precedent had recognized a more expansive "residual" immunity than that applied in the Eleventh Amendment context. The Court, however, asserted that it had only used the term "residual" to refer to the state sovereignty that survived the ratification of the Constitution. The only applicable test was whether the county was acting as an arm of the state, and Chatham County had already conceded in the lower court proceedings that it did not qualify. Furthermore, the Court noted that the question on which it granted certiorari was premised on the conclusion that the county was not an arm of the state.
The Court also rejected the county's alternative argument for a sovereign immunity applicable specifically to in personam admiralty suits, which would bar "cases arising from a county's exercise of core state functions with regard to navigable waters." The Court observed that any immunity extended to states in admiralty cases was simply an application of general principles of sovereign immunity, rather than any issues specific to suits in admiralty.
 Footnotes 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:United States state sovereign immunity case law
Category:United States admiralty case law
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:Zurich Insurance Group
"""

From "Northern Liberty Market Co. v. Kelly" ==> """
Northern Liberty Market Co. v. Kelly, 113 U.S. 199 (1885),  was a writ of error to reverse a judgment for the defendant in an action brought on April 4, 1884, by a corporation formed for the purpose of erecting a markethouse in the City of Washington and carrying on a marketing business there, upon twenty promissory notes made by him to the plaintiff, dated January 1, 1875..
A twenty-year-old incorporated markethouse company with power to purchase, hold, and convey real or personal estate necessary to enable it to carry on its business, built a markethouse on land owned by it in fee simple, and sold by public auction leases for ninety-nine years, renewable forever, of stalls therein at a specified rent. The highest bidder for one of the stalls gave the corporation several promissory notes in part payment for the option of that stall, received such a lease, and took and kept possession of the stall, and afterwards gave it a note for a less sum in compromise of the original notes, and upon express agreement that if this note should not be paid at maturity, the corporation might surrender it to the maker and thereupon the cause of action on those notes should revive. Held that the new note was upon a sufficient legal consideration, and that the corporation, holding and suing upon all the notes, could recover upon this note only.
The judgment was rendered upon a case stated by the parties, in substance as follows:
The plaintiff offered for sale by public auction leases for ninety-nine years, renewable forever, of the stalls in the markethouse at a specified rent, the highest bidder entitled to an option on the stalls. The defendant was the highest bidder for a stall, and made part payment of the purchase money for the option of that stall, twenty notes for $171.05 each, and afterwards received from the plaintiff such a lease of that stall, and took and has since retained possession of the stall under the lease.
On August 5, 1881, the defendant, knowing the plaintiff's corporate existence was limited to twenty years, made and delivered to the plaintiff the note for $1,881.60, in compromise of the twenty original notes, and upon express agreement that if this note should not be promptly paid at maturity, the plaintiff might surrender it to the defendant, and thereupon the plaintiff's cause of action upon the original notes should revive. The note for $394.08 was made by William S. Cross, and guaranteed by the defendant, under like circumstances and in consideration of the surrender of two other notes similar in amount and consideration to the twenty notes before mentioned. All the notes in suit remain unpaid otherwise than by the giving of the note for $1,881.60, and all are still held by the plaintiff.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
"""

From "Northern Pipeline Construction Co. v. Marathon Pipe Line Co." ==> """
Northern Pipeline Construction Company v. Marathon Pipe Line Company, 458 U.S. 50 (1982), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that Article III jurisdiction could not be conferred on non-Article III courts (i.e. courts without the independence and protection given to Article III judges).
 Background 
The Bankruptcy Act of 1978 completely altered bankruptcy law in the United States.  It created the Bankruptcy Code (Title 11 of the United States Code), and created bankruptcy courts, which served as adjuncts to the United States District Courts for each federal judicial district of the United States.  Under the previous law, the Bankruptcy Act of 1898, the federal district courts served as bankruptcy courts and appointed “referees” to conduct proceedings, so long as the district court chose not to withdraw a case from the referee.  The new law eliminated the “referee” system and allowed the President to appoint bankruptcy judges for terms of fourteen years (as opposed to the life tenure given to Article III judges), with the advice and consent of the Senate.  The judges’ salaries were set by statute and subject to adjustment, and they could be removed by the judicial council of the circuit on grounds of incompetence, misconduct, neglect of duty, or physical or mental disability (as compared with Article III judges, who may only be impeached by Congress and are constitutionally forbidden from having their pay decreased while in office).
The new Bankruptcy Act granted the bankruptcy courts jurisdiction over all “civil proceedings arising under Title 11 or arising in or related to cases under Title 11”.  Furthermore, the law endowed the bankruptcy courts with all of the “powers of a court of law or equity”, except for issuing injunctions against other courts and punishing criminal contempt outside of court (or otherwise punishable by imprisonment).  The law also created a Bankruptcy Appellate Panel for each judicial circuit, which would hear appeals from final orders and judgments of the bankruptcy courts.  If no appeals panel was designated, then the district court itself would hear the appeals.
In January 1980, the plaintiff/appellant in this matter, Northern Pipeline Construction Co. (Northern), filed a petition for reorganization under Chapter 11 of the bankruptcy code in the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Minnesota.  Two months later, in March 1980, Northern brought suit in the bankruptcy court against defendant/appellee Marathon Pipe Line Co. (Marathon) for breach of contract and warranty, misrepresentation, coercion, and duress.  Marathon moved to dismiss the suit on the grounds that the Bankruptcy Act of 1978 unconstitutionally conferred Article III powers on judges who lacked the career protections and political independence of Article III judges.  The United States intervened to protect its own interests.
The bankruptcy judge denied Marathon's motion, but on appeal, the United States District Court for the District of Minnesota reversed, agreeing with Marathon's argument that the law was unconstitutional.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Brennan wrote for the plurality, joined by Justices Marshall, Blackmun, and Stevens.  He stressed the importance of the political independence of the judiciary, which allows judges to decide cases free from domination from the Executive and Legislative branches.  The life tenure and protection against diminution of salary helps to ensure this independence, but the bankruptcy judges lacked this protection.
Brennan distinguished the bankruptcy courts from three other categories of non-Article III courts.  The first two categories of courts Brennan discusses are the territorial courts, permissible because Congress exercises the general powers of government in these territories; and courts martial, permissible because the Constitution grants the political branches broad powers to control the military.
The third exception discussed by Brennan are tribunals for the adjudication of cases involving public rights, matters which arise “between the government and persons subject to its authority in connection with the performance of the constitutional functions of the executive or legislative departments”.  458 U.S. at 67-68.  Public rights exist in contrast to private rights, i.e. disputes between two private parties, which are within the judicial power of Article III courts.
Brennan held that the dispute in question here was an adjudication of private rights, because it involved the restructuring of creditor-debtor relations under the bankruptcy laws.  Thus, none of the three exceptions to Article III jurisdiction were applicable.  He further held that Congress’ power under the Naturalization and Bankruptcy Clause (Art. I, § 8, cl.4) of the Constitution did not carry with it a power to create specialized tribunals for the adjudication of bankruptcy cases.  Brennan feared that reading such a power into Article I would erode the jurisdiction conferred by Article III and displace the judicial branch of the government.
Brennan then turned to Northern's argument that the bankruptcy courts were merely adjuncts to the U.S. District Courts.  He framed the Constitutional issue as the determination whether the Bankruptcy Act retained “the essential attributes of judicial power” inherent in Article III tribunals.  He began his analysis by examining two prior cases:  Crowell v. Benson, 285 U.S. 22 (1932), in which the court permitted the United States Employees' Compensation Commission to make factual determinations in the issuance of compensation orders for individual employees; and United States v. Raddatz, 447 U.S. 667 (1980), in which the court upheld the Federal Magistrates Act, which permitted district court judges to refer certain pretrial motions to magistrates for initial determination.  These cases provided limits on the extent to which Congress may transfer traditionally judicial functions to non-Article III tribunals.  For example, Congress has substantial discretion in prescribing the manner in which rights created by its own statutes may be enforced, but Congress has no such discretion in altering the adjudication of rights it has not created by statute.  Furthermore, the functions of the adjunct court must be limited in such a way so as to preserve the parties’ rights to adjudication before an Article III court.
Brennan held that the rights to be determined in a bankruptcy proceeding were not Congressionally created rights, and therefore the Bankruptcy Act encroached upon the powers of Article III courts.  The rights Northern claimed against Marathon were contractual in nature, and as such were creatures of state law.  Moreover, the jurisdiction granted to the bankruptcy courts under the Act was too broad, vesting them jurisdiction over all civil proceedings arising under Title 11 and in related cases, and granting them the power to issue final judgments.  Thus, while Congress did retain the power to assign certain matters to non-Article III tribunals, this power was limited to rights created by federal statute and the powers of the tribunal had to be narrower than what an Article III court could exercise.
Finally, Brennan chose to apply the holding only prospectively, and to stay the judgment of the court until October 4, 1982, to give Congress some time to rewrite the statute.
 Concurrence 
Justice Rehnquist, joined by Justice O’Connor, concurred in the judgment, on the grounds that Congress could not constitutionally vest bankruptcy courts with such broad authority to adjudicate state law matters related to a bankruptcy case, but not governed by a federal rule of decision.  However, because this is an area of law the Court has addressed infrequently, and because this was a narrower constitutional ground upon which to decide the case, Rehnquist would have declined to take as broad a position on the powers of Congress to create such federal courts as the plurality did.
 Dissenting opinions 
 White's dissent 
Justice White, with whom Chief Justice Burger and Justice Powell joined, dissented.  White felt that the plurality was oversimplifying its analysis of Article III and the principle of judicial independence, and that pure textualism and deriving basic rules from past cases was not enough.
First of all, White argued, the statute should not have been declared invalid on its face, but only as applied to Marathon's proceeding.  Secondly, bankruptcy almost always involves a combination of federal and state law issues, by the very nature of its proceedings.  Since federal courts only rarely hear state law claims, having bankruptcy courts adjudicate these issues really would not intrude on the powers of Article III courts very much.  White accused the court of ignoring the complex realities of bankruptcy law in favor of its own theory of separation of powers.
White also felt that the plurality incorrectly defined the Crowell and Raddatz cases as the outer limits of Congressional authority to create non-Article III tribunals, and ignored both prior bankruptcy and administrative law practice.  He noted that not only did bankruptcy judges have many of the same powers as the “referees” under the old law, but that District Courts were given greater latitude in judicial review of bankruptcy court decisions than they had when sitting in review of administrative agency actions (see also: Administrative Procedure Act).
White lamented the confused state of the Court's prior jurisprudence in this area, and suggested that instead of attempting to fashion any sort of hard rules about what matters must remain within the cognizance of Article III courts, the court should use a balancing test.  Specifically, the Court should examine which Article III values Congress seeks to accommodate or undermine in its legislative scheme, and then weigh this impact against which values Congress hopes to serve by creating Article I courts.  In other words, the benefits of a legislative court must be weighed against its effect on separation of powers and judicial independence.  White concluded by saying he felt that the Bankruptcy Act of 1978 passed his balancing test.
 Burger's dissent 
Chief Justice Burger added his own brief dissenting opinion, first agreeing with Rehnquist's comment about the overbreadth of the plurality opinion, then lamenting the disruption that the majority's decision would cause in forcing Congress to rewrite the law.
 Subsequent developments 
The Court stayed its judgment until October 4, 1982 to give Congress an opportunity to repair the constitutional flaws in the bankruptcy system.  The Court then extended its stay until December 24, 1982 upon the motion of the Solicitor General.
In response to Congress’ failure to act quickly, the Judicial Conference of the United States published an Emergency Interim Rule, which the federal district courts adopted on December 25, 1982.  This rule allowed the district courts to refer cases to bankruptcy courts, but allowed them to withdraw the case at any time.  The rule also narrowed the definition of “related proceedings” as those that could have proceeded in federal or state court in the absence of a bankruptcy petition.  The bankruptcy judges could not enter final orders or judgments on such related proceedings without consent of the parties, but had to submit its findings and conclusions to the district court, which were subject to de novo review.
Finally, Congress dealt with the problem with the Bankruptcy Amendments and Federal Judgeship Act of 1984.  Like the Emergency Interim Rule, this statute authorized the federal district courts to refer bankruptcy cases to the bankruptcy courts, but in so called “non-core” proceedings, the bankruptcy court must submit proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law to the district court for de novo review.Doernberg, Donald L.; Wingate, C. Keith; Zeigler, Donald H.  Federal Courts, Federalism and Separation of Powers:  Cases and Materials (3rd Edition).  Thomson West (American Casebook Series), 2004.  
 References 
 Chemerinsky, Erwin.  Federal Jurisdiction, 4th Edition.  Aspen Publishers, 2003.  
 External links 
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States bankruptcy case law
Category:Good Behavior Clause case law
Category:1982 in United States case law
"""

From "Northern Securities Co. v. United States" ==> """
Northern Securities Co. v. United States, 193 U.S. 197 (1904), was a case heard by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1903. The Court ruled 5-4 against the stockholders of the Great Northern and Northern Pacific railroad companies, which had essentially formed a monopoly and to dissolve the Northern Securities Company.
Facts
In 1901, James Jerome Hill, president of and the largest stockholder in the Great Northern Railway, won the financial support of J. P. Morgan and attempted to take over the Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad (CB&Q).Solomon, Brian. Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railway. St. Paul, Minn.: MBI Publishing, 2005, p. 51. The Burlington served a traffic-rich region of the Midwest and Great Plains, was well-managed, and quite profitable. It possessed a finely-engineered line connecting the Twin Cities to the nation's rail center of Chicago, which made it particularly attractive as an addition to Hill's Great Northern.
Hill's strategy was for his railroad and Morgan's Northern Pacific Railway to jointly buy the CB&Q. However, Edward Henry Harriman, president of the Union Pacific Railroad and the Southern Pacific Railroad, also wanted to buy Chicago, Burlington, and Quincy. Harriman demanded a one-third interest in the CB&Q, but Hill refused him. Harriman then began to buy up Northern Pacific's stock, forcing Hill and Morgan to counter by purchasing more stock as well. Northern Pacific's stock price skyrocketed, and the artificially high stock threatened to cause a crash on the New York Stock Exchange. Hill and Morgan were ultimately successful in obtaining more Northern Pacific stock than Harriman and won control of not only the Northern Pacific but also the Chicago, Burlington and Quincy.
Pressured by Harriman's actions, Hill created a holding company—the Northern Securities Company—to control all three of the railroads. The public was greatly alarmed by the formation of Northern Securities, which threatened to become the largest company in the world and monopolize railroad traffic in the western United States. President William McKinley, however, was not willing to pursue antitrust litigation against Hill. McKinley was assassinated, however, and his progressive Vice-President, Theodore Roosevelt, ordered the United States Department of Justice to pursue a case against Northern Securities. The case was led by Assistant Attorney General Milton D. Purdy.
Judgment
Justice Harlan held that the merger was unlawful. Justices Day, Brown, McKenna and Brewer concurred.
Justice Holmes, joined by Fuller, White, Peckham, dissented. The Holmes dissent included the famous passage: "Great cases like hard cases make bad law. For great cases are called great, not by reason of their real importance in shaping the law of the future, but because of some accident of immediate overwhelming interest which appeals to the feelings and distorts the judgment."
Significance
Hill was forced to disband his holding company and manage each railroad independently. The Northern Pacific; the Great Northern; and the Chicago, Burlington and Quincy companies would later merge in 1969. The case was an example of Roosevelt's trust-busting procedures, prosecuting under the Sherman Antitrust Act (1890), and it marked a major victory for the antitrust movement.
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:1904 in United States case law
Category:Great Northern Railway (U.S.)
Category:Northern Pacific Railway
"""

From "Northwest Austin Municipal Utility District No. 1 v. Holder" ==> """
Northwest Austin Municipal Utility District No. 1 v. Holder, 557 U.S. 193 (2009), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court regarding Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, and in particular its requirement that proposed electoral-law changes in certain states must be approved by the federal government.  In a 9–0 decision, the Court concluded that the district was eligible to apply for an exemption (bailout) from this section per Section 4(a), because the definition of "political subdivision" in Section 14(c)(2) included a district of this nature. In an 8–1 opinion, the Court declined to rule on the constitutionality of that provision, citing the principle of constitutional avoidance.
Background
The appellant is a small utility district located northwest of Austin, Texas.  The district is run by an elected board.
The District never had any history or claims of racial discrimination in any of its elections.  However, because the district is located in Texas, it was subject to the requirements of §5 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 (the Act, which applies to states with a history of discrimination, especially in the South given Jim Crow-era laws) and extends to any "political subdivision" within the state.
However, another section of the Act, §4(a), allows a political subdivision to seek "bailout" (i.e., release from the preclearance requirements) if certain conditions are met.  The District thus filed suit in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, seeking bailout under §4(a).  The District argued in the alternative that, if §5 were interpreted to render it ineligible for bailout, §5 was unconstitutional.
The District Court rejected both claims. It concluded that bailout under §4(a) is available only to counties, parishes, and subunits that register voters, not to an entity like the district that does not register its own voters.http://www.statutes.legis.state.tx.us/Docs/EL/htm/EL.13.htm Under Section 13.002 of the Texas Election Code, voter registration is at the county level only. It also concluded that a 2006 amendment extending §5 for 25 years was constitutional.
Arguments were held on April 29, 2009. Chief Justice Roberts and Justice Alito questioned why Congress did not extend §5 to all 50 states.
Opinion of the Court
Section I [legal and historical background]
In Part A, Roberts described the Fifteenth Amendment's problematic history of enforcement that led to the passage of the Voting Rights Act, much of which consists of a "scheme of stringent remedies aimed at areas where voting discrimination has been most flagrant."South Carolina v. Katzenbach, 383 U. S. 301, 315 (1966)  These remedies were bolstered by §5, which suspended any change in state election procedure until the federal government certified that it neither "has the purpose nor will have the effect of denying or abridging the right to vote on account of race or color." To confine these remedies to areas of flagrant disenfranchisement, the Act applied them only to States that met certain explicit standards. However, recognizing that this coverage formula "might bring within its sweep governmental units not guilty of any unlawful discriminatory voting practices, [Congress] afforded such jurisdictions immediately available protection in the form of ... [a] 'bailout' suit."Briscoe v. Bell, 432 U. S. 404, 411 (1977)
Roberts then laid out the requirements of such a suit under D. C. 42 U. S. C. §§1973b.  He noted that §§4 and 5 were temporary provisions—they were originally expected to be in effect for only five years. §4(a), 79 Stat. 438.  However, Congress reauthorized the Act in 1970 (for 5 years), 1975 (for 7 years), and 1982 (for 25 years); each reauthorization was litigated as unconstitutional, and each time the Supreme Court upheld its constitutionality.  Most recently, in 2006, Congress extended §5 for yet another 25 years. It was this latest extension that was now before the court.
Part B characterized the procedural history of the District's suit.
Section II [Constitutional claim]
In Section II, Justice Roberts acknowledged the "undeniable" historic accomplishments of the Voting Rights Act.  However, the Act "now raises serious constitutional concerns."  In particular, §5, "which authorizes federal intrusion into sensitive areas of state and local policymaking, imposes substantial 'federalism costs,' "Lopez, supra, at 282 (quoting Miller v. Johnson, 515 U. S. 900, 926 (1995)) costs which  have caused Members of this Court to express serious misgivings about the constitutionality of §5.Katzenbach, 383 U. S., at 358-362 (Black, J., concurring and dissenting); Allen, 393 U. S., at 586, n. 4 (Harlan, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part); Georgia, supra, at 545 (Powell, J., dissenting); City of Rome, 446 U. S., at 209-221 (Rehnquist, J., dissenting); id., at 200-206 (Powell, J., dissenting); Lopez, 525 U. S., at 293-298 (Thomas, J., dissenting); id., at 288 (Kennedy, J., concurring in judgment).  Meanwhile, some of the conditions that the Court relied upon when it previously upheld this statutory schemein South Carolina v. Katzenbach, 383 U. S. 301, and City of Rome v. United States, 446 U. S. 156 have unquestionably improved. "Those improvements are no doubt due in significant part to the Voting Rights Act itself, and stand as a monument to its success," but the Act imposes current burdens and must be justified by current needs. The Act also differentiates between the States in ways that may no longer be justified.
The Court recognizes that judging the constitutionality of an Act of Congress is "the gravest and most delicate duty that this Court is called upon to perform."Blodgett v. Holden, 275 U. S. 142, 147–148 (Holmes, J., concurring) The District Court found that Congress's contributions to the record documented continuing racial discrimination, and that §5 deterred discriminatory changes. The Court will not shrink from its duty "as the bulwark of a limited Constitution against legislative encroachments,"The Federalist No. 78 but "[i]t is . . . well established. . . that normally the Court will not decide a constitutional question if there is some other ground upon which to dispose of the case."Escambia County v. McMillan, 466 U. S. 48, 51  Here, the district does provide such other grounds:  it raises a statutory claim that it is eligible to bail out under §§4 and 5.  The existence of this claim invokes this principle of "Constitutional avoidance," as characterized in Escambia County v. McMillan.
The Court disagreed with Justice Thomas's argument that this principle has no pertinence here. He contends that even if the Court resolved the district's statutory argument in its favor, it would still have to reach the constitutional question, because the district's statutory argument would not afford it all the relief it seeks. However, the district expressly describes its constitutional challenge to §5 as being "in the alternative" to its statutory argument.See Brief for Appellant 64 ("[T]he Court should reverse the judgment of the district court and render judgment that the district is entitled to use the bailout procedure or, in the alternative, that §5 cannot be constitutionally applied to the district"). The district's counsel confirmed this at oral argument.See Tr. of Oral Arg. 14 ("[Question:] [D]o you acknowledge that if we find in your favor on the bailout point we need not reach the constitutional point? [Answer:] I do acknowledge that").
Section III [Statutory claim]
In Section III, Roberts addressed the district's narrower argument that it is eligible for a bailout under the requirements of §§4 and 5.  The question hinged on the intended definition of the term "[P]olitical subdivision" as used in §14(c)(2).  The Court concluded that "all political subdivisions--not only those described in §14(c)(2)--are eligible to file a bailout suit," thus overturning the district court.
The Act must be interpreted to permit all political subdivisions, including the district, to seek to bail out from the preclearance requirements. It is undisputed that the district is a "political subdivision" in the ordinary sense, but the Act also provides a narrower definition in §14(c)(2): " '[P]olitical subdivision' shall mean any county or parish, except that where registration for voting is not conducted under the supervision of a county or parish, the term shall include any other subdivision of a State which conducts registration for voting." The court below concluded that the district did not qualify for §4(a) bailout under this definition, but specific precedent, the Act's structure, and underlying constitutional concerns compel a broader reading.
This Court has already established that §14(c)(2)'s definition does not apply to the term "political subdivision" in §5's preclearance provision.See, e.g., United States v. Sheffield Bd. of Comm'rs, 435 U. S. 110. Rather, the "definition was intended to operate only for purposes of determining which political units in nondesignated States may be separately designated for coverage under §4(b)."Id., at 128–129. "[O]nce a State has been [so] designated . . . , [the] definition . . . has no operative significance in determining [§5's] reach."Dougherty County Bd. of Ed. v. White, 439 U. S. 32, 44. In light of these decisions, §14(c)(2)'s definition should not constrict the availability of bailout either.
The Government responds that any such argument is foreclosed by City of Rome v. United States. In 1982, however, Congress expressly repudiated City of Rome by amending the Act to allow political subdivisions of a state to seek bailout, even if the state itself was ineligible for bailout. Thus, City of Rome's logic is no longer applicable.
The Government's contention that the district is subject to §5 under Sheffield not because it is a "political subdivision" but because it is a "State" is counterintuitive and similarly untenable after the 1982 amendments.  The Government's contrary interpretation has helped to render the bailout provision all but a nullity. Since 1982, only 17 jurisdictions—out of the more than 12,000 covered political subdivisions—have successfully bailed out of the Act. It is unlikely that Congress intended the provision to have such limited effect.
Concurrence in part; dissent in part
Justice Clarence Thomas concurred in part and dissented in part.
He concurred with the judgment that the District should be able to file a bailout suit.  However, he dissented from the majority's decision not to address the constitutionality of §5, and argued that §5 is no longer constitutional (a position he would take once again in Shelby County v. Holder when the issue of §5's constitutionality would once again be raised).
Section I
Section II
 See also 
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 557
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Exhaustive list of sources at scotuswiki.com
Audio of Oral Arguments at C-Span
[ Docket]
Justices Let Stand a Central Provision of Voting Rights Act (NYT)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:History of voting rights in the United States
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:United States Fifteenth Amendment case law
Category:United States elections case law
Category:Hays County, Texas
Category:Public utilities of the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Northwestern National Life Insurance Co. v. Riggs" ==> """
Northwestern National Life Insurance Co. v. Riggs, 203 U.S. 243 (1906), was an important United States Supreme Court case dealing with corporations conducting business and the power of individual states to regulate how corporations may conduct business.
Facts
The conflict within the case involved the payment of a life insurance claim made by Riggs for the estate of Eber B. Roloson against Northwestern National Life Insurance Company, which Northwestern refused to pay saying that the deceased had made false statements concerning his medical history.  The state of Missouri had in place a series of legislative acts in the period of 1874 and 1889 that basically created a condition on any life insurance contract in which though medical history information may be inaccurate, if the inaccurate information had no bearing on the manner of the deceased's death then any claim must still be paid.  If the inaccurate information did bear on the manner of the deceased's death or if there was a dispute concerning whether the information provided bore on the manner of the deceased's death, then the matter was for a jury to decide whether the claim should be paid.
Trial
In a jury trial on a claim by Riggs for the estate of Roloson, Northwestern National requested that the jury be instructed that the Missouri statute "was not applicable to this case, and could not be applied to it consistently with the 14th Amendment of the Constitution of the United States".  The jury was not so instructed.  The trial resulted in a judgment against the defendant, Northwestern National Life Insurance Company.
Northwestern National appealed the judgment with the position the corporation's due process rights under the Fourteenth Amendment had been violated.
Previous Supreme Court decisions had said that liberty "guaranteed by the 14th Amendment against deprivation otherwise than by due process of law embraces the right to pursue a lawful calling and enter into all contracts proper, necessary, and essential to the carrying out of the purposes of such calling."  This interpretation of the Fourteenth Amendment had been applied to corporations and individuals.  The Court ruled that the Fourteenth Amendment was not a bar to many state laws that effectively limit a corporation's right to contract business so long as such limits were not unreasonable constraints on trade and due process for resolving conflicts and disputes existed.
Northwestern National's arguments were based on the fact that it was, as a corporation, an artificial "person" and hence subject to the protections afforded "persons" under that amendment, an argument which had been and was later used successfully to declare child labor and minimum wage laws unconstitutional.
Judgment
The Court ruled to uphold the application of the Missouri statute, saying:
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 203
Corporate personhood
Allgeyer v. State of Louisiana (165 U.S. 578) [1897]
Lake Shore & M. S. R. Co. v. Ohio (173 U.S. 285, 297)
Powell v. Pennsylvania (127 U.S. 678, 684)
Adkins v. Children's Hospital (261 U.S. 525) Federal minimum wage for women unconstitutional infringement of contract
Muller v. Oregon (208 U.S. 412) upheld state restrictions on working hours of women
West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish (300 U.S. 379) upheld constitutionality of minimum wage
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:1906 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Norton v. Southern Utah Wilderness Alliance" ==> """
Norton v. Southern Utah Wilderness Alliance, 542 U.S. 55 (2004), was a Supreme Court case that held that although the Administrative Procedure Act says that a person may challenge an agency's failure to act, this provision essentially just carries forward the writ of mandamus.  Thus an agency cannot be compelled to act unless there is some non-discretionary, discrete act.  Therefore, in this case, an interest group could not challenge an agency's failure to "act so as to preserve the wilderness" in accordance with the statute.
Background
Under the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976, the federal Bureau of Land Management is required to manage "2.5 million acres of land in Utah" called "wilderness study areas." The Southern Utah Wilderness Alliance and other environmentalist groups filed suit under the Administrative Procedure Act, compelling the government to act when "an agency has failed to meet its legal duties." The Wilderness Alliance claimed that the Bureau of Land Management had failed to adequately protect the study areas and that the bureau permitted off-road vehicle use that damaged the study areas, violating the act passed by Congress in 1976.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 542
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2004 in the environment
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Norwood v. Harrison" ==> """
Norwood v. Harrison, 413 U.S. 455 (1973), is a United States Supreme Court decision in the area of constitutional law which the court held that a state cannot provide aid to a private school which discriminates on the basis of race..
Facts of the Case
Textbooks were being purchased by the state of Mississippi and given to students for free in both public and private schools pursuant a statute passed in 1940.  Among the schools with students receiving textbooks was Tunica Academy, which declined to attest that it had a racially non-discriminatory admissions policy. The District Court decided in favor of the state and the Supreme Court heard oral arguments February 20 and 21, 1973. The case was argued by civil rights attorney Melvyn R. Leventhal.
The Court's Decision
The Supreme Court ruled that a state may not constitutionally give or lend textbooks to students who attend a school that discriminates on the basis of race,Nowak, John E., Ronald D. Rotunda. Principles of Constitutional Law. Thomson West 2004. otherwise the discriminatory conduct of the private school could be considered state action and would thus be in violation of the Constitution.
The opinion of the court was authored by Chief Justice Burger and was joined by Stewart, White, Marshall, Blackmun, Powell, and Rehnquist. Justices Douglas and Brennan wrote concurring opinions.
The Court held that Mississippi was not obligated under the Equal Protection Clause to provide equal assistance to private schools and public schools, ruling that the state does have a constitutional obligation to avoid providing financial assistance to schools that practice racist or other invidious discrimination.Norwood, 413 U.S. at 468-470.
References
External links
Category:Education segregation in Mississippi
Category:United States school desegregation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1973 in United States case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
"""

From "Noto v. United States" ==> """
Noto v. United States, 367 U.S. 290 (1961), was a 1961 United States Supreme Court case that reversed the felony conviction of a lower-echelon official of the Communist Party USA (CPUSA).
Background
John Francis Noto of Buffalo, New York, was the chairman of the CPUSA for upstate New York. According to officials of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Noto "went underground" in 1951. A grand jury issued a secret indictment for his arrest in November 1954 and he was taken into custody on August 31, 1955New York Times: "Red Leader Seized Upstate," September 1, 1955, accessed June 19, 2012; New York Times: "Smith Act Case First in State," September 18, 1955, accessed June 19, 2012. Noto was 37 years old at the time of his trial. He was a native of Ridgeway, Pennsylvania. The government claimed that he had been active in the Party since 1934, was the CPUSA's chairman for Erie County (Buffalo), a leader of the Young Communist League in the 1940s, and on the Party's payroll from 1946 to 1950. He was convicted of a felony in federal District Court in Rochester in 1956 under the membership clause of the Smith Act, which made membership in an organization that advocates the violent overthrow of the United States government a felony. He was sentenced to five years in prison. He challenged the constitutionality of that clause on appeal. The Court of Appeals affirmed his conviction on December 31, 1958, and with respect to the membership clause said: "Clearly this is not a prosecution of membership per se but of membership with knowledge and criminal intent."New York Times: "Red's Conviction Upheld by Court," January 1, 1959, accessed June 19, 2012
Decision
The Supreme Court case reversed Noto's conviction on June 5, 1961, in a unanimous decision, finding that the evidence presented at trial was not sufficient to demonstrate that the Party was advocating action to cause the forcible overthrow of the government.Milton Konvitz, "Noto v. United States", in The Oxford companion to the Supreme Court of the United States (Oxford University Press, 2005), 697
Justice Harlan wrote:Justia: Noto v. United States (1961), accessed June 19, 2012
Justices Black and Douglas wrote concurring opinions that argued that the Court should have gone further and ruled that the membership clause of the Smith Act was unconstitutional. Douglas wrote that "the utterances, attitudes, and associations in this case ... are, in my view, wholly protected by the First Amendment, and not subject to inquiry, examination, or prosecution by the Federal Government." Black characterized Harlan's review of the inadequacy of the trial testimony sarcastically:
On the same day, the Court upheld a provision of the Internal Security Act of 1950 that required "Communist action" organizations to register with the government, which subjected their members to a variety of restrictions. Observers assessed the Court's sustaining the membership clause of the Smith Act in that light. Anthony Lewis wrote in the New York Times: "The court's opinions were carefully limited and did not give the government a blank check in applying the two statutes. Nevertheless, the decisions were substantial victories for the governmentthe most important legal victories it has had in the internal security field in many years."New York Times: Anthony Lewis, ""High Court Puts Curb on U.S. Reds in 2 Major Cases," June 6, 1961, accessed June 19, 2012. The others cases decided the same day were Communist Party of the United States v. Subversive Activities Control Board and Scales v. United States.
See also
Dennis v. United States, 
Scales v. United States, 
Yates v. United States, 
 Smith Act trials of communist party leaders
References
External links
Category:1961 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States due process case law
Category:McCarthyism
Category:Communist Party USA litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
zh:丹尼斯诉合众国案
"""

From "O'Connor v. Donaldson" ==> """
O'Connor v. Donaldson, 422 U.S. 563 (1975), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court in mental health law ruling that a state cannot constitutionally confine a non-dangerous individual who is capable of surviving safely in freedom by themselves or with the help of willing and responsible family members or friends. Since the trial court jury found, upon ample evidence, that petitioner did so confine respondent, the Supreme Court upheld the trial court's conclusion that petitioner had violated respondent's right to liberty.
Overview
Kenneth Donaldson (confined patient) had been held for 15 years in Florida State Hospital at Chattahoochee, due to needs of "care, maintenance, and treatment." He filed a lawsuit against the hospital and staff members claiming they had robbed him of his constitutional rights, by confining him against his will. Donaldson won his case (including monetary damages) in United States District Court, which was affirmed by the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit.Donaldson v. O'Connor, 493 F.2d 507 (5th Cir. 1974).  In 1975, the United States Supreme Court agreed that Donaldson had been improperly confined but vacated the award of damages.  On remand, the Fifth Circuit ordered that a new trial on damages be held.Donaldson v. O'Connor, 519 F.2d 59 (5th Cir. 1975).
A finding of "mental illness" alone cannot justify a State's locking a person up against his will and keeping him indefinitely in simple custodial confinement. Assuming that that term can be given a reasonably precise content and that the "mentally ill" can be identified with reasonable accuracy, there is still no constitutional basis for confining such persons involuntarily if they are dangerous to no one and can live safely in freedom.
Kenneth Donaldson
The origins of Donaldson's institutionalization began in 1943, at age 34, when he suffered a traumatic episode. He was hospitalized and received treatment, before resuming life with his family.
In 1956 Donaldson traveled to Florida to visit his elderly parents. While there, Donaldson reported that he believed one of his neighbors in Philadelphia might be poisoning his food. His father, worried that his son suffered from paranoid delusions, petitioned the court for a sanity hearing. Donaldson was evaluated, diagnosed with "paranoid schizophrenia," and civilly committed to the Florida State mental health system. At his commitment trial, Donaldson did not have legal counsel present to represent his case. Once he entered the Florida hospital, Donaldson was placed with dangerous criminals, even though he had never been proved to be dangerous to himself or others. His ward was understaffed, with only one doctor (who happened to be an obstetrician) for over 1,000 male patients. There were no psychiatrists or counsellors, and the only nurse on site worked in the infirmary.
He spent 15 years as a patient; he did not receive any treatment, actively refusing it, and attempting to secure his release. Throughout his stay he denied he was ever mentally ill, and refused to be put into a halfway house.
Donaldson later wrote a book about his experience as a mental patient titled Insanity Inside Out.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 422
 Jackson v. Indiana (1972)
 Addington v. Texas (1979)
 Jones v. United States (1983)
 Foucha v. Louisiana (1992)
References
External links
Kenneth Donaldson Papers (MS 1677). Manuscripts and Archives, Yale University Library.
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Mental health case law in the United States
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Imprisonment and detention in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "O'Connor v. Ortega" ==> """
O'Connor v. Ortega, 480 U.S. 709 (1987), is a United States Supreme Court decision on the Fourth Amendment rights of government employees with regard to administrative searches in the workplace, during investigations by supervisors for violations of employee policy rather than by law enforcement for criminal offenses. It was brought by Magno Ortega, a doctor at a California state hospital after his supervisors found allegedly inculpatory evidence in his office while he was on administrative leave pending an investigation of alleged misconduct. Some of what they uncovered was later used to impeach a witness who testified on his behalf at the hearing where he unsuccessfully appealed his dismissal.
Although lower courts had considered the issue, it was the first time the Supreme Court had. By a 5-4 margin, the Court ruled that public employees retain their Fourth Amendment rights. Justice Sandra Day O'Connor's plurality opinion established an "operating realities" test for future courts to consider when public employees challenged searches during investigations, reflecting the lower reasonable suspicion standard the government had to meet as an employer. That did not establish binding precedent, since Antonin Scalia argued in a separate concurring opinion that her standard was too vague, and that the same searches which would be reasonable for a private employer were proper when conducted by their public counterparts. Harry Blackmun wrote for four dissenting justices that the search was clearly an investigatory one and thus a breach of the doctor's privacy.
Since it could not decide how to apply that standard to Ortega's case as the record at that time did not establish whether the entry into Ortega's office had been for search purposes or not, the majority remanded the case to the district court. Eleven more years of litigation followed. At some points during it Ortega had to represent himself, and the Court itself had taken the unusual step of inviting Joel Klein to argue Ortega's case before them. It went back and forth between the district and appellate courts twice. Ortega finally prevailed after a jury trial in the late 1990s, and the Ninth Circuit denied Ortega's superiors their appeal.
Despite the two different standards resulting from the split five-justice majority, lower courts have generally followed O'Connor's "operational realities" test in future cases involving actual searches. Observers thought the justices might resolve the conflict the next time a similar case of public employees alleging a search violated their Fourth Amendment rights came before it. When it did, in 2010's Ontario v. Quon, they declined to do so, leaving the matter open for yet another future Court.
Underlying dispute
In March 1981, Dr. Ortega, for 17 years the head of the psychiatric residency program at Napa State Hospital, a mental hospital in Napa, California, purchased a new Apple II computer to use in running the program. Half of the money for it had been donated by some of the residents; Ortega covered the rest. A month later, he asked Dr. Dennis O'Connor, the hospital's executive director and his superior, to sign some thank-you letters to the residents who had made contributions, and to authorize some purchase orders for peripherals and other accessories for the computer.
O'Connor was not sure whether the computer had been properly donated to the hospital, and hesitated to sign the letters. Two months later, Ortega suspended a resident for failing to report for a rotation. The resident complained to Dorothy Owen, the hospital's personnel director, that Ortega was retaliating against him for not only having not contributed to the purchase of the computer but advising other residents to ask him for their money back.
In late July, Owen told O'Connor of the resident's complaint. O'Connor asked Richard Friday, the hospital administrator, to begin an investigation into the resident's allegations specifically and the purchase of the computer generally. He gave Friday and his investigative team broad authority, including permission to search Ortega's office. The hospital otherwise had no policy on such searches.
O'Connor asked Ortega to take administrative leave the next day. Ortega instead received O'Connor's approval for two weeks of paid vacation, after which the administrative leave began. O'Connor told Ortega not to return to the hospital without his permission during his vacation. During the time Ortega was on vacation, Friday had the lock changed and kept the key in his own office.
When Ortega's vacation ended, O'Connor sent a letter to Ortega informing him he was now on paid administrative leave, and extending the restriction on visits to the hospital. Before Ortega had received it, he returned to the hospital. Finding his office door locked and unable to open it himself, he took the computer, then in an unsecured nearby room, home to work with it there, as he had done on occasion in the past.
Upon learning of this, O'Connor called the hospital police, believing that the computer was state property and thus Ortega had stolen it. At some other point during the time Ortega was on vacation and leave, a staff psychiatrist who ran a support group for residents told O'Connor about complaints of possible sexual harassment on Ortega's part from two female residents. It was not clear whether this took place before or after at least one thorough, highly intrusive search of Ortega's office. Materials were removed from Ortega's office, boxed and stored when the security guard performing the inventory found it too difficult to sort out Ortega's property from the state's.
On a separate visit to Ortega's office, Friday found several items—a Valentine, suggestively posed photo and inscribed book of love poetry—sent to Ortega several years earlier by a former resident. After the hospital fired Ortega in September, he appealed to the State Personnel Board. When the former resident testified on Ortega's behalf during the hearing, these items were introduced in an attempt to impeach her.
Owen asked Ortega after the firing if he wanted his personal possessions from his office returned. He did not. By spring of 1982 he had changed his mind. In response to another request, Asher Rubin, the deputy attorney general who had represented the state before the Personnel Board, told him he could make copies of his personal papers but could not keep the originals, nor any of his other personal property.
Litigation
Ortega retained an attorney and filed a Section 1983 suit against O'Connor (who had now become director of the California Department of Mental Health)  Owen, Friday, other parties and the state shortly afterwards in federal court, seeking $750,000 in compensatory and punitive damages. In addition to the violation of his Fourth Amendment protections against unreasonable search and seizure, he made tort claims for invasion of privacy and breach of covenant of good faith and fair dealings under California law. The defendants argued that they had entered Ortega's office and gone through the contents of his desk purely to inventory property and separate state-owned items from the doctor's personal possessions, which it claimed was standard practice when employees had resigned or been terminated. Both sides moved for summary judgement, which Judge John P. Vukasin Jr. granted to the defendants on all claims. It found that the entry into Ortega's office had been for the purpose of securing state property for use by a successor.
Ortega appealed to the Ninth Circuit. In 1985 a three-judge panel unanimously reversed the district court on the search but upheld it on the state-law tort claims. "The entry into the office seems to have been for no other purpose than to secure evidence for use in the ongoing investigation of Ortega," Judge Dorothy Wright Nelson wrote." While the state had said that the entry to the office was not intended as a search, she noted that at the time the doctor had not yet been fired or resigned but was merely on administrative leave. Nor did this seem to have been regularly undertaken in situations where it did apply.
After that finding, Wright considered whether such a warrantless search was reasonable under the Fourth Amendment. She applied the two-pronged test from the Supreme Court's 1967 Katz v. United States decisionKatz v. United States, . to establish whether Dr. Ortega had a reasonable expectation of privacy over the contents of his desk and office. First, did he have a subjective expectation that they would be left undisturbed by others, and second, would that expectation be one that society would consider reasonable and respect?
On the first prong, he had occupied the office for all 17 years of his employment. He kept within his desk not only personal papers and effects but confidential patient records. He had believed he had the only key, and was not aware of any other time during his employment at Napa in which his office had been entered without his permission. In Mancusi v. DeForte,Mancusi v. DeForte, . the Supreme Court had held that an employee can have a reasonable expectation of privacy over his or her desk at work from searches by law enforcement.The Court, in that case, overturned the conviction of a Long Island labor union official on corruption and racketeering-related charges since the principal evidence had been taken from his desk by investigators who only had a subpoena.
Two cases from the Third Circuit, with direct similarities to Ortega's, argued for the reasonableness of his privacy expectation. In one, the presence of sensitive and confidential documents within a deskIn that case, a member of the Fair Lawn, New Jersey, school board had opened a guidance counselor's desk drawer and found the original draft of a pseudonymously published cartoon that ridiculed the board. was held to strengthen the privacy expectation; and in the other,  the personal lock that a police officer had used for his department locker led to the suppression of a sawed-off shotgun seized by federal agents.
In the latter case, the department had also lacked a formal policy on whether the lockers could be searched, as had been the case at Napa. This Wright used to distinguish it and Ortega's case from other precedentsUnited States v. Bunkers, 521 F.2d 1217 (9th Cir. 1975); United States v. Collins, 349 F.2d 863 (2d Cir. 1965), cert. denied,  and  where warrantless searches of public employees' lockers, jackets or backpacks had been upheld due to broadly disseminated and actively implemented policies that such searches could occur at any time. "Here, Napa had never instituted surveillance or searches and had no general inspection policy that might have defeated Ortega's expectation of privacy in his office," she concluded.
The appeals court ordered the district court to enter judgement in Ortega's favor on that issue and hold proceedings to fix damages. The pendent state-law claims had not been filed in a timely fashion, and the panel affirmed that part of the summary judgement.
Before the Court
The state of California's certiorari petition was granted by the Supreme Court in 1985. Since he was representing himself, Ortega filed his own brief. The Court invited Joel Klein, the future New York City Schools Chancellor then in private practice, to argue Ortega's case,. and he also filed an amicus curiae brief on Ortega's behalf.
The appellants' brief was filed by California Attorney General John Van de Kamp and several of his assistants. Solicitor General Charles Fried filed an amicus brief on behalf of the federal government urging reversal. The American Civil Liberties Union and American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees urged affirmance in their amici. Oral arguments were held in October 1986.
Petitioners' oral argument
Jeffrey T. Miller, one of Van de Kamp's deputies, argued for the petitioners. He did not deny that government employees had Fourth Amendment rights, but "the activity that took place in this case did not constitute a search within Fourth Amendment jurisprudence". He insisted that the Court should follow the district court's lead in finding that Dr. Ortega's office had been inventoried, not searched, until he was reminded that the district court had merely found the action to be a securing of the property in case Ortega returned to remove something else, and had not even used the word "inventory." It would not have been reasonable for the doctor to have imagined that no one else would or could have entered the office without his consent or knowledge in the 17 years he was employed at Napa.
Likewise, a desk was a "common repository", likely to be used by many people besides the one regularly seated behind it. "It is foreseeable that a number of different people working for government, from clerical staff to supervisors to colleagues, will move into an office, that is, enter an office, open a desk for a variety of reasons." When Justice Sandra Day O'Connor challenged him as to whether employees in the private sector would have a reasonable expectation of privacy over their desks, he agreed that they might but reminded her the Fourth Amendment does not apply to private employers.
He asked that the Court follow the logic of its 1985 ruling in New Jersey v. T. L. O.New Jersey v. T. L. O., . in which it had held that only a reasonable belief that evidence of misconduct would be found was needed to justify a search of a student or possessions on school property during school hours. Chief Justice William Rehnquist asked Miller if he was arguing the Fourth Amendment did not apply at all in schools. "it seems to me there is certainly language in T.L.O. against you on that point." That case, Miller responded, "had at least made the initial inquiry into whether the Fourth Amendment was applicable."
The other justices were not convinced that Ortega's office had been entered for inventory purposes. They pointed to facts in the record they saw as being at odds with the state's interpretation. Antonin Scalia asked if it were possible that the Court could rule that it was an inventory but the actions taken had exceeded the scope of those necessary to accomplish that. Miller said that would be moot as there was no expectation of privacy over the desk and office. He further explained that Ortega's key may have given him a subjective expectation of privacy, but not necessarily a reasonable one. Miller admitted to Thurgood Marshall that he did not know why the inventory could not have been done in Ortega's presence to better facilitate the sorting of property.
He noted that most public agencies have an Inspector General or something similar, who "every now and then drops in on offices to see if employees have their own things in their office". When Justice Byron White asked if his position implied that a public agency could search its employees' desks or offices at any time of the day or night, he said yes. "It may give rise to work grievances, to state and common law tort remedies ... but it would not violate the Fourth Amendment in our view."
Respondent's oral argument
"Our argument rests on three propositions", Klein told the justices. "[F]irst, that it is both customary and reasonable for a public employee to keep personal papers and effects in his work office and to expect that the privacy of such materials will be protected against arbitrary searches or seizures by his employer; second, that the application of the Fourth Amendment to office searches is not incompatible with the government's responsibilities as an employer."
Before he could get to the third, he was challenged by Scalia, who posited a situation where he might be working late and need to retrieve a document or file. He would find it on the desk of one of his law clerks, who might have gone home for the day. "Now," he asked, "have I conducted a Fourth Amendment search and seizure, and I am only immune from ... suit because it was reasonable?
Klein conceded to another justice's follow-up question that it was understood that, in all offices, "our expectation is, in the evenings, when people go home, others may on the basis of need enter ... The Fourth Amendment does not apply in most situations to a routine office entry, that is, if an employer or co-worker walks into your office looking for a paper clip." However, he said, that understanding did not defeat an expectation of privacy, likening it to a hotel room, where the Court had previously held there was an expectation of privacy even though hotel staff routinely enter for janitorial purposes. Scalia asked if it would be a Fourth Amendment violation if cleaning crews were to have looked through Ortega's desk and papers. "I don't think they would be exercising government authority in that situation", Klein answered, since the cleaning crews were presumably under instructions not to do so.
O'Connor asked if it would be reasonable for a supervisor to enter an office and look through a desk to "discover whatever might be appropriate for work-related wrongdoing of some kind?" As an example, she suggested, a supervisor might want to assess an employee's progress toward a deadline. Klein did not think so, since normally such matters are handled by asking the employee to produce whatever work has been completed.
To highlight his argument that the intrusion into Ortega's office had been a search rather than a property inventory, he used the example of the book of poetry, which was obviously personal property. "[I]f you pick up a book of poetry you don't have to open that book to find out who sent it to him." It was suggested that perhaps he read poetry to his patients, but Klein responded that the state had not suggested that and that, even if he did the book was still undeniably personal property.
He, too, compared the case with T.L.O., telling Justice White that he believed a search warrant might have been necessary to enter Ortega's office in this situation. "[L]et me just say that I think that they were looking for information to use against him to take his job away from him. He had been singled out", Klein said. "[E]ven if you take the T.L.O. standard, it is inconceivable that we could have a lower standard at the work place than we have at the school given the interests of employees and their adult age ... [T]here has to be reasonable suspicion when you go in to do the search that you will uncover evidence." If the state or the hospital had really wanted the right to enter employees' offices, it could have followed the example of the Mint and the Customs Service and promulgated a regulation stating that employees' property could be subject to search.
Decision
Five months later, in March 1987, the Court handed down its decision. All nine justices agreed that public employees had Fourth Amendment protections during administrative searches in the workplace, and that routine work-related intrusions as discussed at oral argument did not constitute a violation. They differed as to whether Ortega's had been breached by the search. The five-justice majority believed it could not determine the purpose of the intrusion into Ortega's office and so remanded the case to the district court to do so.
Justice O'Connor wrote for a four-justice plurality that the same reasonable suspicion standard it developed for T.L.O. was applicable to administrative searches of public employees' workspace or possessions, since the "operational realities" of a public work environment may substantially reduce or eliminate a standard expectation of privacy. In a separate concurring opinion, Justice Scalia rejected that as too vague to be useful to lower courts, and proposed instead that any search that would be reasonable for a private employer would be permissible for a public one.
Justice Blackmun wrote for the four dissenting justices. He believed the majority had put too much weight on the different interpretations of the intrusion by the district and appellate courts, since he felt it was clearly an investigatory search for evidence against Dr. Ortega. Also, he charged, the majority had taken his concurrence in T.L.O. out of context to support its reasonableness standard. He did not feel, as they did, that outside of special cases such as the school system that it would have been detrimental to the operations of a public agency such as the hospital to have some sort of independent review and establish probable cause for an administrative search related to possible violations of policy.
Plurality opinion
After recounting the history of the case and the sweep of the Court's prior Fourth Amendment jurisprudence, O'Connor, joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist, Justice White, and Justice Powell, defined the boundaries of the workplace context as "those areas and items that are related to work and are generally within the employer's control." Some items that passed through the workplace were personal, and as the Court had ruled in Mancusi, a reasonable expectation of privacy may exist there. "[W]e reject the contention made by the Solicitor General and petitioners that public employees can never have a reasonable expectation of privacy in their place of work," she wrote. "Individuals do not lose Fourth Amendment rights merely because they work for the government, instead of a private employer."O'Connor v. Ortega, , 712–17.
She immediately qualified that holding.
Moving from the general principle to the case at hand, O'Connor agreed that Ortega had that same reasonable expectation of privacy, but that since the record did not reflect the extent of whatever legitimate work-related reasons the hospital administrators might have had to enter the office, the Ninth Circuit should have remanded the case to the district court to determine that, as the majority was doing. Following T.L.O., she said the inquiry should not stop with determining the Fourth Amendment applied, but whether the context made the search reasonable. "We must balance the invasion of the employees' legitimate expectations of privacy  against the government's need for supervision, control, and the efficient operation of the workplace."O'Connor, at 719–20.
There was, O'Connor admitted, "surprisingly little case law" on the subject. That which existed did seem to support the standard she proposed for work-related searches, most notably a 1973 case from the Seventh Circuit in which the surreptitious recording of an Internal Revenue Service's agent's conversations at his desk by the agency's internal investigators was held to be reasonable and work-related, and a 1951 case from the District of Columbia which held that although a search of the appellee's desk by local police with her government supervisor's permission was unconstitutional, a work-related search by her supervisor would not have been. She distinguished these from other cases that proposed other standards for public workplace searches by noting that those cases were either not work-related or involved criminal misconduct.O'Connor, 480 U.S. at 721.
"In our view," O'Connor continued,
She quoted from Connick v. Myers, an earlier case which had considered the First Amendment rights of an assistant prosecutor fired for allegedly disruptive behavior: "[G]overnment offices could not function if every employment decision became a constitutional matter."O'Connor, 480 U.S. at 722.
O'Connor announced that the Court would consider only the constitutionality of work-related and investigatory searches "and leave for another day inquiry into other circumstances." She found "the efficient and proper operation of the workplace" to similarly justify investigatory searches, since supervisors had different needs from law enforcement. "The delay in correcting the employee misconduct caused by the need for probable cause, rather than reasonable suspicion, will be translated into tangible and often irreparable damage to the agency's work, and ultimately to the public interest." She again cited T.L.O. to justify this standard.O'Connor, 480 U.S. at 723–24. "Government offices are provided to employees for the sole purpose of facilitating the work of an agency. The employee may avoid exposing personal belongings at work by simply leaving them at home."O'Connor, 480 U.S. at 725.
Lastly O'Connor found the district court's finding on summary judgment that the intrusion was for the purposes of securing state property to be in error since there was a genuine dispute of fact. It followed then that the appellate court could not have made a definitive finding of fact either. The case was remanded to the district court with instructions to both determine what justified the search and seizure of Ortega's property and whether that search was reasonable in both its inception and scope.O'Connor, 480 U.S. at 726–29.
Scalia concurrence
Justice Scalia agreed that the case should be remanded, but felt it was not helpful to call for a case-by-case assessment, since it was difficult to make practical use of. He found fault with O'Connor's comment, justifying her "operating realities" test, that some public workplaces might be "so open" as to offer no reasonable expectation of privacy. "No clue is provided as to how open 'so open' must be; much less is it suggested how police officers are to gather the facts necessary for this refined inquiry ... [I]t is so devoid of content that it produces, rather than eliminates, uncertainty in this field."O'Connor, 480 U.S. at 729–30 (Scalia, J., concurring).
The plurality's standard could not be right if it led to a conclusion that the Fourth Amendment did not apply to a work-related entry into Ortega's office.
Whether it was a supervisor or police officer entering the office, he said, only made a difference as to whether the search was reasonable, not whether the Fourth Amendment applies. When a firefighter enters a house where an alarm has gone off, he noted, "we do not ask whether the occupant has a reasonable expectation of privacy (and hence Fourth Amendment protection) vis-a-vis firemen, but rather whether—given the fact that the Fourth Amendment covers private dwellings—intrusion for the purpose of extinguishing a fire is reasonable",O'Connor, 480 U.S. at 730–31 (Scalia, J., concurring). citing the Court's Michigan v. Tyler ruling..That case had dealt with Fourth Amendment rights during the subsequent investigations of the fire, not the firefighters' initial entry.
Scalia argued that the offices and desks of public employees were covered by the Fourth Amendment as a general matter, choosing his words to avoid the Katz rule that places exposed to public view are not covered by the Fourth Amendment since some government offices, as O'Connor had noted, were subject to unrestricted public access. "Government searches to retrieve work-related materials or to investigate violations of workplace rules—searches of the sort that are regarded as reasonable and normal in the private employer context—do not violate the Fourth Amendment." Since the evidence in the case did not support a summary judgement, he joined his colleagues in ordering the case remanded.O'Connor, at 731–32 (Scalia, J., concurring).
Dissent
At the outset of his dissent, signed by Justices Brennan, Marshall and Stevens, Justice Blackmun said "The facts of this case are simple and straightforward. Dr. Ortega had an expectation of privacy in his office, desk, and file cabinets, which were the target of a search by petitioners that can be characterized only as investigatory in nature." He disagreed with the plurality that there was anything special about a public workplace that justified a lower standard for such searches, and called the intrusion an unconstitutional search. Not only had it found what were to him clear facts in dispute,In his footnote 3, Blackmun accused the plurality of letting its opinion on this issue be shaped by its members' antipathy to public workers. it had nevertheless chosen to derive a standard from a case it had remanded to resolve that dispute. "As a result, the standard that emerges makes reasonable almost any workplace search by a public employer."O'Connor, 480 U.S. at 732–34 (Blackmun, J., dissenting).
As to the facts, Blackmun contended the plurality had been confused, partially relying on Ortega's removal of the computer as a reason to consider the intrusion reasonable when, he noted, the record itself had testimony from Friday that this had not triggered the search. Dr. O'Connor had further admitted in his deposition that there was an investigatory interest in the contents of Ortega's office. The searchers had also consulted with a lawyer and waited until the evening. "The search in question stemmed neither from a Hospital policy nor from a practice of routine entrances into Dr. Ortega's office", he wrote. "It was plainly exceptional and investigatory in nature. Accordingly, there is no significant factual dispute in this case."O'Connor, 480 U.S. at 735–36.
Blackmun began his disagreement with the plurality's embrace of the reasonable suspicion standard by agreeing with it that government employees retained their Fourth Amendment rights at work. He accepted as well that routine work-related intrusions might diminish their expectation of privacy. He did not accept that such intrusions would eliminate it.O'Connor, 480 U.S. at 737.
The Court had always recognized Fourth Amendment rights in offices, he said, despite the understanding that it would be visited by others. The plurality did recognize, he conceded, another point: that a search unreasonable in one context might be reasonable in another.In his footnote 2, Blackmun responded to Scalia's criticism by quoting from other opinions, most by his fellow dissenters, to the effect that a case-by-case analysis might be the only way to create effective Fourth Amendment jurisprudence But
Thus he thought it especially important that the context of the search be considered.O'Connor, 480 U.S. at 739–40.
Justice Blackmun reminded the plurality that his concurring opinion in T.L.O., from which Justice O'Connor had drawn support for her "special need" argument, was meant to address an error he believed that case's plurality had made. The balancing test he had proposed there was not needed here, since "[t]here was no special practical need that might have justified dispensing with the warrant and probable cause requirements." The time and effort required to get a warrant, he said, would not have detracted from the hospital's mission of providing quality patient care and educating new psychiatrists. An independent review by a magistrate might, he added, have helped make the search not only constitutional but more efficient, since they would have been forced to list and justify every aspect of the office and desk they wished to look through.O'Connor, 480 U.S. at 741–42.
And even if there were a special need, the balancing test would still not be necessary.
Despite claiming to have drawn well-defined standards from the facts of the case, the two categories of searches it had approved as not requiring warrants, they were, Blackmun felt, so broadly drawn that "it is difficult to imagine a search that would not fit into one or the other ..."O'Connor, 480 U.S. at 745–46.
Reaction
The case was closely watched by the parties to National Treasury Employees Union v. Von Raab, then on appeal to the Fifth Circuit and seen as likely to reach the Supreme Court (as it eventually did). It involved a challenge by employees of the United States Customs Service to a proposal by the agency that employees in certain positions submit to mandatory drug testing. The employees' union had sued to block it, arguing it was a violation of their Fourth Amendment protections.
The union and the American Civil Liberties Union, which had also filed an amicus brief urging affirmance in O'Connor, praised the court's holding that public employees had Fourth Amendment rights in the workplace. They said it made their arguments in Von Raab stronger. The Justice Department maintained that it still believed the Customs Service's drug testing requirement would be held constitutional.
Disposition
Within two months of the Court's decision the Ninth Circuit formally remanded it to the district court. A new trial was held five years later, in 1992, again before Judge Vukasin. Dr. Ortega once again had to represent himself, and when the defense failed to receive his witness list the court sanctioned him by refusing to allow him to present them. As a result, he was largely limited to cross-examining the opposing witnesses, and when the defense was done presenting its case the court granted its motion for a directed verdict.
Ortega appealed to the Ninth Circuit again, retaining his lawyer to do so. He challenged not only the sanctioning but the trial court's refusal to let him include Asher Rubin as a defendant. In late 1994 a three-judge panel heard the case; it announced its decision five months later.
Circuit judge Diarmuid O'Scannlain wrote for a unanimous panel that the sanctions, while within limits of judicial discretion, had so adversely affected Ortega's case that the verdict was tainted. Reduced to merely cross-examining opposing witnesses, he could not present his own case-in-chief. And, further, they were unjustified as the trial record included a letter from Ortega to Paul Hammerness, the assistant attorney general handling the case, referring to "the enclosed witness list", that had been stamped as received by the court in November 1992.
"The court appears to have overlooked this evidence of Dr. Ortega's compliance", O'Scannlain wrote. "Dr. Ortega's compliance is not negated by the fact that opposing counsel failed to receive the list." Therefore, the sanctions against his witnesses had clearly been erroneous. The panel then affirmed the district court on its denial of the additional defendant, as the district court that had first heard the case dismissed that defendant on prosecutorial immunity grounds. Had Ortega wished to challenge that holding, the panel said, he had to have done so on his original appeal to the Ninth Circuit.
On remand, O'Connor and Friday, the only defendants left, changed their strategy and asserted qualified immunity,Qualified immunity bars suits against those acting under color of law for actions that might have been illegal, or were later prohibited, but for which there was a lack of settled law at the time. for the first time, dropping their claim that the need to secure or inventory state property justified their intrusion. Instead, they said, the claims of misconduct, particularly the alleged sexual harassment, made it necessary. During pretrial motions, Judge Marilyn Hall Patel, who took over the case since Vukasin had died, barred the use of qualified immunity and ruled that sexual harassment could not have justified the search. As a result, both parties agreed not to introduce the book of poetry, photo and Valentine.
A jury found for Ortega on all his claims. It awarded him $376,000 in compensatory damages, and $35,000 and $25,000 respectively against O'Connor and Friday respectively. Afterward, the district court awarded almost $32,000 in attorney's fees.Graham v. Ortega (Cal. Ct. App.) (unpublished). O'Connor and Friday appealed.
A three-judge panel, including two of the judges who had been on the 1985 panel, found Patel's rulings on qualified immunity and the sexual harassment claims worthy of consideration. Stephen Reinhardt, one of those original judges, noted that Judge Vukasin had rejected the qualified immunuity defense at the first trial and that the jury instructions Patel and both sides had approved made such a defense possible even if the exact words "qualified immunity" were not used. Nor were the defendants correct in arguing that there was no settled law before the Supreme Court's ruling. "[I]t was clearly established in 1981 that, in the absence of an accepted practice or regulation to the contrary, government employees such as Dr. Ortega had a reasonable expectation of privacy in their private offices, desks, and file cabinets, thereby triggering the protections of the Fourth Amendment with regard to searches and seizures", Reinhardt wrote. He quoted explicit language to that effect from the Supreme Court's 1966 holding in Hoffa v. United States. and noted the Supreme Court plurality's citation of existing lower-court holdings saying the same thing. Even if it had not been, it was not "reasonable under the circumstances", as Terry v. Ohio. required.
O'Connor and Friday had argued that, by denying them the opportunity to raise the sexual harassment claims as a justification for the search, Patel had improperly granted what amounted to sua sponte partial summary judgement against them. Reinhardt countered that they had had adequate time to develop their defense and so the judge was "procedurally free" to do that. He turned to whether such a ruling was justified and not an abuse of discretion. Even if he resolved an issue of disputed fact in their favor and assumed that O'Connor and Friday knew of the sexual harassment allegations before they went into Ortega's office, the allegations themselves were  vague, and one of them was ten years old. Thus, he continued, they did not create a reasonable suspicion that he was harassing residents, and even if they did they could not have reasonably established a likelihood that evidence supporting them would be found there. "The search was, at best, a general and unbounded pursuit of anything that might tend to indicate any sort of malfeasance—a search that is almost by definition, unreasonable." It had also been properly excluded since its prejudicial value outweighed its probative value.
"It is now seventeen years since the search of Dr. Ortega's office occurred and his most personal letters and possessions were examined and seized. It is time to bring this matter to a conclusion", wrote Reinhardt. He dismissed the remaining grounds for appeal as meritless, and the panel unanimously upheld the district court. The appellate decision was not further appealed.
After the state paid his claim, amounting to over $700,000 with interest, Dr. Ortega was sued by one of his former attorneys for unpaid bills. The two settled the claim in arbitration, but after Ortega refused to comply, the attorney sued him and won an adjustment to the arbitration award correcting some errors made in calculating the interest rate. A state appellate court upheld the trial court verdict in 2001, saying Ortega's "often rambling and incoherent narratives" in briefs he wrote himself left them with little in the way of substantive legal argument. Ortega died in 2009.
Subsequent jurisprudence
The first case after O'Connor to involve the Fourth Amendment rights of government employees at work was, as expected, National Treasury Employees Union v. Von Raab. A 5-4 majority held that the urine testing the Customs Service proposed for internal promotion to positions involving drug interdiction, carrying firearms or handling classified material was reasonable since it was "not designed to serve the ordinary needs of law enforcement."National Treasury Employees Union v. Von Raab, . Scalia, in a dissent joined by Stevens, called the program "a kind of immolation of privacy and human dignity in symbolic opposition to drug use". The Customs Service, he said, had not introduced "real evidence of a real problem that will be solved by urine testing."Von Raab, 489 U.S. at 681, Scalia, J., dissenting.
Later, when turning down a 1997 challenge by employees of Puerto Rico Telephone to a proposed video surveillance plan, Judge Bruce M. Selya of the First Circuit called O'Connor "[t]he watershed case in this enclave of Fourth Amendment jurisprudence". His opinion surveyed a number of other district and circuit cases considering the "operating realities" of public workplaces to establish whether a legitimate expectation of privacy existed.
A key issue was whether the workplace or portion in question was reserved for the employee's personal use. A judge in the District of Kansas had granted summary judgement to Johnson County Community College against its security guards who challenged its video surveillance of their locker room by noting that the locker area under view was not exclusive to any of them. This distinguished it from the Drug Enforcement Administration's surreptitious videotaping of two agents convicted of illegal wiretapping, where the Ninth Circuit suppressed the videos because it found the agents had exclusive use of their offices.
In a New York case that echoed Scalia's questions to Klein at oral argument, the Second Circuit found it reasonable for a judge to have court officers seize the  contents of his just-fired law clerk's desk since the relationship between the two required free and complete access to each other's papers. As in cases preceding O'Connor, a workplace policy on searches has been held to defeat or diminish expectations of privacy. The Ninth Circuit upheld a civilian engineer's discharge from the Naval Reserve was upheld on the grounds that regular workplace searches removed any expectation of privacy over documents revealing his bisexuality. An unenforced or absent policy has been held to create a legitimate expectation.
Ontario v. Quon
As Ortega's dispute with his lawyer was coming to an end, elsewhere in California the events were unfolding that would lead to the next case where the Court would consider the Fourth Amendment rights of public employees during administrative investigations. In 2000 the city of Ontario purchased 20 alphanumeric pagers for its police department SWAT team to carry on and off-duty. A department policy, never put in writing, said that "light personal use" was permitted but that the pager messages could be audited at any time.
Several officers routinely exceeded the monthly character limit. The lieutenant in charge of the pagers at first allowed them to reimburse the city for the overage fees in exchange for not auditing the messages. Later, when he was "tired of being a bill collector", he and his superiors decided to audit the text messages to see if the character limit was too low.
Transcripts of the pager messages, redacted to include those sent only during work hours, showed that many of them were not work-related, and some were sexually explicit. Two officers were disciplined. Afterwards, they sued the superior officers, the department, the city and the pager provider for violation of the Stored Communications Act and their Fourth Amendment rights. The district court held a jury trial, which determined the audit was work-related, and it ruled for the defendants.
On appeal the Ninth Circuit reversed, calling the audit an unreasonable search.<ref name="Quon v. Arch Wireless">'',  ( 2008).</ref> After being denied their petition for an en banc rehearing, the defendants successfully petitioned the Supreme Court for certiorari.; U.S. Supreme Court. The Court would only consider the Fourth Amendment claim, so the wireless provider was dropped as a petitioner there.
The case received much attention since it also was the first time the Court had considered Fourth Amendment rights in the rapidly expanding area of electronic telecommunications. Only Scalia and Stevens remained from the O'Connor court. As a result, it was also seen as a possible chance to resolve the conflict between the plurality's "operating realities" standard and Scalia's.
In June 2010, the Court unanimously upheld the search. Instead of choosing one of the O'Connor standards, it applied them both. Anthony Kennedy wrote for a seven-justice majority that since the audit had had a legitimate work-related purpose and its scope was limited to the pager messages sent at work, it was reasonable enough for the plurality in that case, and it would have been reasonable for a private-sector employer as Scalia had proposed.
Stevens and Scalia both wrote separate concurring opinions. The former felt that, under the case-by-case approach Blackmun had advocated in his O'Connor dissent, Quon in this case knew or should have known all his communications could have come under public scrutiny. Scalia's opinion of the "operational realities" test remained unchanged. He called it "standardless and unsupported" and said the Quon majority "underscores the unworkability of that standard".
Analysis and commentary
When considering what approach the Court would take in Quon, George Washington University law professor Orin Kerr, a Fourth Amendment scholar, noted that courts have generally used the plurality standard from O'Connor''. "Exactly how you get there is sort of tricky, though", he commented. "So courts have mostly just figured that four Justices is more than one and that they should follow the analysis in the concurring opinion."
O'Connor biographer Ann Cary McFeatters writes that her and Scalia's separate opinions in this case were the first of many clashes between the two justices in their joint tenure on the Court. "It would not be the last time Scalia went after her with verbal venom. It would not be the last time his doctrinaire certitude conflicted with her case-by-case approach."
Notes
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 480
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
Special needs exception
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States public employment case law
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:Search and seizure case law
Category:Napa, California
"""

From "O'Gorman & Young, Inc. v. Hartford Fire Insurance Co." ==> """
O'Gorman & Young, Inc. v. Hartford Fire Ins. Co., 282 U.S. 251 (1931), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that a state statute limiting the commissions allowable by insurers against loss by fire to local agents will be deemed a valid exercise of the police power in the absence of facts showing it to be unreasonable.
Facts & procedural history
A New Jersey statute required rates for fire insurance to be reasonable. O'Gorman and Young, Inc., a domestic corporation licensed as an insurance broker, sued a licensed foreign fire insurance company to recover a balance alleged to be due for services performed as local agent. O'Gorman and Young had contracts with both the Hartford Fire Insurance Company and the Phoenix Assurance Company which agreed to pay the agent 25% of the premiums, both insurance companies paid only 20%. O'Gorman and Young alleged that the statute violated the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and the Contracts Clause of the United States and New Jersey constitutions. 
The trial court ruled in favor of the insurance companies, finding that a law is presumed to be reasonable until a contrary showing is made. The New Jersey Court of Errors and Appeals affirmed in a per curiam opinion.
Decision
The United States Supreme Court affirmed a judgment in favor of the insurance companies in O'Gorman and Young's action to recover payment for services rendered as a local agent. Writing for a 5-4 majority, Justice Brandeis cited German Alliance Insurance Co. v. Lewis (1914) for the proposition that the insurance business is so far affected with a public interest that a state may regulate insurance rates. Aside from insurance rates, the case is better known for Brandeis's statement that "[a]s underlying questions of fact may condition the constitutionality of legislation of this character, the presumption of constitutionality must prevail in the absence of some factual foundation of record for overthrowing the statute."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 282
Further reading
External links
Category:1931 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:ITT Inc.
"""

From "O'Lone v. Estate of Shabazz" ==> """
O'Lone v. Estate of Shabazz, 482 U.S. 342 (1987), was a U.S. Supreme Court decision involving the constitutionality of prison regulations.  The court ruled that it was not a violation of the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment to deprive an inmate of attending a religious service for "legitimate penological interests."
Further reading
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 482
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:Imprisonment and detention in the United States
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:1987 in religion
"""

From "O'Neale v. Thornton" ==> """
O'Neale v. Thornton, 10 U.S. (6 Cranch) 53 (1810), is a ruling by the Supreme Court of the United States which held that neither the state of Maryland nor the government of the District of Columbia authorized the resale of foreclosed government land at a price less than the original sale price. In establishing the District of Columbia, the D.C. government had sold land to original investors at $66.50 per lot. The investors failed to pay, so the government foreclosed and resold the land to a second investor at the same price. The second investor failed to pay, so the government foreclosed again and sold the land to a third investor at a price lower than the original sale price. This third sale, the Supreme Court said, was illegal. Title should be returned to the second buyer, although the government was still free to seek foreclosure against that buyer on the basis of nonpayment.
Background
In 1789, the states of Virginia and Maryland agreed to cede land to the United States government for the creation of the seat of the national government. Land belonging to absentee owners, the insane, minors, and women was seized by the state of Maryland and turned over to the federal government. The federal government met with all other titleholders to land within the former Maryland lands, and agreed to pay them £25 per acre for their property. Maryland agreed to quiet all title to anyone holding land for more than five years, and made provision for the federal government to sell, foreclose on, and resell land.Commission to Investigate the Title of the United States to Lands in the District of Columbia, p. 3-10. Accessed 2012-12-09.O'Neale v. Thornton, 10 U.S. 53, 53-56.
The Residence Act of 1790 gave President George Washington the authority to establish the location for the seat of government of the United States. The act also provided for the appointment of three Commissioners to govern the new "District of Columbia". The commissioners were empowered to receive land from the existing landowners, set aside land for streets and parks and public buildings, and sell the remaining land as private property.Pinheiro, p. 212.
In December 1793, the commissioners sold 6,000 city lots to investors James Greenleaf and Robert Morris for $66.50 per lot.Royster, p. 358; Warren and Brownson, p. 56. Among these were lots Number 1 and Number 2 in square 107. Greenleaf and Morris defaulted on their payment to the commissioners, who foreclosed on the two lots (as well as others).Clark, p. 71. Accessed 2012-12-09. The commissioners attempted to resell the Greenleaf/Morris lots on May 2, 1797, but were unsuccessful.O'Neale v. Thornton, 10 U.S. 53, 59. They tried again on August 28, 1797. At this sale, the commissioners decided that the proceeds from any sale would be credited to the Greenleaf/Morris debt. Any intermediate buyer(s) would not be taken notice of. Once more the commissioners found few buyers. Only one lot received a purchase price which recouped the Greenleaf/Morris sale price (plus interest) as well as covered the auction costs.  A third resale occurred on October 18, 1797. This time, the commissioners agreed that no lot would sell for less than the amount due (plus interest and auction costs).
On August 6, 1800, William O'Neale purchased lots 1 and 2 in square 107 from Commissioner William Thornton. There was no down-payment, and no security for the mortgage.O'Neale v. Thornton, 10 U.S. 53, 53.
On May 1, 1802, Congress enacted legislation which abolished the tripartite commission and established a single Superintendent for the District of Columbia.Tindall, p. 23. Accessed 2012-12-09. Thomas Munroe was appointed superintendent. Since O'Neale had failed to pay his mortgage, Munroe foreclosed and sold lots 1 and 2 to Andrew Ross. The purchase price was less than the amount owed on the Greenleaf/Morris mortgage, however. Ross turned title to the land over to James Moore.O'Neale v. Thornton, 10 U.S. 53, 58.
Thornton sued O'Neale in the Circuit Court of the District of Columbia to recover the 1800 sale price.  O'Neale raised two defenses: First, that the commissioners annulled the 1800 sale when they foreclosed and took the lots back; and second, that the sale of the lots to Andrew Ross for the amount owed by Greenleaf/Morris proved that the sale to O'Neale was null (preventing Thornton from receiving any proceeds from the Ross sale).O'Neale v. Thornton, 10 U.S. 53, 59-50.  He asked the court to instruct the jury accordingly. The court refused. O'Neale was found liable for the payment to Thornton.  O'Neale appealed the jury decision on the basis of the failure of the court to issue the instructions he requested.
Decision
Chief Justice John Marshall delivered the opinion of the court.O'Neale v. Thornton, 10 U.S. 53, 66.
Thornton had argued before the court that the legislation enacted by the state of Maryland ceding land to the federal government for the creation of the District of Columbia authorized a third sale (the Ross sale) only to pay the second sale (the O'Neale sale). Thus, the proceeds from the Ross sale should go to Thornton. But, Thornton argued, if the Maryland law did not apply, then the third sale was illegal and O'Neale still held title to lots 1 and 2—and Thornton could still sue O'Neale for payment of the mortgage on the land O'Neale continued to hold.O'Neale v. Thornton, 10 U.S. 53, 66-67.
Marshall concluded that the Maryland legislation clearly specified one sale of land. In the event of a default, the land could be seized and resold. O'Neale's purchase, therefore, should be considered null.O'Neale v. Thornton, 10 U.S. 53, 67-68. However, Marshall said, neither the Maryland legislature nor the commissioners agreed to resales at less than the original sale price (e.g., the Greenleaf/Morris sale price). When Munroe sold lots 1 and 2 to Ross for less than the Greenleaf/Morris price, he did so illegally. This made the Ross sale null and void as well.O'Neale v. Thornton, 10 U.S. 53, 69.
Marshall then declined to decide whether O'Neale still held title to lots 1 and 2. Thornton had admitted O'Neale now retained title to lots 1 and 2, but the Superintendent (not Thornton) was the proper plaintiff in the case.O'Neale v. Thornton, 10 U.S. 53, 70.
The Supreme Court remanded the case back to the district court for a new trial, instructing the lower court to issue the jury instructions requested by O'Neale. The government was not precluded, however, from seeking foreclosure against O'Neale for nonpayment, however.
References
Bibliography
Clark, Allen. Greenleaf and Law in the Federal City. Washington, D.C.: Press of W.F. Roberts, 1901.
Commission to Investigate the Title of the United States to Lands in the District of Columbia. Title of the United States to Lands in the District of Columbia. Document No. 632. United States Congressional Serial Set. Vol. 61. 61st Cong., 2d sess. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, June 16, 1910.
Pinheiro, John C. "George Washington's Leadership Style and Conflict at the Federal City." In White House Studies Compendium. Vol. 5. Robert W. Watson, ed. New York: Nova Science Publishers, 2008.
Royster, Charles. The Fabulous History of the Dismal Swamp Company: A Story of George Washington's Times. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2000.
Tindall, William. Origin and Government of the District of Columbia. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1909.
Warren, Jack D. and Brownson, Anna L. The Presidency of George Washington. Mt. Vernon, Va.: Mount Vernon Ladies' Association, 2000.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:1810 in United States case law
Category:History of Washington, D.C.
Category:Foreclosure
"""

From "O'Reilly v. Morse" ==> """
O'Reilly v. Morse, 56 U.S. (15 How.) 62 (1853),. also known as The Telegraph Patent Case, is an 1854 decision of the United States Supreme Court that has been highly influential in the development of the law of patent-eligibility in regard to claimed inventions in the field of computer-software related art. It holds, essentially, that an abstract idea, apart from its implementation, is not patent-eligible.
Background
250px|thumb|right|The figure illustrates the problem that Morse addressed: signal amplitude decreases with distance traversed until noise (jagged red) overcomes signal – plot showing signal voltage vs. distance from source. 
The problem that would-be telegraphers faced in the early 19th century is explained in the Court's opinion:"The great difficulty in their way was the fact that the galvanic current, however strong in the beginning, became gradually weaker as it advanced on the wire; and was not strong enough to produce a mechanical effect, after a certain distance had been traversed.” (See figure at right illustrating problem Court describes.) To send a signal from Baltimore to Washington would require thousands of volts and high currents – not feasible at a time when managing to make a pickled frog’s legs twitch, as Luigi Galvani and Alessandro Volta did, was the major achievement of the electro-galvanic force. 
300px|thumb|right|The figure illustrates the great question, "What did Morse invent?" Did he invent the depicted apparatus and no more? Did he invent the more generic and abstract formulation of claim 8 — the use of electromagnetism, however developed, for marking intelligible characters at any distance?
Samuel Morse’s “plan [was] combining two or more electric or galvanic circuits, with independent batteries for the purpose of overcoming the diminished force of electromagnetism in long circuits.” The concept is illustrated in the figure shown at the right. Morse inserted the relays (or “repeaters” as the opinion terms them) at sufficiently short intervals (say, every 15 to 20 miles) so that the signal was regularly restored to its initial level before noise could swamp it out.
left|150px|thumb|Effect of repeaters
The effect of Morse's use of "repeaters" is shown in the figure at the left, a graph of signal amplitude (with noise) vs. distance. The signal decays between repeaters, but Morse restores the signal to a predetermined level before it falls into the noise. That permits the message to be sent to great distances, which was previously not feasible.
Daniel Broadbent (Jun. 30, 1811 in Dukinfield, England - Apr. 11, 1879 in Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania), a prominent Philadelphia Patent Attorney represented Morse, and William McConnell (Apr. 17, 1812 in Louisville, Kentucky - Jun. 28, 1870 in New Orleans, Louisiana), a prominent Louisville Patent Attorney represented Henry O'Reilly. Broadbent was a graduate of Princeton University and the University of Pennsylvania, and later became a Colonel in the Union Army during the American Civil War, being wounded at the Battle of Gettysburg. McConnell was a graduate of Georgetown University, in addition to being a lawyer, McConnell also owned a large plantation near Glasgow, Kentucky, which led to him being financially ruined by the Civil War, this led to McConnell killing himself in his New Orleans Hotel Room on June 28, 1870.
Supreme Court opinion
125px|right|thumb|Samuel Morse
Majority opinion
Morse's claim 8
While the case concerned a number of other issues, such as whether Morse was indeed first to invent the telegraph, the issue of lasting importance concerned Morse's eighth claim, which was directed to a method of communicating intelligible information to any distance by means of exploiting the electro-magnetic force:
Eighth. I do not propose to limit myself to the specific machinery or parts of machinery described in the foregoing specification and claims; the essence of my invention being the use of the motive power of the electric or galvanic current, which I call electro-magnetism, however developed for marking or printing intelligible characters, signs, or letters, at any distances, being a new application of that power of which I claim to be the first inventor or discoverer.
What did Morse invent?
As Justice Taney, speaking for the majority of the Court, explained it, "He claims the exclusive right to every improvement where the motive power is the electric or galvanic current, and the result is the marking or printing intelligible characters, signs, or letters at a distance." Although "it required the highest order of mechanical skill to execute and adjust the nice and delicate work necessary to put the telegraph into operation," Morse did not "invent" what he claimed: "Professor Morse has not discovered that the electric or galvanic current will always print at a distance, no matter what may be the form of the machinery or mechanical contrivances through which it passes." Morse did not enable others to do more than make the repeater system that he described. Other persons may discover and disclose to the public other ways to use electromagnetic force to transmit messages, and the other ways may be cheaper or work better. "In fine, he claims an exclusive right to use a manner and process which he has not described and indeed had not invented, and therefore could not describe when he obtained his patent. The court is of opinion that the claim is too broad, and not warranted by law."
Enablement and "abstract idea"
In reaching the conclusion that Morse's claim 8 was too broad and thus not subject to patent protection, the Court considered not only the fact that Morse did not teach and enable other ways to communicate information at a great distance by using the electromagnetic force,See 35 U.S.C. sec. 112(a), which requires patentees to disclose their inventions in sufficient detail that others are enabled to practice the invention without undue experimentation. but also whether the claim was at such a high level of generality and abstraction that it claimed an "idea" rather than a practical application and implementation of an idea. In analyzing this aspect of the case, the Court looked to a recent English decision, Neilson v. Harford.151 Eng. Rep. 1266, 8 M & W 806, Web. Pat. Cases 295 (Exch. 1841). Neilson upheld a patent on using heated air to oxidize carbon in cast iron in a Bessemer Converter against the claim that it was just a patent on the idea or principle that heating the injected air makes a blast furnace work better. The court pointed to the apparatus that Neilson used to preheat the air, which made the patent one on an implementation of the principle, not one on the principle itself. Morse, of course, disclosed apparatus only for the repeater system and no other. The language of the English court, picked up by the Supreme Court, was important in 20th century computer software cases:See, for example, Parker v. Flook.
We think the case must be considered as if, the principle being well known, the plaintiff had first invented a mode of applying it by a mechanical apparatus to furnaces; and his invention then consists in this – the interposing a receptacle for heated air between the blowing apparatus and the furnace. In this receptacle he directs the air to be heated, by the application of heat externally to the receptacle, and thus he accomplishes the object of applying the blast, which before was of cold air, in a heated state to the furnace. 
Dissent
Justice Grier, dissenting in Morse, asked, "What is meant by a claim [specifically, Morse's claim 8] being too broad?" Grier said, "It is only when he claims something before known and used, something as new which is not new, either by mistake or intentionally." That is, a claim is overbroad only if it encroaches beyond the frontiers of the prior art (covers prior art devices). Of course, that completely ignores the enablement requirement of what is now section 112 of the patent code.35 U.S.C. sec. 112.
References
External links
Category:1853 in United States case law
Category:Software patent case law
Category:Telegraphy
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
"""

From "OBB Personenverkehr AG v. Sachs" ==> """
OBB Personenverkehr AG v. Sachs, 577 U.S. ___ (2015), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States, holding that the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act barred a California resident from bringing suit against an Austrian railroad in federal district court., slip op. at 1–2 (2015). The case arose after a California resident suffered traumatic personal injuries while attempting to board a train in Innsbruck, Austria.OBB Personenverkehr, slip op. at 1–3. She then filed a lawsuit against the railroad in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California in which she alleged the railroad was responsible for causing her injuries.OBB Personenverkehr, slip op. at 1, 3. Because the railroad was owned by the Austrian government, the railroad claimed that the lawsuit should be barred by the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act, which provides immunity to foreign sovereigns in tort suits filed in the United States.OBB Personenverkehr, slip op. at 1, 3–4. In response, the plaintiff argued that her suit should be permitted under the Foreign Sovereign Immunity Act's commercial activity exception because she purchased her rail ticket in the United States.OBB Personenverkehr, slip op. at 1, 3–4 (citing 28 U.S.C. § 1605(a)(2)).
Writing for a unanimous Court, Chief Justice John Roberts held that the plaintiff's injury was "based upon" conduct that occurred solely in Austria, and the suit therefore fell outside the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act's commercial activity exception.OBB Personenverkehr, slip op. at 1–2, 10–11. Chief Justice Roberts emphasized that "the conduct constituting the gravamen of Sachs's suit plainly occurred abroad".OBB Personenverkehr, slip op. at 8. Commentators have identified this case as part of "a series of rulings" in which the Supreme Court of the United States "has limited the use of U.S. courts as a forum for adjudicating wrongs that took place primarily outside the country".Tony Mauro, Justices' Austrian Train Ruling Further Restricts Foreign Claims in U.S. Courts, , December 1, 2015. Although some analysts suggest the case has a "larger meaning", other analysts have described the Court's ruling as "less momentous than we might have expected".Compare Lyle Denniston, Constitution Check: Do U.S. laws protect Americans traveling overseas?, , December 3, 2015 (noting the case has a "larger meaning") with Amy Howe, First decision of the Term is a unanimous one in Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act case,  (December 1, 2015, 2:50 PM) (noting that the case was "less momentous than we might have expected").
Background
Tort immunity for foreign sovereigns
The Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976 codified the longstanding common law principle that foreign sovereigns could not be held liable for torts in United States courts.28 U.S.C. §§ 1602–1611. After its enactment, the Act became "the sole basis for obtaining jurisdiction over a foreign state in [United States] courts".Argentine Republic v. Amerada Hess Shipping Corp. . The Act states that United States courts may only exercise subject matter jurisdiction in cases brought by a private citizen against a foreign sovereign when the suit falls within one of the Act's enumerated exceptions.Lee M. Caplan, The Constitution and Jurisdiction over Foreign States: The 1996 Amendment to the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act in Perspective, 41  369, 405 (2001) (citing 28 U.S.C. § 1330(a)). Absent subject matter jurisdiction, United States Courts may not exercise personal jurisdiction over a foreign sovereign.Lee M. Caplan, The Constitution and Jurisdiction over Foreign States: The 1996 Amendment to the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act in Perspective, 41  369, 405 (2001) (citing 28 U.S.C. § 1330(b)). However, one of the Foreign Sovereign Immunity Act's enumerated exceptions is the commercial activity exception, which specifies that foreign sovereigns may be held liable in United States courts when "the action is based upon a commercial activity carried on in the United States by [a] foreign state".28 U.S.C. § 1605(a)(2). According to the Act, the definition of a "foreign state" also includes an "agency or instrumentality" of the foreign state.28 U.S.C. § 1603(a).
Initial lawsuit
Carol Sachs, a resident of California, purchased a Eurail pass from a Massachusetts-based travel agent in March 2007.OBB Personenverkehr, slip op. at 2. She arrived in Innsbruck, Austria, one month after purchasing her Eurail pass, where she intended to board a train operated by ÖBB Personenverkehr AG (ÖBB) bound for Prague. When Sachs attempted to board the train, she fell from the platform onto the tracks and suffered traumatic personal injuries.OBB Personenverkehr, slip op. at 2–3 (internal citations omitted). Sachs filed a lawsuit in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California in which she alleged ÖBB was responsible for causing her injuries.OBB Personenverkehr, slip op. at 3. Although ÖBB was operated by the Austrian Ministry of Transport, Sachs argued her suit was not barred by the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act because her suit was based upon the railway's act of selling her a Eurail pass in the United States. In response, ÖBB moved to dismiss the suit for lack of subject matter jurisdiction on the grounds that Sachs' suit was barred by sovereign immunity. The district court granted ÖBB's motion, and the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed the district court's decision.OBB Personenverkehr, slip op. at 4 (citing Sachs v. Republic of Austria, 2011 WL 816854, *1, *4 (ND Cal., January 28, 2011); Sachs v. Republic of Aus., 695 F.3d 1021 (9th Cir. 2012)). However, the Ninth Circuit ordered the case to be reheard en banc, and a majority of judges reversed the panel's decision.OBB Personenverkehr, slip op. at 4 (citing Sachs v. Republic of Austria, 737 F.3d 584 (9th Cir. 2013)). The en banc majority concluded that Sachs' suit was permitted under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act's commercial activity exception because her claims were "based upon a commercial activity carried on in the United States by OBB".OBB Personenverkehr, slip op. at 4 (citing 737 F.3d at 602) (internal quotations omitted). ÖBB then appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States, which granted certiorari on January 23, 2015.OBB Personenverkehr AG v. Sachs, 135 S. Ct. 1172 (2015).
Opinion of the Court
Writing for a unanimous Court, Chief Justice John Roberts held that Sachs' injury was "based upon" conduct that occurred solely in Austria, and the suit therefore fell outside the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act's commercial activity exception.OBB Personenverkehr, slip op. at 5. Although the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act does not define the phrase "based upon" with specificity, Chief Justice Roberts explained that the Court's 1993 ruling in Saudi Arabia v. NelsonSaudi Arabia v. Nelson, . should guide the Court's analysis in this case.OBB Personenverkehr, slip op. at 5–6. In Nelson, the Court held that the Saudi Arabian government was protected by sovereign immunity in a tort suit brought by an American who alleged he was tortured by Saudi police after reporting safety violations in a Saudi hospital.OBB Personenverkehr, slip op. at 5–6; see also Nelson, 507 U.S. at 353–58. Although the plaintiff alleged the suit was based upon commercial activity that occurred when the Saudi hospital recruited the plaintiff in America, the Court ruled that the plaintiffs claims involved "sovereign acts" rather than commercial activity.OBB Personenverkehr, slip op. at 6 (citing Nelson, 507 U.S. at 358). The Court ultimately held that the Foreign Sovereign Immunity Act's "based upon" provision requires courts to identify the "particular conduct" upon which a plaintiff's claim is based.OBB Personenverkehr, slip op. at 6 (citing Nelson, 507 U.S. at 357) (internal quotations omitted).
Applying the Nelson analysis to the facts of this case, Chief Justice Roberts held that "the conduct constituting the gravamen of Sachs’s suit plainly occurred abroad". Justice Roberts also concluded that "[u]nder any theory of the case", there was "nothing wrongful about the sale of the Eurail pass standing alone". To support his arguments, Chief Justice Roberts cited a letter written by former Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. to then-professor Felix Frankfurter, which explained that the "essentials of a personal injury narrative will be found at the point of contact – the place where the boy got his fingers pinched". Chief Justice Roberts wrote that "[a]t least in this case, that insight holds true".OBB Personenverkehr, slip op. at 9. Therefore, Chief Justice Roberts concluded that Sach's suit did not fall within the commercial activity exception of the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act, and that the Ninth Circuit's opinion should be reversed for lack of jurisdiction.OBB Personenverkehr, slip op. at 10–11.
Analysis and commentary
Although some commentators suggested the Court's opinion may have a significant impact in tort cases involving foreign sovereigns, other commentators suggested the case's impact would be limited. Lyle Denniston, for example, noted that although "the case focused on one American and one incident, it may well have larger meaning" and that following the Court's opinion, foreign railroads "could rarely, if ever, be held accountable for causing injuries, or worse".Lyle Denniston, Constitution Check: Do U.S. laws protect Americans traveling overseas?,  (December 3, 2015). However, Amy Howe wrote that the Court's decision "at first blush appears less momentous than we might have expected when the Court agreed to take the case on earlier this year".Amy Howe, First decision of the Term is a unanimous one in Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act case,  (December 1, 2015). In The National Law Journal, Tony Mauro commented that the court's opinion was "the latest in a series of rulings in which the high court has limited the use of U.S. courts as a forum for adjudicating wrongs that took place primarily outside the country". Although she characterized the case as "a good decision by the Court", Ingrid Wuerth noted that the Court "left for another day" other cases "with less tangible injuries such as the misappropriation of trade secrets and other data or intellectual property-related actions, some of which may prove difficult to analyze under the Court's gravamen test".Ingrid Wuerth, The Supreme Court’s Anodyne Opinion in Sachs v. OBB Personenverkehr,  (December 4, 2015).
Following the publication of the Court's opinion, Dorsey & Whitney LLP partner Juan C. Basombrio, who argued the case before the Supreme Court on behalf of ÖBB Personenverkehr, issued a press release that praised the Court's decision to respect "the importance of international comity".Dorsey & Whitney LLP, Dorsey Partner Juan Basombrio Prevails Before United States Supreme Court Representing Austria’s National Railway (December 1, 2015). The press release also noted that "[i]n a world that has become increasingly connected by international commercial transactions, and where there is also increasing friction in the relations between the United States and other nations, this is a seminal and important decision that will foster harmony between the United States and other nations at least in the commercial context".Dorsey & Whitney LLP, Dorsey Partner Juan Basombrio Prevails Before United States Supreme Court Representing Austria’s National Railway (December 1, 2015) (internal quotations omitted). Stanford Law School professor Jeffrey Fisher, who argued on behalf of Carol Sachs at the Supreme Court, stated that he was "deeply disappointed in the court's ruling".Jimmy Hoover, Austrian Railway Immune To US Suits, High Court Says,  (December 1, 2015) (internal quotations omitted). Fisher wrote that he "hoped the court would consider – as it often does – the totality of respondent's arguments in support of the holding below", but that "[t]he court's failure to do so means that the Ninth Circuit and other courts still have not been given guidance concerning how to resolve cases like this".
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:Foreign Sovereign Immunity Act case law
"""

From "Obergefell v. Hodges" ==> """
Obergefell v. Hodges,  ( ), is a landmark case of the Supreme Court of the United States which ruled that the fundamental right to marry is guaranteed to same-sex couples by both the Due Process Clause and the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution. The 5–4 ruling requires all fifty states, the District of Columbia, and the Insular Areas to perform and recognize the marriages of same-sex couples on the same terms and conditions as the marriages of opposite-sex couples, with all the accompanying rights and responsibilities.Obergefell v. Hodges, No. 14-556, slip op. at 22–23 (U.S. June 26, 2015) ("The Court now holds that same-sex couples may exercise the fundamental right to marry. ... [T]he State laws challenged by Petitioners in these cases are now held invalid to the extent they exclude same-sex couples from civil marriage on the same terms and conditions as opposite-sex couples."). Prior to Obergefell, same-sex marriage had already been established by statute, court ruling, or voter initiative in thirty-six states, the District of Columbia, and Guam.
Between January 2012 and February 2014, plaintiffs in Michigan, Ohio, Kentucky, and Tennessee filed federal district court cases that culminated in Obergefell v. Hodges. After all district courts ruled for the plaintiffs, the rulings were appealed to the Sixth Circuit. In November 2014, following a series of appeals court rulings that year from the Fourth, Seventh, Ninth, and Tenth Circuits that state-level bans on same-sex marriage were unconstitutional, the Sixth Circuit ruled that it was bound by Baker v. Nelson and found such bans to be constitutional. This created a split between circuits and led to a Supreme Court review. Decided on June 26, 2015, Obergefell overturned Baker and requires states to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples and to recognize same-sex marriages validly performed in other jurisdictions.Obergefell, slip op. at 28 ("The Court, in this decision, holds same-sex couples may exercise the fundamental right to marry in all States."). This established same-sex marriage throughout the United States and its territories. In a majority opinion authored by Justice Anthony Kennedy, the Court examined the nature of fundamental rights guaranteed to all by the Constitution, the harm done to individuals by delaying the implementation of such rights while the democratic process plays out,Obergefell, slip op. at 23–26, 27–28. and the evolving understanding of discrimination and inequality that has developed greatly since Baker.Obergefell, slip op. at 7–12, 20–23.
Lawsuits in the district courts
The U.S. Supreme Court case of Obergefell v. Hodges is not the culmination of one lawsuit.  Ultimately, it is the consolidation of six lower-court cases, originally representing sixteen same-sex couples, seven of their children, a widower, an adoption agency, and a funeral director. Those cases came from Michigan, Ohio, Kentucky, and Tennessee. All six federal district court rulings found for the same-sex couples and other claimants.
Michigan case: DeBoer v. Snyder
One case came from Michigan, involving a female couple and their three children. April DeBoer and Jayne Rowse held a commitment ceremony in February 2007. They were foster parents. A son was born on January 25, 2009, and adopted by Rowse in November. A daughter was born on February 1, 2010, and adopted by DeBoer in April 2011. A second son was born on November 9, 2009, and adopted by Rowse in October 2011. Michigan law allowed adoption only by single people or married couples. Consequently, on January 23, 2012, DeBoer and Rowse filed a lawsuit in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan (Southern Division, Detroit), DeBoer v. Snyder, alleging Michigan's adoption law was unconstitutional. Richard Snyder, the lead defendant, was then governor of Michigan.Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief, DeBoer v. Snyder, No. 12-CV-10285 (E.D. Mich. Mar. 21, 2014) (complaint filed Jan. 23, 2012); DeBoer, slip op. at 1–4.
During a hearing on August 29, 2012, Judge Bernard A. Friedman expressed reservations regarding plaintiffs' cause of action, suggesting they amend their complaint to challenge  the state's ban on same-sex marriage. The plaintiffs amended their complaint accordingly on September 7.Amended Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief, DeBoer, No. 12-CV-10285 (amended complaint filed Sept. 7, 2012). During a hearing on March 7, 2013, Friedman decided to delay the case until the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in United States v. Windsor and Hollingsworth v. Perry, hoping for guidance.See, also, Case Docket (doc. 50, Jan. 11, 2013). On October 16, Friedman set trial for February 25, 2014.Notice to Appear, DeBoer, No. 12-CV-10285 (notice filed Oct. 16, 2013). The trial ended March 7. On March 21, Friedman ruled for the plaintiffs, concluding that, "without some overriding legitimate interest, the state cannot use its domestic relations authority to legislate families out of existence. Having failed to establish such an interest in the context of same-sex marriage, the [state marriage ban] cannot stand."DeBoer, slip op. at 29.
Ohio cases
Obergefell v. Kasich
thumb|right|Outside the Supreme Court on the morning of June 26, 2015, James Obergefell (foreground, center) and attorney Al Gerhardstein (foreground, left) react to its historic decision.
Two cases came from Ohio, the first ultimately involving a male couple, a widower, and a funeral director. In June 2013, following the U.S. Supreme Court's decision in United States v. Windsor, James "Jim" Obergefell ( ) and John Arthur decided to marry to obtain legal recognition of their relationship. They married in Maryland on July 11. After learning that their state of residence, Ohio, would not recognize their marriage, they filed a lawsuit, Obergefell v. Kasich, in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Ohio (Western Division, Cincinnati) on July 19, 2013, alleging that the state discriminates against same-sex couples who have married lawfully out-of-state. The lead defendant was Ohio Governor John Kasich.Verified Complaint for Temporary Restraining Order and Declaratory and Injunctive Relief, Obergefell v. Kasich, No. 13-cv-501 (S.D. Ohio Dec. 23, 2013) (complaint filed July 19, 2013). See, also,  Justia Docket Report. Because one partner, John Arthur, was terminally ill and suffering from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), they wanted the Ohio Registrar to identify the other partner, James Obergefell, as his surviving spouse on his death certificate, based on their marriage in Maryland. The local Ohio Registrar agreed that discriminating against the same-sex married couple was unconstitutional, but the state attorney general's office announced plans to defend Ohio's same-sex marriage ban.
As the case progressed, on July 22, District Judge Timothy S. Black granted the couple's motion, temporarily restraining the Ohio Registrar from accepting any death certificate unless it recorded the deceased's status at death as "married" and his partner as "surviving spouse". Black wrote that "[t]hroughout Ohio's history, Ohio law has been clear: a marriage solemnized outside of Ohio is valid in Ohio if it is valid where solemnized", and noted that certain marriages between cousins or minors, while unlawful if performed in Ohio, are recognized by the state if lawful when solemnized in other jurisdictions.Order Granting Plaintiffs' Motion for a Temporary Restraining Order at 1, Obergefell, No. 1:13-cv-501 (order filed July 22, 2013). Ohio Attorney General Mike DeWine indicated he would not appeal the preliminary order. On August 13, Black extended the temporary restraining order until the end of December and scheduled oral arguments on injunctive relief, which is permanent, for December 18.Obergefell, No. 1:13-cv-501 (order extending restraining order) (order filed Aug. 13, 2013). See, also, Justia Docket Report.
Meanwhile, on July 22, 2013, David Michener and William Herbert Ives married in Delaware. They had three adoptive children.Motion for Temporary Restraining Order Re David Michener, Obergefell, No. 1:13-cv-501 (motion filed Sept. 3, 2013); Amended Verified Complaint for Temporary Restraining Order and Declaratory and Injunctive Relief at 1–5, Obergefell, No. 1:13-cv-501 (amended verified complaint filed Sept. 3, 2013). On August 27, William Ives died unexpectedly in Cincinnati, Ohio. His remains were being held at a Cincinnati funeral home pending the issuance of a death certificate, required before cremation, the deceased's desired funeral rite. As surviving spouse David Michener's name could not by Ohio law appear on the death certificate, he sought legal remedy, being added as a plaintiff in the case on September 3.Motion to Amend Complaint, Obergefell, No. 1:13-cv-501 (motion filed Sept. 3, 2013); Motion for Temporary Restraining Order Re David Michener, Obergefell, No. 1:13-cv-501 (motion filed Sept. 3, 2013); Amended Verified Complaint for Temporary Restraining Order and Declaratory and Injunctive Relief at 1–5, Obergefell, No. 1:13-cv-501 (amended verified complaint filed Sept. 3, 2013); see, also, Fed. R. Civ. P. 20(a)(1).
As the newly amended case moved forward, on September 25, Black granted a September 19 motion by the plaintiffs to dismiss the governor and the state attorney general as defendants, and to add funeral director Robert Grunn to the lawsuit so that he could obtain clarification of his legal obligations under Ohio law when serving clients with same-sex spouses, such as his client James Obergefell. Ohio Health Department Director Theodore Wymyslo was substituted as the lead defendant, and the case was restyled Obergefell v. Wymyslo.Motion to Amend Complaint, Obergefell, No. 1:13-cv-501 (motion filed Sept. 19, 2013); Second Amended Complaint for Temporary Restraining Order and Declaratory and Injunctive Relief at 1, 3, 9–10, Obergefell v. Wymyslo, No. 13-cv-501 (S.D. Ohio Dec. 23, 2013) (second amended complaint filed Sept. 26, 2013); Obergefell, slip op. at 8–9; Justia Docket Report (esp. for Sept. 25, 2013); see, also, Fed. R. Civ. P. 20(a)(1). On October 22, plaintiff John Arthur died. The state defendants moved to dismiss the case as moot. Judge Black, in an order dated November 1, denied the motion to dismiss.Obergefell, No. 1:13-cv-501 (order denying motion to dismiss) (order filed Nov. 1, 2013). On December 23, Judge Black ruled that Ohio's refusal to recognize same-sex marriages from other jurisdictions was discriminatory and ordered Ohio to recognize same-sex marriages from other jurisdictions on death certificates.Obergefell v. Wymyslo, No. 1:13-cv-501 (S.D. Ohio Dec. 23, 2013). He wrote, "When a state effectively terminates the marriage of a same-sex couple married in another jurisdiction, it intrudes into the realm of private marital, family, and intimate relations specifically protected by the Supreme Court."Obergefell, slip op. at 14.
Henry v. Wymyslo
The second case from Ohio involved four couples, a child, and an adoption agency. Georgia Nicole Yorksmith and Pamela Yorksmith married in California on October 14, 2008. They had a son in 2010 and were expecting another child. In 2011, Kelly Noe and Kelly McCraken married in Massachusetts. They were expecting a child. Joseph J. Vitale and Robert Talmas married in New York on September 20, 2011. In 2013, they sought the services of the adoption agency, Adoption S.T.A.R., finally adopting a son on January 17, 2014, the same day Brittani Henry and Brittni Rogers married in New York. They, too, were expecting a son. The three female couples were living in Ohio, each anticipating the birth of a child later in 2014. Vitale and Talmas were living in New York with their adopted son, Child Doe, born in Ohio in 2013 and also a plaintiff through his parents. On February 10, 2014, the four legally married couples filed a lawsuit, Henry v. Wymyslo, also in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Ohio (Western Division, Cincinnati), to force the state to list both parents on their children's birth certificates. Adoption agency, Adoption S.T.A.R., sued due to the added and inadequate services Ohio law forced it to provide to same-sex parents adopting in the state. Theodore Wymyslo, the lead defendant, was then director of the Ohio Department of Health.Complaint for Temporary Restraining Order and Declaratory and Injunctive Relief  at 1–10, Henry v. Wymyslo, No. 1:14-cv-129 (S.D. Ohio Apr. 14, 2014) (complaint filed Feb. 10, 2014); Henry v. Himes, No. 1:14-cv-129, slip op. at 6–10 (S.D. Ohio Apr. 14, 2014).
As the case moved forward, the plaintiffs amended their complaint to ask the court to declare Ohio's recognition ban on same-sex marriage unconstitutional. Judge Black gave the state time to prepare its appeal of his decision by announcing on April 4 that he would issue an order on April 14 requiring Ohio to recognize same-sex marriages from other jurisdictions. Following the resignation of the lead defendant, Ohio's director of health, Ted Wymyslo, for reasons unrelated to the case, Lance Himes became interim director, and the case was restyled Henry v. Himes. On April 14, Black ruled that Ohio must recognize same-sex marriages from other jurisdictions,Henry v. Himes, No. 1:14-cv-129 (S.D. Ohio Apr. 14, 2014). and, on April 16, stayed enforcement of his ruling, except for the birth certificates sought by the plaintiffs.Henry, No. 1:14-cv-129 (order granting motion for stay) (order filed Apr. 16, 2014).
Kentucky cases
Bourke v. Beshear
thumb|right|Plaintiffs Gregory Bourke (left) and Michael DeLeon (right) celebrate outside the Supreme Court building on June 26, 2015.
Two cases came from Kentucky, the first ultimately involving four same-sex couples and their six children. Gregory Bourke and Michael DeLeon married in Ontario, Canada, on March 29, 2004. They had two children: Plaintiff I.D., a fourteen-year-old girl, and Plaintiff I.D., a fifteen-year-old boy. Randell Johnson and Paul Campion married in California on July 3, 2008. They had four children: Plaintiffs T.J.-C. and T.J.-C., twin eighteen-year-old boys, Plaintiff D.J.-C., a fourteen-year-old boy, and Plaintiff M.J.-C., a ten-year-old girl. Jimmy Meade and Luther Barlowe married in Iowa on July 30, 2009. Kimberly Franklin and Tamera Boyd married in Connecticut on July 15, 2010. All resided in Kentucky.Second Amended Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief at 2–4, Bourke v. Beshear, No. 3:13-CV-750-H (W.D. Ky. Feb. 12, 2014) (second amended complaint filed Nov. 1, 2013). On July 26, 2013, Bourke and DeLeon, and their two children through them, filed a lawsuit, Bourke v. Beshear, in the United States District Court for the Western District of Kentucky (Louisville Division), challenging Kentucky's bans on same-sex marriage and the recognition of same-sex marriages from other jurisdictions. Steve Beshear, the lead defendant, was then governor of Kentucky.Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief at 1–6, 18, Bourke, No. 3:13-CV-750-H (complaint filed July 26, 2013); see, also, Civil Docket.
Subsequently, on August 16, the complaint was amended to bring Johnson and Campion, their four children through them, and Meade and Barlowe into the case, again challenging the state's bans on same-sex marriage and the recognition of same-sex marriages from other jurisdictions.Amended Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief at 1–2, 5–10, Bourke, No. 3:13-CV-750-H (amended complaint filed Aug. 16, 2013); see, also, Civil Docket; Fed. R. Civ. P. 20(a)(1). On November 1, the complaint was amended again to bring Franklin and Boyd into the case, now challenging only Kentucky's ban on the recognition of same-sex marriages from other jurisdictions.Second Amended Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief at 1–7, 16–17, Bourke, No. 3:13-CV-750-H (second amended complaint filed Nov. 1, 2013); see, also, Civil Docket (nos. 29–31); Fed. R. Civ. P. 20(a)(1). Originally, the couple had filed their own lawsuit, Franklin v. Beshear, with the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Kentucky, but a change of venue was ordered for convenience, with the intent formally to consolidate the case with Bourke.Franklin v. Beshear, No. 3:13-CV-51 (E.D. Ky. filed Aug. 16, 2013) (order to change venue) (order filed Oct. 2, 2013); Bourke, slip op. at 5 n.7; see, also, PlainSite Docket; Fed. R. Civ. P. 42(a). Consolidation never occurred,Bourke, slip op. at 5 n.7. and that separate case was dismissed for failure to raise new claims.Franklin v. Beshear, No. 3:13-CV-946-H (W.D. Ky. dismissed Feb. 12, 2014) (order of dismissal); see, also, PlainSite Docket. On February 12, 2014, Judge John G. Heyburn II issued the court's decision: "In the end, the Court concludes that Kentucky's denial of recognition for valid same-sex marriages violates the United States Constitution's guarantee of equal protection under the law, even under the most deferential standard of review. Accordingly, Kentucky's statutes and constitutional amendment that mandate this denial are unconstitutional."Bourke, slip op. at 2.
Love v. Beshear
The second case from Kentucky, Love v. Beshear, involved two male couples. Maurice Blanchard and Dominique James held a religious marriage ceremony on June 3, 2006. Kentucky county clerks repeatedly refused them marriage licenses. Timothy Love and Lawrence Ysunza had been living together as a couple for thirty years when, on February 13, 2014, they were refused a marriage license at the Jefferson County Clerk's office. On February 14, the next day, the couples submitted a motion to join Bourke v. Beshear, challenging the state's ban on same-sex marriage.Motion to Intervene, Bourke v. Beshear, No. 3:13-CV-750-H (W.D. Ky. Feb. 12, 2014) (motion filed Feb. 14, 2014); Intervening Complaint and Petition for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief at 2–4, Bourke, No. 3:13-CV-750-H (filed in record Feb. 27, 2014); see, also Case Docket. The motion was granted on February 27,Bourke, No. 3:13-CV-750-H (order granting motion to intervene) (order filed Feb. 27, 2014); see, also Case Docket; Fed. R. Civ. P. 24(b). and the case was bifurcated, the instant action restyled as Love v. Beshear, on February 28.Love v. Beshear, No. 3:13-CV-750-H (W.D. Ky. July 1, 2014) (order restyling case) (order filed Feb. 28, 2014); see, also Case Docket; Fed. R. Civ. P. 42(b). On July 1, 2014, Judge Heyburn issued his ruling. He found "homosexual persons constitute a quasi-suspect class",Love, slip op. at 14. and ordered that Kentucky's laws banning same-sex marriage "violate the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, and they are void and unenforceable."Love, slip op. at 19. In the course of assessing the state's arguments for the bans, he stated, "These arguments are not those of serious people."Love, slip op. at 15.
Tennessee case: Tanco v. Haslam
One case came from Tennessee, involving four same-sex couples. Joy "Johno" Espejo and Matthew Mansell married in California on August 5, 2008. On September 25, 2009, they adopted two foster children. After Mansell's job was transferred to the state, they relocated to Franklin, Tennessee, in May 2012. Kellie Miller and Vanessa DeVillez married in New York on July 24, 2011, later moving to Tennessee. Army Reservist Sergeant First Class Ijpe DeKoe and Thomas Kostura married in New York on August 4, 2011. In May 2012, after completing a tour of duty in Afghanistan, Sergeant DeKoe was restationed in Memphis, Tennessee, where the couple subsequently relocated. On September 3, 2013, the Department of Defense began recognizing their marriage, but the state did not. Valeria Tanco and Sophia Jesty married in New York on September 9, 2011, then moved to Tennessee, where they were university professors. They were expecting their first child in 2014. On October 21, 2013, wishing to have their out-of-state marriages recognized in Tennessee, the four couples filed a lawsuit, Tanco v. Haslam, in the United States District Court for the Middle District of Tennessee (Nashville Division). William Edwards Haslam, the lead defendant, was then governor of Tennessee.Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief  at 1, 5–6, 38, Tanco v. Haslam, No. 3:13-cv-01159 (M.D. Tenn. Mar. 14, 2014) (complaint filed Oct. 21, 2013); Tanco, slip op. at 4–7.
As the case progressed, on November 19, 2013, the plaintiffs moved for a preliminary injunction enjoining the state from applying its marriage recognition ban against them.Motion for Preliminary Injunction, Tanco, No. 3:13-cv-01159 (motion filed Nov. 19, 2013); Plaintiffs' Memorandum of Law in Support of Motion for Preliminary Injunction, Tanco, No. 3:13-cv-01159 (memorandum filed Nov. 19, 2013). On March 10, 2014, plaintiff couple Kellie Miller and Vanessa DeVillez withdrew from the case.Stipulation of Dismissal of Plaintiffs Kellie Miller and Vanessa DeVillez and Defendant Bill Gibbons, Tanco, No. 3:13-cv-01159 (stipulation filed Mar. 10, 2014). On March 14, Judge Aleta Arthur Trauger granted a preliminary injunction requiring the state to recognize the marriages of the three plaintiff couples. She wrote, "At this point, all signs indicate that, in the eyes of the United States Constitution, the plaintiffs' marriages will be placed on an equal footing with those of heterosexual couples and that proscriptions against same-sex marriage will soon become a footnote in the annals of American history."Tanco, slip op. at 19; see, also, Tanco, No. 3:13-cv-01159 (preliminary injunction) (preliminary injunction filed Mar. 14, 2014). The state immediately filed a motion to stay this ruling, but, on March 20, Judge Trauger denied the request, reasoning that "the court's order does not open the floodgates for same-sex couples to marry in Tennessee ... [and] applies only to the three same-sex couples at issue in this case."Memorandum and Order at 7, Tanco, No. 3:13-cv-01159 (memorandum and order filed Mar. 20, 2014).
Reversal by the Sixth Circuit
thumb|right|upright|Judge Jeffrey Sutton wrote the Sixth Circuit's majority opinion upholding same-sex marriage bans, causing the circuit split that helped trigger Supreme Court review.Obergefell v. Hodges, No. 14-556, slip op. at 26 (U.S. June 26, 2015).
The six decisions of the four federal district courts were appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit. Ohio's director of health appealed Obergefell v. Wymyslo on January 16, 2014.Notice of Appeal, Obergefell v. Wymyslo, No. 13-CV-501 (S.D. Ohio Dec. 23, 2013) (notice filed Jan. 16, 2014). See, also, Justia Docket Report. The governor of Tennessee appealed Tanco v. Haslam on March 18.Defendants' Notice of Appeal, Tanco v. Haslam, No. 3:13-cv-01159 (M.D. Tenn. Mar. 14, 2014) (notice filed Mar. 18, 2014). On March 21, the governor of Michigan appealed DeBoer v. Snyder.Notice of Appeal, Deboer v. Snyder, No. 12-CV-10285 (E.D. Mich. Mar. 21, 2014) (notice filed Mar. 21, 2012). The governor of Kentucky appealed Bourke v. Beshear and Love v. Beshear on March 18 and July 8, respectively.See Case Docket (items 68 and 92). And on May 9 Ohio's director of health appealed Henry v. Himes.Notice of Appeal, Henry v. Himes, No. 1:14-cv-129 (S.D. Ohio Apr. 14, 2014) (notice filed May 9, 2014).
Subsequently, on May 20, the Sixth Circuit consolidated Obergefell v. Himes with Henry v. Himes for the purposes of briefing and oral argument.Regarding case consolidation, generally, see Fed. R. Civ. P. 42(a). (On April 15, after Ohio's governor, John Kasich, appointed Lance Himes interim health director on February 21, Obergefell was restyled Obergefell v. Himes.Obergefell v. Himes, No. 14-3057 (6th Cir. Nov. 6, 2014) (order replacing defendant and changing caption) (order filed Apr. 15, 2014), consol. sub nom. DeBoer v. Snyder, No. 14-1341 (6th Cir. Nov. 6, 2014).) Upon prior motion by the parties, the Sixth Circuit also consolidated Bourke v. Beshear and Love v. Beshear on July 16.Regarding Bourke and Love, see Petition for a Writ of Certiorari at 11, Bourke v. Beshear, No. 14-574 (U.S. June 26, 2015) (petition filed Nov. 18, 2014); see, also, SCOTUSblog Bourke Docket; Fed. R. Civ. P. 42(a). On August 6, the three-judge panel consisting of Judges Jeffrey Sutton, Deborah L. Cook, and Martha Craig Daughtrey heard oral arguments in all four cases.See, generally, Fed. R. Civ. P. 42(a). On August 11, Richard Hodges, by the appointment of Ohio governor John Kasich,  succeeded Himes as Ohio's health director, and Obergefell was again retitled, this time as its final iteration of Obergefell v. Hodges.Joint Petition for a Writ of Certiorari at ii–iii, Obergefell v. Hodges, No. 14-556 (U.S. June 26, 2015) (petition filed Nov. 14, 2014); Obergefell, slip op. at 1.
On November 6, 2014, in a decision styled DeBoer v. Snyder, the Sixth Circuit ruled 2–1 that Ohio's ban on same-sex marriage did not violate the U.S. Constitution. The court said it was bound by the U.S. Supreme Court's 1972 action in a similar case, Baker v. Nelson, which dismissed a same-sex couple's marriage claim "for want of a substantial federal question".DeBoer v. Snyder, No. 14-1341, slip op. at 14 (6th Cir. Nov. 6, 2014) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Writing for the majority, Judge Sutton also dismissed the arguments made on behalf of same-sex couples in this case: "Not one of the plaintiffs' theories, however, makes the case for constitutionalizing the definition of marriage and for removing the issue from the place it has been since the founding: in the hands of state voters."DeBoer, slip op. at 17.
Dissenting, Judge Daughtrey wrote:
Before the Supreme Court
Petitions for writs of certiorari
Claimants from each of the six district court cases appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States. On November 14, 2014, the same-sex couples, widowers, child plaintiff, and funeral director in DeBoer v. Snyder, Obergefell v. Hodges, and Tanco v. Haslam filed petitions for writs of certiorari with the Court. Adoption agency Adoption S.T.A.R. did not petition.Petition for Writ of Certiorari, DeBoer v. Snyder, No. 14-571 (U.S. June 26, 2015) (petition filed Nov. 14, 2014); Joint Petition for a Writ of Certiorari, Obergefell v. Hodges, No. 14-556 (U.S. June 26, 2015) (petition filed Nov. 14, 2014) (Adoption S.T.A.R. at iii); Petition for a Writ of Certiorari, Tanco v. Haslam, No. 14-562 (U.S. June 26, 2015) (petition filed Nov. 14, 2014); see, also SCOTUSblog Tanco Docket. The same-sex couples in Bourke v. Beshear filed their petition for a writ of certiorari with the Court on November 18.Petition for a Writ of Certiorari, Bourke v. Beshear, No. 14-574 (U.S. June 26, 2015) (petition filed Nov. 18, 2014); see, also, SCOTUSblog Bourke Docket. 
The DeBoer petitioners presented the Court with the question of whether denying same-sex couples the right to marry violated the Fourteenth Amendment.Petition for Writ of Certiorari at i, DeBoer, No. 14-571 (petition filed Nov. 14, 2014). The Obergefell petitioners asked the Court to consider whether Ohio's refusal to recognize marriages from other jurisdictions violated the Fourteenth Amendment's guarantees of due process and equal protection, and whether the state's refusal to recognize the adoption judgment of another state violated the U.S. Constitution's Full Faith and Credit Clause.Joint Petition for a Writ of Certiorari at i, Obergefell, No. 14-556 (petition filed Nov. 14, 2014). The Tanco petitioners asked the Court to consider three questions: whether denying same-sex couples the right to marry, including recognition of out-of-state marriages, violated the Due Process or Equal Protections Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment; whether refusing to recognize their out-of-state marriages violated same-sex couples' right to interstate travel; and whether Baker v. Nelson (1972), summarily dismissing same-sex couples' marriage claims, remained binding precedent.Petition for a Writ of Certiorari at i, Tanco, No. 14-562 (petition filed Nov. 14, 2014). Lastly, the Bourke petitioners posed to the Court two questions: whether a state violates the Due Process or Equal Protection Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment by prohibiting same-sex couples to marry, and whether it does so by refusing to recognize out-of-state same-sex marriages.Petition for a Writ of Certiorari at i, Bourke, No. 14-574 (petition filed Nov. 18, 2014).
Merits briefs
On January 16, 2015, the U.S. Supreme Court consolidated the four same-sex marriage cases challenging state laws that prohibited same-sex marriage—DeBoer v. Snyder (Michigan), Obergefell v. Hodges (Ohio), Bourke v. Beshear (Kentucky), and Tanco v. Haslam (Tennessee)—and agreed to review the case. It set a briefing schedule to be completed April 17. The Court ordered briefing and oral argument on the following questions:
 Does the Fourteenth Amendment require a state to license a marriage between two people of the same sex?
 Does the Fourteenth Amendment require a state to recognize a marriage between two people of the same sex when their marriage was lawfully licensed and performed out-of-state?
The Court also told the parties to each of the four cases to address only the questions raised in their particular case. Thus, Obergefell raises only the second question, the recognition of same-sex marriages from other jurisdictions.Order List, 574 U.S. ___ (Jan. 16, 2015) (No. 14-556) (order granting cert.); regarding case consolidation, generally, see Fed. R. Civ. P. 42(a).
The case had 148 amici curiae briefs submitted, more than any other U.S. Supreme Court case, including a historic amicus brief, written by Morgan Lewis partner Susan Baker Manning, on behalf of 379 business entities, which stated a business case for legalizing same-sex marriage across the country."Business Won Big, Lost Big At Supreme Court This Term" by Daniel Fisher, Forbes, July 2, 2015. Retrieved January 26, 2019.Ingraham, Nathan, "Apple, Facebook, Comcast, and hundreds of others ask Supreme Court for nationwide marriage equality", The Verge, March 5, 2015. Retrieved January 26, 2019."Morgan Lewis Creates Role for 'Large Impact' Pro Bono Matters", by Lizzy McLellan, The Legal Intelligencer (Law.com), January 9, 2019. Retrieved January 9, 2019.
Oral argument
Oral arguments in the case were heard on April 28, 2015. The plaintiffs were represented by civil rights lawyer Mary Bonauto and Washington, D.C. lawyer Douglas Hallward-Driemeier. U.S. Solicitor General Donald B. Verrilli Jr., representing the United States, also argued for the same-sex couples. The states were represented by former Michigan Solicitor General John J. Bursch and Joseph R. Whalen, an associate solicitor general from Tennessee. Of the nine justices, all except Clarence Thomas made comments and asked questions, giving clues as to their positions on the Constitution and the future of same-sex marriage. While the questions and comments of the justices during oral arguments are an imperfect indicator of their final decisions, the justices appeared sharply divided in their approaches to this issue, splitting as they often do along ideological lines, with Justice Anthony Kennedy being pivotal. It was thought Chief Justice John Roberts could be pivotal as well. Despite his past views, and his dissent in Windsor, Roberts made comments during oral argument suggesting that the bans in question may constitute sex discrimination. In his opinion, however, he argued that same-sex marriage bans were constitutional.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|left|On the morning of June 26, 2015, outside the Supreme Court, the crowd celebrates the Court's decision.
On June 26, 2015, the U.S. Supreme Court held in a 5–4 decision that the Fourteenth Amendment requires all states to grant same-sex marriages and recognize same-sex marriages granted in other states. The Court overruled its prior decision in Baker v. Nelson, which the Sixth Circuit had invoked as precedent.
The Obergefell v. Hodges decision came on the second anniversary of the United States v. Windsor ruling that struck down Section 3 of the Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA), which denied federal recognition to same-sex marriages, as being unconstitutional. It also came on the twelfth anniversary of Lawrence v. Texas, which struck down sodomy laws in 13 states. The Obergefell decision was issued on the second-to-last decision day of the Court's term; and, as late as 9:59 on the morning of the decision, same sex couples were unable to marry in many states.
The justices' opinions in Obergefell are consistent with their opinions in Windsor which rejected DOMA's recognition of only opposite-sex marriages for certain purposes under federal law. In both cases, Justice Kennedy authored the majority opinions and was considered the "swing vote".
Chief Justice Roberts and Justices Scalia, Thomas, and Alito each wrote a separate dissenting opinion. The Chief Justice read part of his dissenting opinion from the bench, his first time doing so since joining the Court in 2005.
Majority opinion
thumb|right|upright|Justice Anthony Kennedy authored the Court's opinion declaring same-sex couples have the right to marry.
Justice Anthony Kennedy authored the majority opinion and was joined by Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor, and Elena Kagan. The majority held that state same-sex marriage bans are a violation of the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses.
"The Constitution promises liberty to all within its reach," the Court declared, "a liberty that includes certain specific rights that allow persons, within a lawful realm, to define and express their identity."Obergefell v. Hodges, No. 14-556, slip op. at 1–2 (U.S. June 26, 2015). Citing Griswold v. Connecticut, the Court affirmed that the fundamental rights found in the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause "extend to certain personal choices central to individual dignity and autonomy, including intimate choices that define personal identity and beliefs," but the "identification and protection" of these fundamental rights "has not been reduced to any formula."Obergefell, slip op. at 10 (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). As the Supreme Court has found in cases such as Loving v. Virginia, Zablocki v. Redhail, and Turner v. Safley, this extension includes a fundamental right to marry.Obergefell, slip op. at 11.
The Court rejected respondent states' framing of the issue as whether there were a "right to same-sex marriage," insisting its precedents "inquired about the right to marry in its comprehensive sense, asking if there was a sufficient justification for excluding the relevant class from the right." Addressing the formula in Washington v. Glucksberg that fundamental rights had to be "deeply rooted" in the nation's history and traditions, the Court said that it is "inconsistent with the approach this Court has used" in Loving, Turner, and Zablocki. It continued, "If rights were defined by who exercised them in the past, then received practices could serve as their own continued justification and new groups could not invoke rights once denied." Citing its prior decisions in Loving and Lawrence v. Texas, the Court framed the issue accordingly in Obergefell.Obergefell, slip op. at 18 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).
The Court listed four distinct reasons why the fundamental right to marry applies to same-sex couples, citing United States v. Windsor in support throughout its discussion. First, "the right to personal choice regarding marriage is inherent in the concept of individual autonomy."Obergefell, slip op. at 12. Second, "the right to marry is fundamental because it supports a two-person union unlike any other in its importance to the committed individuals," a principle applying equally to same-sex couples.Obergefell, slip op. at 13. Third, the fundamental right to marry "safeguards children and families and thus draws meaning from related rights of childrearing, procreation, and education"; as same-sex couples have children and families, they are deserving of this safeguard—though the right to marry in the United States has never been conditioned on procreation.Obergefell, slip op. at 14–16. Fourth, and lastly, "marriage is a keystone of our social order," and "[t]here is no difference between same- and opposite-sex couples with respect to this principle"; consequently, preventing same-sex couples from marrying puts them at odds with society, denies them countless benefits of marriage, and introduces instability into their relationships for no justifiable reason.Obergefell, slip op. at 16–17.
The Court noted the relationship between the liberty of the Due Process Clause and the equality of the Equal Protection Clause and determined that same-sex marriage bans violated the latter.Obergefell, slip op. at 19–22. Concluding that the liberty and equality of same-sex couples was significantly burdened, the Court struck down same-sex marriage bans for violating both clauses, holding that same-sex couples may exercise the fundamental right to marry in all fifty states "on the same terms and conditions as opposite-sex couples."Obergefell, slip op. at 22–23.
Due to the "substantial and continuing harm" and the "instability and uncertainty" caused by state marriage laws differing with regard to same-sex couples, and because respondent states had conceded that a ruling requiring them to marry same-sex couples would undermine their refusal to hold valid same-sex marriages performed in other states, the Court also held that states must recognize same-sex marriages legally performed in other states.Obergefell, slip op. at 27–28.
Addressing respondent states' argument, the Court emphasized that, while the democratic process may be an appropriate means for deciding issues such as same-sex marriage, no individual has to rely solely on the democratic process to exercise a fundamental right.Obergefell, slip op. at 23–26. "An individual can invoke a right to constitutional protection when he or she is harmed, even if the broader public disagrees and even if the legislature refuses to act," for "fundamental rights may not be submitted to a vote; they depend on the outcome of no elections."Obergefell, slip op. at 24 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Furthermore, to rule against same-sex couples in this case, letting the democratic process play out as "a cautious approach to recognizing and protecting fundamental rights" would harm same-sex couples in the interim.Obergefell, slip op. at 25–26. The Court invoked Bowers v. Hardwick as an exemplum of this principle.
Additionally, the Court rejected the notion that allowing same-sex couples to marry harms the institution of marriage, leading to fewer opposite-sex marriages through a severing of the link between procreation and marriage, calling the notion "counterintuitive" and "unrealistic".Obergefell, slip op. at 26. Instead, the Court stated that married same-sex couples "would pose no risk of harm to themselves or third parties".Obergefell, slip op. at 27. The majority also stressed that the First Amendment protects those who disagree with same-sex marriage.
In closing, Justice Kennedy wrote for the Court:
Dissenting opinions
Chief Justice Roberts
thumb|right|upright|In his dissent, Chief Justice John Roberts argued same-sex marriage bans did not violate the Constitution.
Chief Justice John Roberts wrote a dissenting opinion, which was joined by Justices Scalia and Thomas. Roberts accepted substantive due process, by which fundamental rights are protected through the Due Process Clause, but warned it has been misused over time to expand perceived fundamental rights, particularly in Dred Scott v. Sandford and Lochner v. New York.Obergefell v. Hodges, No. 14-556, slip op. at 10–15 (U.S. June 26, 2015) (Roberts, C.J., dissenting). Roberts stated that no prior decision had changed the core component of marriage, that it be between one man and one woman; consequently, same-sex marriage bans did not violate the Due Process Clause.Obergefell, slip op. at 15–17 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting). Roberts also rejected the notion that same-sex marriage bans violated a right to privacy, because they involved no government intrusion or subsequent punishment.Obergefell, slip op. at 17–18 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting). Addressing the Equal Protection Clause, Roberts stated that same-sex marriage bans did not violate the clause because they were rationally related to a governmental interest: preserving the traditional definition of marriage.Obergefell, slip op. at 24 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting).
More generally, Roberts stated that marriage, which he proposed had always had a "universal definition" as "the union of a man and a woman", arose to ensure successful childrearing.Obergefell, slip op. at 4–5 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting). Roberts criticized the majority opinion for relying on moral convictions rather than a constitutional basis, and for expanding fundamental rights without caution or regard for history.Obergefell, slip op. at 19–20 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting). He also suggested the majority opinion could be used to expand marriage to include legalized polygamy.Obergefell, slip op. at 20–21 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting). Roberts chided the majority for overriding the democratic process and for using the judiciary in a way that was not originally intended.Obergefell, slip op. at 24–26 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting). According to Roberts, supporters of same-sex marriage cannot win "true acceptance" for their side because the debate has now been closed.Obergefell, slip op. at 26–27 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting). Roberts also suggested the majority's opinion will ultimately lead to consequences for religious liberty, and he found the Court's language unfairly attacks opponents of same-sex marriage.Obergefell, slip op. at 27–29 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting).
Justice Scalia
Justice Antonin Scalia wrote a dissenting opinion, which was joined by Justice Thomas. Scalia stated that the Court's decision effectively robs the people of "the freedom to govern themselves", noting that a rigorous debate on same-sex marriage had been taking place and that, by deciding the issue nationwide, the democratic process had been unduly halted.Obergefell v. Hodges, No. 14-556, slip op. at 2 (U.S. June 26, 2015) (Scalia, J., dissenting). Addressing the claimed Fourteenth Amendment violation, Scalia asserted that, because a same-sex marriage ban would not have been considered unconstitutional at the time of the Fourteenth Amendment's adoption, such bans are not unconstitutional today.Obergefell, slip op. at 4 (Scalia, J., dissenting). He claimed there was "no basis" for the Court's decision striking down legislation that the Fourteenth Amendment does not expressly forbid, and directly attacked the majority opinion for "lacking even a thin veneer of law". Lastly, Scalia faulted the actual writing in the opinion for "diminish[ing] this Court's reputation for clear thinking and sober analysis" and for "descend[ing] from the disciplined legal reasoning of John Marshall and Joseph Story to the mystical aphorisms of the fortune cookie."Obergefell, slip op. at 9, 8 n.22 (Scalia, J., dissenting).
Justice Thomas
thumb|upright|right|Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissent rejecting substantive due process.
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion, which was joined by Justice Scalia. Thomas rejected the principle of substantive due process, which he claimed "invites judges to do exactly what the majority has done here—roa[m] at large in the constitutional field guided only by their personal views as to the fundamental rights protected by that document"; in doing so, the judiciary strays from the Constitution's text, subverts the democratic process, and "exalts judges at the expense of the People from whom they derive their authority."Obergefell v. Hodges, No. 14-556, slip op. at 2–3 (U.S. June 26, 2015) (Thomas, J., dissenting) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). Thomas argued that the only liberty that falls under Due Process Clause protection is freedom from "physical restraint".Obergefell, slip op. at 6–7 (Thomas, J., dissenting). Furthermore, Thomas insisted that "liberty has long been understood as individual freedom from governmental action, not as a right to a particular governmental entitlement" such as a marriage license.Obergefell, slip op. at 7 (Thomas, J., dissenting). According to Thomas, the majority's holding also undermines the political process and threatens religious liberty.Obergefell, slip op. at 13–14, 14–16 (Thomas, J., dissenting). Lastly, Thomas took issue with the majority's view that marriage advances the dignity of same-sex couples. In his view, government is not capable of bestowing dignity; rather, dignity is a natural right that is innate within every person, a right that cannot be taken away even through slavery and internment camps.Obergefell, slip op. at 16–17 (Thomas, J., dissenting).
Justice Alito
Justice Samuel Alito wrote a dissenting opinion, which was joined by Justices Scalia and Thomas. Invoking Glucksberg, in which the Court stated the Due Process Clause protects only rights and liberties that are "deeply rooted in this Nation's history and tradition", Alito claimed any "right" to same-sex marriage would not meet this definition; he chided the justices in the majority for going against judicial precedent and long-held tradition.Obergefell v. Hodges, No. 14-556, slip op. at 2–3 (U.S. June 26, 2015) (Alito, J., dissenting) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Alito defended the rationale of the states, accepting the premise that same-sex marriage bans serve to promote procreation and the optimal childrearing environment.Obergefell, slip op. at 3–6 (Alito, J., dissenting). Alito expressed concern that the majority's opinion would be used to attack the beliefs of those who disagree with same-sex marriage, who "will risk being labeled as bigots and treated as such by governments, employers, and schools", leading to "bitter and lasting wounds".Obergefell, slip op. at 6–7 (Alito, J., dissenting). Expressing concern for judicial abuse, Alito concluded, "Most Americans—understandably—will cheer or lament today's decision because of their views on the issue of same-sex marriage. But all Americans, whatever their thinking on that issue, should worry about what the majority's claim of power portends."Obergefell, slip op. at 8 (Alito, J., dissenting).
 Effects 
Initial reactions
Support
thumb|The White House illuminated in rainbow colors, which appear on the LGBTQ+ pride flag, on the evening of the ruling
James Obergefell, the named plaintiff in Obergefell who sought to put his name on his husband's Ohio death certificate as surviving spouse, said, "Today's ruling from the Supreme Court affirms what millions across the country already know to be true in our hearts: that our love is equal." He expressed his hope that the term gay marriage soon will be a thing of the past and henceforth only be known as marriage. President Barack Obama praised the decision and called it a "victory for America".
thumb|left|Plaintiffs Jimmy Meade (left) and Luke Barlowe (right) celebrate at Lexington Pride Festival, Lexington, Kentucky, on the day after the Obergefell ruling.
Hundreds of companies reacted positively to the Supreme Court decision by temporarily modifying their company logos on social media to include rainbows or other messages of support for the legalization of same-sex marriage. Jubilant supporters went to social media, public rallies, and Pride parades to celebrate the ruling. Media commentators highlighted the above-quoted passage from Kennedy's decision as a key statement countering many of the arguments put forth by same-sex marriage opponents and mirroring similar language in the 1967 decision in Loving v. Virginia, which abolished bans on inter-racial marriages, and the 1965 decision in Griswold v. Connecticut, which affirmed married couples have a right of privacy. The paragraph was frequently repeated on social media after the ruling was reported.
In 2015, due to the ruling, Justice Anthony Kennedy and the other justices of the Supreme Court were chosen as The Advocate'''s People of the Year.
Opposition
Conversely, Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton called the Court's decision a "lawless ruling" and pledged free legal defense of state workers who refuse to marry couples on religious grounds. In a tweet, former Governor of Arkansas and then Republican candidate for the 2016 presidential election  Mike Huckabee wrote, "This flawed, failed decision is an out-of-control act of unconstitutional judicial tyranny." Austin R. Nimocks, senior counsel for the Alliance Defending Freedom, a group that opposes same-sex marriage, accused the Court's majority of undermining freedom of speech, saying that "five lawyers took away the voices of more than 300 million Americans to continue to debate the most important social institution in the history of the world. . . . Nobody has the right to say that a mom or a woman or a dad or a man is irrelevant." Some, such as the National Catholic Register and Christianity Today, raised concerns that there may be conflict between the ruling and religious liberty, echoing the arguments made by the dissenting justices.
On May 4, 2017, Republican Governor of Tennessee Bill Haslam signed HB 1111/SB 1085 into law. The bill was seen by the Human Rights Campaign as an attempt to challenge Obergefell v. Hodges.
Compliance
Though the U.S. Supreme Court legalized same-sex marriage throughout the country in June 2015, there have been numerous counties refusing to issue marriage licenses to otherwise eligible same-sex couples in the states of Alabama, Texas, and Kentucky. Additionally, the overall status of same sex-marriage in the territory of American Samoa remains uncertain.
 Alabama 
180px|thumb|Alabama counties issuing marriage licenses to all couples (blue) and counties issuing licenses to no one (purple) prior to August 29, 2019|alt=Map of Alabama divided by county with Autauga, Clarke, Cleburne, Covington, Elmore, Geneva, Pike, and Washington Counties highlighted.
After the ruling in Obergefell, by September 4, 2015, officials in eleven Alabama counties stopped issuing all marriage licenses: Autauga, Bibb, Chambers, Choctaw, Clarke, Cleburne, Covington, Elmore, Geneva, Pike, and Washington. 
On January 6, 2016, Alabama's Chief Justice, Roy Moore, issued a ruling forbidding state officials from issuing marriage licenses to same-sex couples; he faced ethics charges for this decree in May of that year and was subsequently suspended for the remainder of his term beginning that September. Following Moore's ruling, the previously listed counties continued to refuse to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples, while Elmore and Marengo Counties joined in their refusal.
Chambers County began issuing marriage licences again in June 2016, and so by June 26, 2016, twelve counties were refusing to issue any marriage licenses: Autauga, Bibb, Choctaw, Clarke, Cleburne, Coosa, Covington, Elmore, Geneva, Marengo, Pike and Washington. By October 2016, Bibb, Coosa, and Marengo Counties had begun issuing licenses again, and by June 2017 so had Choctaw County. Until June 2019, eight counties still refused to issue marriage licences to any couple: Autauga, Clarke, Cleburne, Covington, Elmore, Geneva, Pike and Washington.
At that time, the Alabama Legislature passed a bill that would change state law to replace marriage licences, which were applications put before a probate court, with marriage certificates, which are given to couples that file the required notarized forms. The bill was signed into law in May 2019 by Alabama Governor Kay Ivey, and it went into effect on August 29, 2019; all eight remaining holdout counties were required to begin issuing marriage certificates, and every county in Alabama is currently issuing marriage certificates to all couples, including otherwise eligible same-sex couples.
 Texas 
After the ruling in Obergefell, six Texas counties initially refused to issue same-sex marriage licenses: Hood, Irion, Loving, Mills, Swisher, and Throckmorton. Swisher and Throckmorton Counties began issuing marriage licenses by August 2015, and Loving and Mills Counties followed suit by September 2015. After September 4, 2015, Irion County was the only county that refused to issue marriage licenses, with the county clerk citing grounds of personal religious beliefs. However, as a result of the November 2020 elections, there is a new office holder for the position of Irion County Clerk, the new county clerk has said she will issue same-sex couples marriage licenses.
 Kentucky 
Three Kentucky counties were not confirmed to be issuing or refused to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples: Whitley, Casey, and Rowan. Kim Davis, clerk of Rowan County, cited religious exemptions based on the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and Section Five of the Kentucky Constitution in her non-issuance of same-sex marriage licenses. In an attempt to mitigate the issue, Kentucky Governor Matt Bevin signed SB-216 into law on April 13, 2016, which replaced the previously separate marriage license forms for opposite-sex and same-sex couples with one form that has an option for gender neutral language. On June 22, 2016, the director of the Kentucky Fairness Campaign, Chris Hartmann, stated that "there are no counties where marriage licenses are being denied" in Kentucky.
 U.S. territories 
Guam had been issuing marriage licenses to same-sex couples prior to Obergefell; the territory was already fully compliant with the ruling.
The governor of Puerto Rico announced on June 26, 2015, that the territory would comply with the ruling in Obergefell and same-sex marriage would begin in Puerto Rico within fifteen days. Although same-sex couples began marrying in the territory on July 17, the court battle would continue until April 11, 2016.Conde-Vidal v. García-Padilla, No. 14-1253 (D.P.R. Apr. 11, 2016).
On June 29 and June 30, 2015, the governors of the Northern Mariana Islands and the U.S. Virgin Islands, respectively, announced that their territories would comply with Obergefell.
However, it is unclear whether and how Obergefell applies to American Samoa, because residents born in the territory are U.S. nationals, rather than U.S. citizens as in the other four populated U.S territories. On July 9, 2015, then-attorney general for American Samoa, Talauega Eleasalo Ale, stated that his office was "still reviewing the decision to determine its [Obergefell's] applicability to American Samoa." Further, the district court judge for American Samoa, Fiti Alexander Sunia, stated in his January 2016 Senate confirmation hearing that he "will not perform weddings for same-sex couples unless local laws are changed." The legality of these statements by former and current territorial government officials remains to be addressed due to lack of litigation, making the legal status of same-sex marriage in American Samoa somewhat uncertain. In 2022, the Respect for Marriage Act established by federal law that all territories, including American Samoa, must recognize same-sex marriages performed in other states; however, this does not change anything for marriages performed in American Samoa, the status of which remains uncertain.
Indian reservations
The Court's decision did not legalize same-sex marriage on Indian reservations. In the U.S., the Congress, not the federal courts, has legal authority over tribal reservations. Thus, unless Congress passes a law regarding same-sex marriage that is applicable to tribal governments, federally recognized American Indian tribes have the legal right to form their own marriage laws, and to reject those of the U.S. As such, the individual laws of the various federally recognized Native American tribes can set limits on same-sex marriage under their jurisdictions. At least twelve reservations specifically prohibit same-sex marriage and do not recognize same-sex marriages performed in other jurisdictions, and two others may ban it; these reservations remain the only parts of the Contiguous United States to enforce explicit bans on same-sex couples marrying.
 Subsequent cases 
 Pavan v. Smith 
In Pavan v. Smith, the Supreme Court reaffirmed Obergefell and ruled that states may not treat married same-sex couples differently from married opposite-sex couples in issuing birth certificates. In Obergefell, birth certificates were listed among the "governmental rights, benefits, and responsibilities" that typically accompany marriage. Quoting Obergefell, the Court reaffirmed that "the Constitution entitles same-sex couples to civil marriage 'on the same terms and conditions as opposite-sex couples'."Pavan v. Smith, No. 16–992, slip op. at 1 (U.S. June 26, 2017) (citation omitted).
 Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization 
In Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization, the majority opinion overruled Roe v. Wade, and held that the right to privacy does not extend to that of abortion on the criteria from Washington v. Glucksberg that a right must be "deeply rooted in the Nation's history", and abortion was considered a crime, a view that some historians argued is incomplete. For the majority, Justice Samuel Alito responded to the dissenting's concerns, saying that the ruling would not affect other substantive due process cases. In his concurring opinion, Justice Clarence Thomas, a dissenter in Obergefell, urged the court to revisit this case, since Dobbs overruled the fundamental right to privacy as unenumerated right implied in Roe and cast doubt over substantive due process. The dissenting opinion, which criticized the majority for rejecting stare decisis and overruling precedents dating back to Griswold v. Connecticut, responded, "Either the majority does not really believe in its own reasoning. Or if it does, all rights that have no history stretching back to the mid-19th century are insecure. Either the mass of the majority's opinion is hypocrisy, or additional constitutional rights are under threat. It is one or the other."Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization, No. 19–1392, slip op. at 5 (U.S. June 24, 2022) (Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan, JJ., dissenting). Concerns over Thomas’ opinion prompted Congress to pass the Respect for Marriage Act, signed into law by President Joe Biden on December 13, 2022. The federal statute aims to mitigate the potential harm to same-sex and interracial couples should Obergefell and Loving be overturned.
 See also 
 List of LGBT-related cases in the United States Supreme Court
 Goodridge v. Department of Public Health (2003), the court case that legalized same-sex marriage in Massachusetts (first state to do so  in the U.S.)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 576
 Public opinion of same-sex marriage in the United States
 Respect for Marriage Act (2022), which formally codified the requirement that individual states (and the federal government) must recognize another state's legal marriage
 Timeline of same-sex marriage in the United States
References
Notes
Further reading
 Cathcart, Kevin M., and Leslie J. Gabel-Brett, eds. Love Unites Us: Winning the Freedom to Marry in America. New York: New Press, 2016. .
 Cenziper, Debbie, and Jim Obergefell. Love Wins: The Lovers and Lawyers Who Fought the Landmark Case for Marriage Equality. New York: William Morrow, 2016. .
 Frank, Nathaniel. Awakening: How Gays and Lesbians Brought Marriage Equality to America. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2017. .
 Leslie, Christopher R. "Dissenting from History: The False Narratives of the Obergefell Dissents." Indiana Law Journal 92, no. 3 (2017): 1007–57.
 Tribe, Laurence H. "Equal Dignity: Speaking Its Name." Harvard Law Review Forum 129, no. 1 (2015): 16–32.
 Yoshino, Kenji. "A New Birth of Freedom?:  Obergefell v. Hodges." Harvard Law Review 129, no. 1 (2015): 147–79.
External links
 U.S. Supreme Court opinion in Obergefell v. Hodges (June 26, 2015)
 U.S. Supreme Court official docket entry for Obergefell v. Hodges SCOTUSblog official docket entry for Obergefell v. Hodges U.S. Supreme Court oral arguments in Obergefell v. Hodges (April 28, 2015): Question 1 (audio and transcript) 
 U.S. Supreme Court oral arguments in Obergefell v. Hodges (April 28, 2015): Question 2 (audio and transcript)
 U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit opinion in Obergefell v. Hodges, then known as DeBoer v. Snyder, No. 14-1341 (6th Cir. Nov. 6, 2014)
 U.S. District Courts: Most relevant actions (dates refer to indicated actions)
 Final Order Granting Plaintiffs' Motion for Declaratory Judgment and Permanent Injunction in Obergefell v. Wymyslo, No. 1:13-cv-501 (S.D. Ohio Dec. 23, 2013)
 Memorandum Opinion in Bourke v. Beshear, No. 3:13-CV-750-H (W.D. Ky. Feb. 12, 2014) 
 Memorandum in Tanco v. Haslam, No. 3:13-cv-01159 (M.D. Tenn. Mar. 14, 2014) 
 Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law in DeBoer v. Snyder, No. 12-CV-10285 (E.D. Mich. Mar. 21, 2014)
 Order Granting Plaintiffs' Motion for Declaratory Judgment and Permanent Injunction in Henry v. Himes, No. 1:14-cv-129 (S.D. Ohio Apr. 14, 2014)
 Memorandum Opinion and Order in Love v. Beshear, No. 3:13-CV-750-H (W.D. Ky. July 1, 2014)
 Plaintiff pictures:
  Feature provides images of all plaintiffs, except John Arthur, Adoption S.T.A.R., Joy Espejo, Matthew Mansell, Kellie Miller, and Vanessa DeVillez. See, also, reference 45.
  Article provides pics of James Obergefell and husband John Arthur. See, also, references 14 and 15.
  Article provides pics of Joy Espejo, Matthew Mansell, Kellie Miller, and Vanessa DeVillez.
 Plaintiff Adoption S.T.A.R.'s homepage
  Includes reactions to multiple Supreme Court cases, including Obergefell''.
Category:2010s in LGBT history
Category:2014 in Ohio
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:2015 in LGBT history
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Discrimination against LGBT people in the United States
Category:LGBT in Ohio
Category:Ohio law
Category:Same-sex marriage law in the United States
Category:United States due process case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States LGBT rights case law
Category:United States same-sex union case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Ocasio v. United States" ==> """
Ocasio v. United States, 578 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court clarified whether the Hobbs Act's definition of conspiracy to commit extortion only includes attempts to acquire property from someone who is not a member of the conspiracy., slip op. at 1, 5, 18 (2016). The case arose when Samuel Ocasio, a former Baltimore, Maryland police officer, was indicted for participating in a kickback scheme with an automobile repair shop where officers would refer drivers of damaged vehicles to the shop in exchange for cash payments.Ocasio, slip op. at 2. Ocasio argued that he should not be found guilty of conspiring to commit extortion because the only property that was exchanged in the scheme was transferred from one member of the conspiracy to another, and an individual cannot be found guilty of conspiring to extort a co-conspirator.Ocasio, slip op. at 3. 11–14.
Writing for a majority of the Court, Justice Samuel Alito held that a conspiracy to violate the Hobbs Act can occur when an individual obtains property from another conspirator under the pretense that they have an official right to take that property.Ocasio, slip op. at 1, 18. Justice Stephen Breyer wrote a separate concurring opinion in which he suggested that the Court may need to revisit prior cases that have held that "extortion" is roughly equivalent to "bribery".Ocasio, slip op. at 1–2 (Breyer, J., concurring) (noting that he ""join[ed] the majority’s opinion in full."). Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion in which he also argued that the Court should overturn a line of cases that has conflated the definition of extortion with bribery, and he also argued that the majority's opinion was inconsistent with principles of federalism.Ocasio, slip op. at 1, 3–6 (Thomas, J., dissenting). Justice Sonia Sotomayor also wrote a dissenting opinion in which she argued that the majority's opinion was inconsistent with the plain language of the Hobbs Act as well as the Court's prior conspiracy law jurisprudence.Ocasio, slip op. at 1, 11 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting). Although some commentators have stated that the case is consistent with precedent,See, e.g., Randall Eliason, Response, The Contortionist Extortionist: Response to United States v. Ocasio,  (May 10, 2016). at least one commentator has suggested that the case will "raise more questions than answers."Rory Little, Opinion analysis: Federal conspiracy law reaches persons who agree to obtain secret kickbacks from a member of the conspiracy,  (May 2, 2016) (internal quotations omitted).
Background
Between 2008 and 2011, at least 60 Baltimore, Maryland police officers engaged in a kickback scheme with an automobile repair shop.Ocasio, slip op. at 1–2. When these officers responded to traffic accidents, they would refer motorists to the repair shop in exchange for payments of $150 to $300 for every referral. Samuel Ocasio was a former Baltimore police officer who participated in this scheme between 2009 and 2011. He was charged under the Hobbs Act. for extorting money from the automobile repair shop. Before his trial began, Ocasio sought a jury instruction that would have required the jury to find, as a prerequisite for convicting him for conspiracy to commit extortion, that "the government must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the conspiracy was to obtain money or property from some person who was not a member of the conspiracy".Ocasio, slip op. at 3 (internal quotations omitted) (noting that Ocasio based his request on the Sixth Circuit's ruling in United States v. Brock, 501 F.3d 762 (6th Cir. 2007)). The United States District Court for the District of Maryland ultimately refused to provide Ocasio's proposed instruction and Ocasio was found guilty on one count of conspiracy and three counts of extortion.Ocasio, slip op. at 4 (noting that "[t]he District Court denied [Ocasio's] motions, concluding that the Fourth Circuit had already rejected Brock’s holding in United States v. Spitler, 800 F.2d 1267 (4th Cir. 1986)). On appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, Ocasio argued that "his conspiracy conviction was fatally flawed because the conspirators had not agreed to obtain money from a person who was not a member of the conspiracy", but the Fourth Circuit affirmed his conviction.Ocasio, slip op. at 4 (citing United States v. Ocasio, 750 F.3d 399 (4th Cir. 2014)). Ocasio appealed again, and on March 2, 2015, the Supreme Court of the United States granted certiorari.Ocasio v. United States, 574 U.S. ___ (2015) (granting certiorari).
Opinion of the Court
thumb|right|upright=1.0|In his majority opinion, Justice Samuel Alito (pictured) held that it was sufficient for the government to demonstrate that at least one member of the conspiracy intended to commit extortion.Ocasio, slip op. at 10.
Writing for a majority of the Court, Justice Samuel Alito held that to be found guilty of conspiracy, a "defendant must merely reach an agreement with the 'specific intent that the underlying crime be committed''' by some member of the conspiracy".Ocasio, slip op. at 5 (quoting 2 K. O’Malley, J. Grenig, & W. Lee,  §31:03, p. 225 (6th ed. 2008)) (emphasis in original). He concluded that it was sufficient for the government to demonstrate that each conspirator "specifically intended that some conspirator commit each element of the substantive offense".Ocasio, slip op. at 10 (emphasis in original). Additionally, Justice Alito rejected Ocasio's argument that the conspiracy conviction should be reversed because Ocasio and the auto shop were simply exchanging "their own" money; instead, Justice Alito held that the convictions were justified because other Baltimore police officers were involved in the underlying substantive violations.Ocasio, slip op. at 11–14. 
Justice Alito also rejected Ocasio's argument that the Court's "interpretation makes the Hobbs Act sweep too broadly, creating a national antibribery law and displacing a carefully crafted network of state and federal statutes".Ocasio, slip op. at 14–16. In Evans v. United States,Evans v. United States, . the Court had explained that an act of extortion under the Hobbs act was the "rough equivalent" of bribery.Ocasio, slip op. at 14. Because Ocasio did not ask the court to overrule Evans and because the Court had "no occasion to do so" sua sponte, Justice Alito held that "we have no principled basis for precluding the prosecution of conspiracies to commit" extortion under the Hobbs act. Justice Alito also rejected the argument that the Court's ruling would "transform every bribe of a public official into a conspiracy to commit extortion" because "[i]n cases where the bribe payor is merely complying with an official demand, the payor lacks the mens rea necessary for a conspiracy".Ocasio, slip op. at 16. Consequently, because Ocasio entered into an agreement to extort money "under color of official right", the Court affirmed Ocasio's conviction.Ocasio, slip op. at 18.
Justice Breyer's concurring opinion
Although he "join[ed] the majority’s opinion in full", Justice Stephen Breyer wrote a separate concurring opinion to explain that Evans v. United States "may well have been wrongly decided".Ocasio, slip op. at 1–2 (Breyer, J., concurring). Justice Breyer wrote that "[t]he present case underscores some of the problems that Evans raises", but he ultimately agreed with the majority's conclusion because "we must in this case take Evans as good law".Ocasio, slip op. at 2 (Breyer, J., concurring). However, Justice Breyer argued that "it is an exceptionally difficult question" whether the Hobbs Act's definition of extortion was equivalent to bribery.Ocasio, slip op. at 1 (Breyer, J., concurring).
Justice Thomas' dissenting opinion
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion in which he argued that Ocasio's conviction should be reversed because "an extortionist cannot conspire to commit extortion with the person whom he is extorting".Ocasio, slip op. at 6 (Thomas, J., dissenting). He stated that the majority opinion "further exposes the flaw in this Court’s understanding of extortion".Ocasio, slip op. at 1 (Thomas, J., dissenting). Justice Thomas argued that this misunderstanding originated in the Court's prior opinion in Evans v. United States, which, according to Justice Thomas, "wrongly equated extortion with bribery". In Evans, Justice Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion in which he argued that under the Hobbs Act, "the only perpetrator is the public official; the payor is a victim and not a participant".Ocasio, slip op. at 3 (Thomas, J., dissenting) (citing Evans, 504 U.S. at 283 (Thomas, J., dissenting). Relying upon this principle, Justice Thomas reiterated that it is not possible for an extortionist and "his payor-victim can be co-conspirators to extortion of the payor".Ocasio, slip op. at 3 (Thomas, J., dissenting). Justice Thomas criticized the majority for taking "another step away from the common-law understanding of extortion that the Hobbs Act adopted", and argued that "[o]nly by blurring the distinction between bribery and extortion could Evans make it seem plausible that an extortionist and a victim can conspire to extort the victim".Ocasio, slip op. at 3–4 (Thomas, J., dissenting).
Justice Thomas also criticized the majority for expanding federal criminal law in a manner that he argued was inconsistent with the principles of [federalism.Ocasio, slip op. at 4–6 (Thomas, J., dissenting). He characterized the Hobbs Act as an example of the "stunning expansion" into the area of anti-corruption laws, which he argued were "traditionally policed by state and local laws".Ocasio, slip op. at 3 (Thomas, J., dissenting) (citing Evans, 504 U.S. at 290 (Thomas, J., dissenting)). Additionally, Justice Thomas stated that the authors of the Hobbs Act did not intend to enable the regulation of state officials by federal prosecutors, and he characterized the expansion of the Hobbs act as an "invasion of state sovereignty".Ocasio, slip op. at 4–5 (Thomas, J., dissenting). He wrote, "as in Evans, the Court reaches its decision with barely a nod to the sovereignty interests that it tramples".Ocasio, slip op. at 5 (Thomas, J., dissenting). For those reasons, Justice Thomas dissented from the Court's majority opinion.
Justice Sotomayor's dissenting opinion
Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote a dissenting opinion in which she was joined by Chief Justice John Roberts.Ocasio, slip op. at 1 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting). She criticized the majority's conclusion as "not a natural or logical way to interpret" the Hobbs Act's definition of extortion, which requires property to be extorted "from another".Ocasio, slip op. at 1 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting) ("If a group of conspirators sets out to extort 'another' person, we ordinarily think that they are proposing to extort money or property from a victim outside their group, not one of themselves."). Citing dictionary definitions of the word "another" and the Court's prior conspiracy law jurisprudence, Justice Sotomayor argued that an individual should only be found guilty of conspiring to commit extortion when they plan to extort an individual who is not a member of the conspiracy.Ocasio, slip op. at 3–6 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting) Likewise, she also distinguished other cases in which criminal defendants were also the "victim[s] of the crime" in those cases.Ocasio, slip op. at 6–11 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting). Justice Sotomayor ultimately concluded her opinion by stating that the majority reached "an unnatural outcome predicated on an unsupported assumption".Ocasio, slip op. at 11 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting).
Commentary and analysis
In his analysis for The George Washington Law Review, Randall Eliason wrote that the Court's decision "doesn’t represent some new watershed in white collar crime or dramatic expansion of federal criminal jurisdiction", but rather, that the Court's ruling was "simply the logical and unfortunate outgrowth of a questionable Supreme Court decision more than three decades old."Randall Eliason, Response, The Contortionist Extortionist: Response to United States v. Ocasio,  (May 10, 2016). Additionally, in his review of the Court's opinion for SCOTUSblog, Rory Little wrote that the majority's opinion "does not seem wrong as a matter of case-specific practical reality" but that the case may "raise more questions than answers for future federal official right extortion prosecutions." Jonathan H. Adler also characterized the Court's ruling as one of several cases released in early 2016, including Luis v. United States and Bank Markazi v. Peterson'', that "produced some particularly interesting divisions among the justices".Jonathan H. Adler, Today’s interesting Supreme Court lineup  (May 2, 2016).
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Hobbs Act case law
"""

From "Octane Fitness, LLC v. ICON Health & Fitness, Inc." ==> """
Octane Fitness, LLC v. ICON Health & Fitness, Inc., 572 U.S. 545 (2014),. is one of two U.S. Supreme Court decisions issued on April 29, 2014 regarding patent lawsuit fee-shifting (the other case being Highmark v. Allcare Health).. The Supreme Court essentially made it easier for courts to make the loser pay for all attorney costs if the lawsuit is regarded as frivolous. In other words, "the Supreme Court's decision grants judges more leeway to crack down on baseless claims." 
The decision is particularly relevant for the so-called patent trolls, which "will have to add a new variable to their calculations before pursuing a marginal lawsuit over their intellectual property: the other side’s legal fees." The decision was unanimous, with the opinion written by Justice Sonia Sotomayor.
Background
In the underlying litigation, ICON Health & Fitness, the world's largest maker of exercise equipment, sued Octane Fitness, a relatively small and specialized maker of elliptical trainers, for patent infringement. Octane Fitness, arguing that their elliptical products did not infringe ICON's patent, won on summary judgment and later moved for reimbursement for their attorney's fees.  The district court denied the motion for attorney's fees, stating that even though Octane Fitness eventually prevailed, ICON's claims were not objectively baseless, but the Supreme Court reversed this decision.
See also
 Fogerty v. Fantasy, Inc. (1994): awarding attorney's fees in a copyright case
 Peter v. NantKwest, Inc. (2019): awarding attorney's fees in a patent case
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 572
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States patent case law
Category:Legal costs
"""

From "Office of Senator Mark Dayton v. Hanson" ==> """
Office of Senator Mark Dayton v. Hanson, 550 U.S. 511 (2007) is a United States Supreme court case in which the court held that it did not have jurisdiction under the Congressional Accountability Act of 1995 to review a wrongful termination suit brought against United States Senator Mark Dayton, where the lower courts did not rule on the constitutionality of the Act. This case was the first Speech or Debate Clause case the Supreme Court took up since 1979.
 Background 
In 2002, Brad Hanson worked as a State Office Manager for Senator Mark Dayton's Fort Snelling, Minnesota office. Due to a heart problem, Hanson took a medical leave of absence. Upon informing his employer of his need for time off, Dayton said "You're done," and to take the leave. Dayton's Washington office later called Dayton and terminated him. Dayton claimed that Hanson was fired with cause because of his "exceptionally poor performance," including sleeping on the job, which Hanson denied.  
Hanson sued under the Congressional Accountability Act of 1995 (CAA) for discrimination based on a perceived disability. The CAA applies 11 labor and employment laws to Congress from which it had previously exempted itself. Hanson said that his termination violated medical and disability laws, including the Americans with Disability Act of 1990 and the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993. Hanson also sued for failure to pay overtime compensation. 
Dayton's office filed a motion to have the case dismissed for lack of jurisdiction, claiming immunity to the suit under the Speech or Debate Clause of the Constitution. The Speech or Debate Clause, grounded in the separation of powers doctrine,  prohibits judicial inquiry into the "legislative acts" of members of Congress. This shields lawmakers from lawsuits stemming from actions taken in the course of their official duties. The definition of "legislative acts" was at issue, particularly whether it includes the employment decisions of a Congressperson's office.
In an unreported decision and without oral argument, the district court denied Dayton's office's motion and held that the Speech or Debate Clause does not bar Hanson's claims. The Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, sitting en banc, affirmed the district court's decision. D.C. Circuit Judge David S. Tatel, in one of three concurring opinions, wrote that the Speech or Debate Clause has “some role to play” in employment cases and that what the Clause precludes should be decided case-by-case.
 Supreme Court 
Dayton's office filed a notice of appeal, arguing that appeal was the proper procedure to ask the Supreme Court to review the case. Alternatively, Dayton's office filed a jurisdictional statement and asked the court to accept the statement as a writ of certiorari. Dayton's office also argued that because Dayton's term of office ended in January 2007, the case was moot.    
Under Jean Manning, the Office of the Senate Chief Counsel for Employment took a hardline stance against Hanson's lawsuit and sought to have it dismissed, arguing that the Speech and Debate Clause "provides absolute immunity" for a senator's personnel actions. Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid and Minority Leader Mitch McConnell disagreed with this position and passed a resolution ordering the Senate Legal Counsel to file an amicus brief in support of Hanson. Representatives Barney Frank and Christopher Shays also disagreed with the lawsuit, saying in a legal brief that Manning's arguments are  "wrong and misunderstand both constitutional doctrine and the CAA."   
The following questions were at issue in the case: 
 Does the Speech or Debate Clause of the U.S. Constitution bar federal court jurisdiction of suits under the Congressional Accountability Act of 1995 by congressional employees whose job duties are part of the due functioning of the legislative process?
 Was the Office of Senator Mark Dayton entitled to appeal the judgment of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit directly to the Supreme Court?
 Was the case rendered moot by the expiration of Senator Dayton's term of office?
The court only answered the second question at issue and did not reach the merits of the case. Justice John Paul Stevens authored the opinion of the 8-0 court, which held that it did not have jurisdiction to hear the case and declined to grant certiorari. The justices held that because the CAA only allows direct appeals to the Supreme Court for rulings on the constitutional validity of the statute, and the lower courts' ruling did not qualify as such, appeal was not authorized.
 Subsequent history 
In February 2009, Hanson and Dayton reached a confidential settlement, one month after Hanson filed to run for governor of Minnesota. In October 2010, Minnesota Republican Party Chairman Tony Sutton and Deputy Chairman Michael Brodkorb called on Dayton to answer questions about the settlement, including whether public money was involved. The Dayton campaign released a statement: "The parties have reached a settlement, the terms of which are confidential. I will reimburse the U.S. Treasury for the full amount of the settlement to relieve taxpayers of any such burden. The terms of this agreement prohibit me from making any further statement regarding this action."
 See also 
 Mark Dayton
 Congressional Accountability Act of 1995
 Speech or Debate Clause
 2006 term opinions of the Supreme Court of the United States
 2006 term United States Supreme Court opinions of John Paul Stevens
 References 
 Sources 
 External links 
 Text of Office of Senator Mark Dayton v. Hanson, 550 U.S. 511 (2007) and other related media is available from: Justia Oyez Supreme Court  Legal Information Institute
Category:21st century in United States case law
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Ogden v. Saunders" ==> """
Ogden v. Saunders, 25 U.S. 213 (1827), was a United States Supreme Court case that determined the scope of a bankruptcy law in relation to a clause of the Constitution of the United States.. It is notable for its era in producing multiple opinions from the justices. Justice William Johnson delivered the majority opinion. Chief Justice John Marshall, Justice Gabriel Duvall, and Justice Joseph Story concurred in part and dissented in part to the Court's judgment, while Justices Bushrod Washington, Smith Thompson, and Robert Trimble dissented.
Parties
Saunders was a citizen of Kentucky demanding payment in accordance with a contract. Ogden was a citizen of Louisiana who lived in New York at the signing of the contract and claimed bankruptcy as a defense under a New York bankruptcy law passed in 1801.
Saunders was represented by Daniel Webster, among others.  Webster argued to the Court that the clause of the Constitution barring states from impairing the obligations of contracts is applicable not just to past contracts, but also to future contracts.  Ogden's attorneys included  Henry Clay.  The case was initially argued in 1824, and then again in 1827.Warren, Charles. History of the Harvard Law School and of Early Legal Conditions in America, Volume I (Lewis Publishing 1908).
Ruling
The main issue of the case was whether or not the New York law violated the Obligation of Contracts Clause of the Constitution. It hinged on whether Congress had exclusive power to pass bankruptcy laws, which itself depended on what was meant by the clause prohibiting states from passing laws impairing the "obligations of contracts".  The court's decision found that the clause prevented states from passing only laws affecting contracts already signed; laws that affected future contracts were construed to become part of the contracts themselves.  Since the statute was part of the conditions of any prospective contract, the parties to the contract were presumed to have considered the law in signing the contract; the obligation, then, incorporated the possibility of bankruptcy rather than being impaired by it. 
John Marshall
Chief Justice John Marshall authored a separate opinion "assenting" to the judgment in part, and dissenting in part. He maintained that the Contract Clause gave the federal legislature the exclusive power over bankruptcy laws, rejecting the argument that state laws became part of contracts signed within the state thereafter. Marshall was joined in his dissent by Associate Justices Gabriel Duvall and Joseph Story.Michaelsen, Scott. "Cooper's Monikins."
Near the end of his opinion the Chief Justice recapitulates what is perhaps the central contention of his opinion:
"contracts derive their obligation from the act of the parties, not from the grant of government".
The Chief Justice in the course of his opinion uses the "will theory of contract".
The fact that the state may define how contracts can be formed, how defaults can be remedied, and even exclude from the outset certain types of contract, usurious ones for example, does not make contract a creature of the state.
The obligation of any particular contract is what the parties determine it to be.
Thus, if Ogden owes Saunders a certain amount in legal tender coin, it is not within the authority of the state, under the US Constitution,
to alter that obligation so that, for example, Ogden may simply hand over his property to Saunders in settlement of the debt.
Marshall took this opportunity to set forth his general principles of constitutional interpretation:.
In his Ogden dissent, Marshall also adopted a definition of the word "law" that would later be denounced by the individualist anarchist Lysander Spooner.Marshall, joined by Associate Justices Gabriel Duvall and Joseph Story, wrote:When its existence as law is denied, that existence cannot be proved by showing what are the qualities of a law.  Law has been defined by a writer, whose definitions especially have been the theme of almost universal panegyric, "To be a rule of civil conduct prescribed by the supreme power in a State."
Ogden v. Saunders, .
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 25
References
External links
Category:1827 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:United States bankruptcy case law
Category:Contract Clause case law
"""

From "Ohio Civil Rights Commission v. Dayton Christian Schools, Inc." ==> """
Ohio Civil Rights Commission v. Dayton Christian Schools, Inc., 477 U.S. 619 (1986), reversed a lower court's decision and stated that the lower court should not have heard the case until after the Ohio Civil Rights Commission had concluded their investigation.. The Commission argued that the non-renewal and firing constituted unlawful sex discrimination, while the school argued that this was an ecclesiastical matter not suitable for review by civil authorities.
Case Facts
thumb|left|150px|Seal of the Ohio Civil Rights Commission
Linda Hoskinson was hired as an elementary school teacher at Dayton Christian Schools during the 1978-1979 school year. Her employment contract required following a "biblical chain of command"From the Supreme Court ruling: As a contractual condition of employment, teachers must agree to present any grievance to their immediate supervisor, and to acquiesce in the final authority of Dayton's board of directors, rather than to pursue a remedy in civil court.From the Appeal Court ruling: The Chain of Command is a biblically based authority structure which depends on the internal peaceful resolution of differences. The Chain of Command concept is related to the concept of giving a good report. Hoskinson's contract included the following provision:The teacher agrees to follow the Biblical pattern of Matthew 18:15-17 and Galatians 6 and always give a good report. All differences are to be resolved by utilizing Biblical principles--always presenting a united front.  in lieu of using the state legal system and a signed statement of faith. In 1979, she became pregnant. After informing the principal, her contract to teach was not renewed as the organization believed that mothers should stay home with their pre-school aged children. When she hired an attorney, she was immediately terminated for failing to follow the internal dispute resolution protocol. She then filed a complaint with the Ohio Civil Rights Commission, claiming that the non-renewal of the contract was sexual discrimination under ORC 4112.02A, and that the termination was in violation of 4112.02I. The commission determined that there was sufficient probable cause to believe that the school had discriminated against Hoskinson based on her sex, and retaliated against her for asserting her rights. The school claimed that the First Amendment prevented the Commission from having jurisdiction, that the civil rights statutes were unconstitutionally overreaching and appealed to the US District Court seeking a permanent injunction against the state.
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act generally permits religious organizations to require membership in their religious group as a bona fide occupational qualifications. Unaddressed was one of the school's claims, that by requiring the school to hire a teacher that disobeyed the church's teachings, they would not be able to demonstrate to students that the church's doctrine was important.
Opinion
Justice Rehnquist, writing for the majority of the Court, found that the District Court erred in hearing the request for an injunction as a federal court should abstain until after the Commission had brought in a finding. The Court of Appeals erred in ruling that the Commission's jurisdiction violated both the Free Exercise and Establishment Clauses of the First Amendment and the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, as instead they should have invoked federal abstention doctrine.
See also
 Geduldig v. Aiello (1974)
 Hosannna-Tabor Lutheran Church & School v. EEOC (2012)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 477
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:1986 in education
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Education in Montgomery County, Ohio
Category:Private schools in Ohio
Category:Legal issues in pregnancy
"""

From "Ohio v. American Express Co." ==> """
Ohio v. American Express Co., 585 U.S. ___ (2018), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding the nature of antitrust law in relationship to two-sided markets. The case specifically involves policies set by some credit card banks that prevented merchants from steering customers to use cards from other issuers with lower transaction fees, forcing merchants to pay higher transaction fees to the banks. While Visa and MasterCard settled with the United States Department of Justice in 2010, American Express defended its practice by arguing that the anti-steering policies benefited its cardholders, the higher transaction fees helping to maintain member services.  While the Department of Justice and several states prevailed during a District Court trial in 2015 citing harm to the merchants, the Appeals Court reversed the District Court's ruling in 2016 by ruling that the plaintiffs had not shown harm to both sides of the two-side market, a novel test in antitrust law. This decision led to some of the states to appeal to the Supreme Court. The case was heard by the Court in February 2018.
The Court issued its decision on June 25, 2018, affirming the Appeals Court's ruling that steering provisions do not violate antitrust laws. With this decision upheld, the two-market test could be applied to other venues, particularly to the high tech sector where two-side markets are common.
Background
Within the United States, credit card transactions are controlled by four main financial institutions: Visa, MasterCard, American Express, and Discover, making it an oligopoly. Credit cards work as a two-sided market, with the institutions providing benefits to consumers (by allowing them to access lines of credit to make instant purchases) and merchants (by providing them the funds for that purchase instantly). The institutions support this by taking a transaction fee off the merchant's funds, with the fee varying between each institution.
Of the four institutions, Discover was the latest offering, created in 1985. To try to compete with the other three institutions on the market, Discover developed a low-cost transaction fee model compared to the other three institutions, which gave incentive for merchants to steer customers towards using Discover cards. To counter this, Visa, MasterCard, and American Express all developed anti-steering contractual language to merchants that prevented them from steering customers into using other cards; this included informing their customers of the different fees and offering discounts and other incentives by using other cards. This also affected the promotion of other cards offered within the institution's network, such as using debit cards with lower fees compared to credit cards.
District Court
In October 2010, the United States Department of Justice (DOJ), after receiving numerous complaints that the anti-steering language violating antitrust laws and following two years of investigation, filed a civil antitrust lawsuit against Visa, MasterCard, and American Express in United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York. The DOJ asserted that with  in transaction fees each year, the practices of these three institutions prevented merchants from reducing their own costs of business, and requiring them to raise prices to consumers. The DOJ's suit was joined by the states of Connecticut, Iowa, Maryland, Michigan, Missouri, Ohio and Texas. Visa and MasterCard immediately settled with the DOJ without any fines, agreeing to remove the anti-steering language imposed on merchants. However, American Express defended its practice, and continued to fight the lawsuit. During the pre-trial period, additional states also joined the other plaintiffs, including Arizona, Idaho, Illinois, New Hampshire, Montana, Nebraska, Rhode Island, Tennessee, Vermont, and Utah; Hawaii had also joined but later dismissed its claims before the trial.
In February 2015, following a seven-week trial hearing, the District Court ruled in favor of the DOJ and states, finding that American Express's anti-steering terms violated antitrust laws.  Judge Nicholas Garaufis wrote that the language was "an unlawful restraint on trade" and considered the language to violate Section 1 of the Sherman Antitrust Act. American Express asserted that it would appeal the decision. Garaufis issued a permanent injunction on American Express from enforcing its anti-steering language in April 2015.
Appeals Court
American Express's appeal was heard in the 2nd Circuit Appeals Court in December 2015. After the oral testimony, the Appeals Court lifted the injunction placed by Judge Garaufis. The full ruling of the Appeals Court in September 2016 reversed the lower court ruling; the Appeals Court argued that the plaintiffs had not shown harm that American Express's anti-steering had to merchants or consumers, and that the government would have been required to show how higher prices to merchants set by the transaction fees would harm consumer or not benefit them. The Appeals Court also argued that merchants overburdened by high transaction fees could simply cease accepting that card. This decision was considered to have created a new type of rule that could make it difficult to seek antitrust litigation; with credit cards being a two-sided market serving two distinct sets of customers, a successful antitrust argument would have to show how both sides of the market were harmed.
The DOJ petitioned the Appeals Court to reconsider the case at an en banc hearing, believing that their decision looked at both merchants and consumers, instead of focusing only on the impact to merchants alone, and that the onus should be for American Express to show how its anti-steering clauses would promote competition. The Appeals Court refused to reconsider its decision by January 2017.
Supreme Court
While the Department of Justice and other states dropped the suit, eleven states continued to appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States and filed petition to hear the case in June 2017; Ohio (leading the petition for appeal), Connecticut, Idaho, Illinois, Iowa, Maryland, Michigan, Montana, Rhode Island, Utah and Vermont. The States' appeal raised questions of the Second Circuit's decision in conflict with past case law, and that Supreme Court guidance was needed on how antitrust measures should be applied a two-sided market, which was becoming a significant portion of the national economy. The Supreme Court accepted the case in October 2017.
Oral arguments were heard on February 26, 2018; court observers reported that both sides were equally asked tough questions, and it was difficult to determine which direction the Court would take. Questions asked in the oral session were principally from Justices Sonia Sotomayor and Neil Gorsuch.
The Court issued its 5–4 decision on June 25, 2018, affirming the Appeals Court's ruling, and that the American Express steering provisions did not violate antitrust law. The majority opinion, written by Justice Clarence Thomas and joined by Justices Roberts, Kennedy, Alito, and Gorsuch, found that the petitioners had not shown any harm of the steering provisions that otherwise would not have occurred if no steering provisions were in place, nor have the provisions stifled competition in the market. Justice Stephen Breyer wrote the dissenting opinion, joined by Justices Ginsburg, Sotomayor, and Kagan, taking issue with how the rule of reason had been applied for this case throughout its judicial history.
References
External links
Category:Anti-competitive practices
Category:Credit cards in the United States
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:American Express
"""

From "Ohio v. Clark" ==> """
Ohio v. Clark, 576 U.S. 237 (2015), is United States Supreme Court case opinion that narrowed the standard set in Crawford v. Washington for determining whether hearsay statements in criminal cases are permitted under the Confrontation Clause of the Sixth Amendment. The United States Supreme Court unanimously reversed the Supreme Court of Ohio on June 18, 2015. The Court held that the out-of-court statements were admissible because the primary purpose was not to create evidence. Citing a prior related case, Michigan v. Bryant, the Court formulated this test as one asking "whether a statement was given with the 'primary purpose of creating an out-of-court substitute for trial testimony.'"
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 576
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Confrontation Clause case law
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Ohio v. Roberts" ==> """
Ohio v. Roberts, 448 U.S. 56 (1980), is a United States Supreme Court decision dealing with the Confrontation Clause of the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
 Factual background 
Herschel Roberts was charged with forgery of a check and with possession of stolen credit cards. At the preliminary hearing, defense counsel called the victims' daughter to the stand and tried to elicit from her an admission that she provided the defendant with the checks and the credit card but failed to inform the defendant that she did not have permission to use them. Counsel was unable to elicit this admission nor did the prosecutor cross-examine the witness.
The daughter was subpoenaed five times but never appeared for trial. At trial, the defendant testified that the daughter had given him her parents' checkbook and credit cards with the understanding he could use them. The State, on rebuttal, offered the transcript of the daughter's testimony pursuant to Ohio Rev. Code Ann. Section 2945.49 (1975) which permits the use of preliminary examination testimony of a witness who “cannot for any reason be produced at trial.” The defense objected asserting that use of the transcript violated the Confrontation Clause of the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution (incorporated to the States under the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution). The trial court admitted the transcript and the defendant was convicted. The Supreme Court of Ohio overturned the conviction. That court held that the daughter's absence at trial and the lack of cross-examination at the preliminary hearing violated the Confrontation Clause.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court held that the daughter's statement did not violate the Confrontation Clause. They reasoned that out-of-court statements can be admissible if they bear an adequate “indicia of reliability,” even if the declarant is not available to testify in court. They found that one could infer reliability in cases where the evidences falls “within a firmly rooted hearsay exception,” but even in other cases, if “particularized guarantees of trustworthiness” can be shown, the evidence would be admitted.
Subsequent history
Ohio v. Roberts is no longer controlling authority. The Supreme Court later ruled, in Crawford v. Washington, that because the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution specifies the right to confrontation, an “indicia of reliability” was not an adequate substitute for cross-examination. But the Court's recent decision in Michigan v. Bryant may signal a "resurrection" of Roberts, as the Court  based its decision on reliability of the out-of-court statement, rather than on the Defendant's opportunity to confront the witness bearing testimony against him.
See also
California v. Green, , established the concept of the indicia of reliability.
Mancusi v. Stubbs,  
Crawford v. Washington, , a later case which reiterated some and rejected other findings of the Court.
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 448
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:1980 in United States case law
Category:Confrontation Clause case law
"""

From "Ohio v. Robinette" ==> """
Ohio v. Robinette, 519 U.S. 33 (1996), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the Fourth Amendment does not require police officers to inform a motorist at the end of a traffic stop that they are free to go before seeking permission to search the motorist's car.
 Background 
While driving on a stretch of Interstate 70 north of Dayton, Ohio, Robert Robinette was stopped for speeding.  After verifying that Robinette had no prior violations, the officer asked Robinette to step out of his car before issuing him a verbal warning.  The officer handed over Robinette's driver's license, and then asked him if he had any drugs or weapons in his car.  Robinette said he did not.  The officer asked Robinette if he could search the car, and Robinette agreed.  The officer found a small amount of marijuana and a tablet of ecstasy.  Robinette was arrested for possession of a controlled substance.
Before trial, Robinette moved to suppress the evidence seized from his car, but the trial court denied that request.  Robinette then pleaded no contest to the charge.  On appeal, the Ohio District Court of Appeal reversed the conviction, ruling that the search resulted from an illegal detention.  The Ohio Supreme Court affirmed, ruling that the police must end a traffic stop by informing a motorist that they are free to leave before attempting to engage the motorist in a consensual interrogation or search their car.  The U.S. Supreme Court agreed to review the case.
Majority opinion
Chief Justice William Rehnquist, writing for the majority, stated that "The touchstone of the Fourth Amendment is reasonableness," and reasonableness is measured by examining the totality of the circumstances.  This kind of fact-specific inquiry does not accommodate bright-line rules, as the Court has repeatedly held.  In fact, in Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, , the Court had rejected a rule similar to the one adopted by the Ohio Supreme Court in this case.  In Schneckloth the Court refused to adopt a rule that a search predicated on a suspect's consent is unreasonable unless the suspect knew he had the right to refuse to consent to the search.  The Court reasoned it would be impractical to require the police to explain to a suspect in any detail his right to refuse consent to a search.  For the same reason, the Court reasoned it would be "unrealistic to require police officers to always inform detainees that they are free to go before a consent to search may be deemed voluntary."  Rather, voluntariness is a fact to be determined from all the circumstances surrounding the search.
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg concurred in the judgment of the Court.  Ginsburg emphasized that the Court's holding only construed the Fourth Amendment, and that in light of the particular circumstances present in Ohio—where stops similar to Robinette's were frequently used as a pretext to search for drugs—the Ohio Supreme Court was free to adopt the first-tell-then-ask rule it articulated as part of Ohio law, without imposing that requirement on the rest of the states.
Dissenting opinion
Justice John Paul Stevens concluded that the traffic stop was unlawful.  The officer asked Robinette if he could ask him one more question before Robinette left.  Stevens argued that a reasonable person, when faced with such a question from a police officer during a traffic stop, would not feel free to leave and not feel free to refuse to answer.  Accordingly, the officer had continued to detain Robinette beyond the end of the traffic stop.  These conclusions of the Ohio Supreme Court were derived entirely from federal law, and thus did not impose a new obligation on other states in the guise of interpreting federal law.  For this reason, Justice Stevens noted he would have affirmed the judgment of the Ohio Supreme Court.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 519
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
External links
  Press release from National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1996 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Assn." ==> """
Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Association, 436 US 447 (1978), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States that in-person solicitation of clients by lawyers was not protected speech under the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution.
 Background 
 Factual Background 
In February 1974, two 18-year-olds, Carol McClintock and Wanda Lou Holbert, were badly injured in a car accident in their hometown of Montville, Ohio. When Albert Ohralik, a local attorney, learned of the accident, he sought to speak with each of them in person to offer his services. He first called Carol McClinktock's parents, who told him that she was in the hospital; when he said he might visit her, the parents said he should stop by their house to talk to them first. He did so,  learning from them that the motorist who struck Carol's vehicle was uninsured, and after discussing their insurance policy and applicable laws, he brought up the possibility of hiring a lawyer. The parents stated that Carol was 18, and it would be her decision; then Ohralik went to visit Carol in the hospital. Carol did not object to hiring Ohralik, although she did not sign the agreement until talking about it with her parents.
Ohralik also tried to visit Wanda Lou Holbert in the hospital, but she was released before he did. He learned her address from the McClintocks and visited her at home, uninvited. He secretly recorded the conversation and briefly interviewed her about the accident, and then got her oral agreement to be legally represented by him. Both McClintock and Holbert agreed to pay Ohralik one-third of any recovery as his fee.
However, both soon discharged Ohralik. Holbert decided she did not want to sue, and McClintock chose to hire another attorney. In a breach of contract claim, Ohralik forced McClintock to pay him one-third of her recovery.
 Disciplinary proceedings 
Both McClintock and Holbert filed ethics complaints with the Geauga County Bar Association, which referred the case to the Ohio State Bar Association. The Bar Association filed a formal complaint with the Board of Commissioners on Grievances and Discipline of the Supreme Court of Ohio. After a hearing, the Board found that Ohralik had violated the Ohio Code of Professional Responsibility. Ohralik argued that soliciting clients in person was speech, and therefore was protected by the First Amendment (as incorporated against the States by the Fourteenth Amendment). The Board rejected this argument, and recommended a public reprimand. The Supreme Court of Ohio accepted the Board's reasoning, but increased the sanction to indefinite suspension. Ohralik appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
 Case before the Supreme Court 
 Arguments 
Arguing for the suspension to be overturned, Ohralik asserted that his situation was essentially identical to another Supreme Court case from the prior year, Bates v. State Bar of Arizona.Bates v. State Bar of Arizona, 433 U.S. 350 (1977). In Bates, the Court had ruled that attorneys have a right to advertise their services, deeming it an instance of commercial speech which deserves protection under the First Amendment. Ohralik said that he had explained to McClintock and Holbert their legal rights in the situation, and made himself available to pursue their claims. Moreover, neither the Ohio State Bar Association nor the Supreme Court of Ohio had establisheded any "specific harm that the State has a compelling interest in preventing".
Arguing to uphold the suspension, the Ohio State Bar Association said that in-person solicitation of clients was particularly problematic for the legal profession, and a blanket ban was justified, even under the First Amendment. An in-person conversation creates pressure to say yes or no immediately, without time to consider alternatives. This problem is made worse in situations of stress (say, the scene of an accident or crime) or vulnerability (such as a hospital room).
 Decision 
In an 8-0 vote (Justice Brennan not participating), the Court agreed with the Ohio State Bar Association. Powell wrote for a six-justice majority, and Marshall and Rehnquist each wrote concurring opinions. Constitutional protection for commercial speech was a relatively new doctrine, with three major cases having been decided in the previous five years, including Pittsburgh Press Co. v. Pittsburgh Commission on Human Relations, 413 U.S. 376 (1973); Bigelow v. Virginia, 421 U.S. 809 (1975); Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council, 425 U.S. 748 (1976). The Court held that in-person solicitation by lawyers was distinct from other kinds of commercial speech, as far as the First Amendment was concerned. The potential problems with in-person solicitation were not to be taken lightly:
Second, states continued to have a "particularly strong" interest in regulating the practice of law. Although the rule against in-person solicitation apparently originated as rule of etiquette, rather than ethics, the dangers at hand justified a prophylactic rule. Accordingly, the Ohio State Bar Association was not obligated to examine the particular circumstances and establish "specific harms".
Still, Powell did note that Ohralik's conduct in this case did him no favors. The fact that he approached and solicited young adults with only high school degrees in vulnerable situations ("Both were in pain and may have been on medication") and his stubbornness after being fired were a "striking example" of why in-person solicitation by lawyers was a bad idea.
 Concurrences 
Justice Marshall concurred in the judgment, as he agreed that Ohralik's behavior warranted the discipline he received. However, Marshall argued that states should have to consider the particular circumstances of instances of in-person solicitation. Agreeing in broad terms that there were dangers lurking when lawyers tried to drum up business in-person, he nevertheless argued,
Justice Rehnquist, on the other hand, believed that states should have even more leeway to regulate lawyers than the majority allowed. His one-sentence concurrence simply referred to his dissent in In Re Primus, 436 U.S. 412 (1978), decided the same day.
 See also 
 Ambulance chasing
 In Re Primus
 References 
Category:1978 in Ohio
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Ohio
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Legal ethics
Category:Practice of law
Category:Freedom of expression
Category:Freedom of expression in the United States
Category:United States First Amendment case law
"""

From "Oil States Energy Services, LLC v. Greene's Energy Group, LLC" ==> """
Oil States Energy Services, LLC v. Greene's Energy Group, LLC, 584 U.S. ___ (2018), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the inter partes review process granted by Congress to the United States Patent and Trademark Office for challenging the validity of patents, rather than a jury trial, is constitutional and did not violate either Article III of the Constitution nor the Seventh Amendment..
Background
The United States Congress passed the Leahy-Smith America Invents Act in 2012. Among its provisions, the Act gave the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) the ability to handle challenges to patent validity following their granting through an improved inter partes review process.. Prior to the Act's passage, a party could request USPTO to initiate a full re-examination of a patent, which was a lengthy and costly process for the office. Alternatively, the party could challenge the patent through a jury trial within the Circuit Court system.  With the new inter partes review process, a party can seek to invalidate specific claims of a patent based on published prior art by filing a petition with the USPTO. The owner of the patent may then file a response to the petition. The Patent Trial and Appeal Board (PTAB) then reviews the materials, and if it deems there is a reasonable challenge, it will hold a trial hearing with the parties, and issue a ruling on the validity of the claims in question. This process was designed to reduce the time and costs of dealing with inter partes challenges to patents.
Since its implementation, the inter partes review process has come under some criticism. Large tech firms support the process as it enables them to fend off patent infringement challenges from patent trolls without extensive costs.Joe Mullin, "Supreme Court will weigh in on troll-killing patent-review process", Ars Technica (June 13, 2017),  Archive In contrast, biomedical and pharmaceutical firms are critical of the process since it is a non-judicial review by which rival companies can challenge and invalidate their patents, which often are the product of extensive time and costs for research and development.Susan Decker, "Likes the Patent 'Death Squad.' Allergan Pays to Avoid It", Bloomberg Businessweek (Sept. 20, 2017), Archive The inter partes review process has led the PTAB being called the "patent death squad", a term coined by Randall Rader, a former Chief Judge on the Federal Appeals Court.Tony Dutra, "Rader Regrets CLS Bank Impasse, Comments on Latest Patent Reform Bill", Bloomberg Businessweek (Oct. 29, 2013),  Archive
Procedural history
Oil States Energy Services, LLC had gained ownership of a 2001 patent related to protection of oilwells. In 2012, Oil States filed a patent infringement lawsuit within the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Texas against Greene's Energy Group, LLC, claiming that Greene's Energy were violating their oilwell protection patent. In addition to defending itself and attempting to prove the patent was invalid in the District Court, Greene's Energy filed a petition for an inter partes review with PTAB to challenge two of the claims of Oil States' patent, which if found invalid, would nullify the patent infringement claims. Following receipt of Oil States' response to the petition, the PTAB found that there was a likelihood that Greene's Energy's challenge would prevail and initiated the inter partes review.
Both the District Court trial and the inter partes review ran simultaneously. While District Court denied summary judgment to Greene’s Energy, allowing the case to proceed,Oil States Energy Servs., L.L.C. v. Trojan Wellhead Prot., Inc., No. 12-cv-611, 2014 WL 12360946, at *11 (E.D. Tex. June 23, 2014).  the PTAB ruled that the two claims were invalid and cancelled Oil States’ patents.IPR 2014-00216. Oil States appealed PTAB's decision to the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, both on the patentability of the claims in question, as well as challenging the inter partes review process. Oil States stated that patents were considered to be a private right, and challenges to patent validity is a judicial process requiring a jury trial. Therefore, they claimed the inter partes review process violated Article III of the Constitution and the Seventh Amendment. Because Oil States' appeal challenged the America Invents Acts, the federal government joined as a respondent to the case. Both Greene's Energy and the federal government called upon the Federal Circuit decision in MCM Portfolio LLC v. Hewlett-Packard Co., which had ruled in a similar manner that the USPTO's patent granting authority was "a federal regulatory scheme" and considered a public right based on the Supreme Court's ruling in Stern v. Marshall,. and that the inter partes review did not violate Article III nor the Seventh Amendment. While MCM Portfolio was petitioned to the Supreme Court, it declined to hear the case at that time.Brian Mudge & Clifford Ulrich, "to Decide 2:Are AIA Patent reviews Constitutional?", Nat'l Law Review (June 22, 2017), Archive
The Federal Circuit Appeals Court summarily affirmed the PTAB's ruling, leading Oil States' to petition the Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari to hear the case in November 2016. The Court granted certiorari in June 2017 specifically to address the Article III and Seventh Amendment questions raised by Oil States.
Supreme Court
The case was heard by the Court on November 27, 2017, and announced judgment against Oil States on April 24, 2018. Voting 7-2 to affirm the lower court, the Court held that the inter partes review process did not violate Article III or the Seventh Amendment.
Opinion of the Court
The majority decision was written by Justice Clarence Thomas and joined by Justices Anthony Kennedy, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen Breyer, Samuel Alito, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan. Thomas asserted that the granting of a patent was a public right and more specifically, a public franchise, and as found in Louisville Bridge Co. v. United States,. the government can authorize and deauthorize that franchise to a private entity without intercession of an Article III court.Timothy Lee, "Supreme Court upholds patent review process, dealing trolls a blow, Ars Technica (Apr. 24, 2018), Archive Thomas stated that the inter partes review "is simply a reconsideration of that grant, and Congress has permissibly reserved the PTO's authority to conduct that reconsideration". The Court stated that its opinion did not contradict established case law that patents are private property, such as found in United States v. American Bell Telephone Co.,. only that the granting and re-examination of patents falls within the public rights managed by the Executive Branch. 
Concurrence
Justice Breyer filed a concurrence that was joined by Ginsburg and Sotomayor. While Breyer agreed in full with the majority opinion, he stated that precedent held that even matters dealing with private rights do not require adjudication by Article III courts and can be performed by government agencies.
Dissent
Justice Neil Gorsuch wrote the dissenting opinion, joined by Chief Justice John Roberts. Gorsuch wrote that patents had generally been considered to be a personal right "that the federal government could revoke only with the concurrence of independent judges" and that the majority opinion set a precedent that "invites us to retreat from the promise of judicial independence."Richard Wolf, "Supreme Court upholds patent review process in victory for tech companies", USA Today (Apr. 24, 2018),  Archive
 References 
External links
 Case page at SCOTUSblog
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Oklahoma Tax Commission v. Citizen Band, Potawatomi Indian Tribe of Oklahoma" ==> """
Okla. Tax Commission v. Citizen Band, Potawatomi Indian Tribe of Okla., 498 U.S. 505 (1991), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the tribe was not subject to state sales taxes on sales made to tribal members, but that they were liable for taxes on sales to non-tribal members.
Background
The Potawatomi was originally from the Wabash River area of Indiana and was known as the Mission Band of Potawatomi.  After 1833, they were relocated to Kansas, where they lost most of their land due to the allotment system.  In 1867, in a treaty with Kansas, the tribe sold their land in that state in order to purchase land in the Indian Territory (now Oklahoma) and took United States citizenship.  They have henceforth been known as the Citizen Potawatomi Nation.
District Court decision
The tribe, for many years has sold cigarettes on tribal lands without collecting Oklahoma's cigarette tax. In 1987, the Oklahoma Tax Commission demanded that the tribe pay $2.7 million for taxes due from 1982 to 1986.  The tribe sued in the U.S. District Court.  The District Court denied the tribe's motion for summary judgment and following a trial, held that the tribe's sales to tribal members was immune from state taxation, but that sales to non-tribal members could be taxed.
Circuit Court decision
The tribe appealed, asserting that they enjoyed total tribal sovereign immunity for sales on tribal lands.  The State of Oklahoma stated that the tribe had waived its immunity by filing the case in the district court.  The Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals held that Oklahoma lacked the authority to collect any state sales taxes on tribal lands, whether to tribal members or non-tribal members.  Oklahoma appealed and the Supreme Court granted certiorari.
Opinion of the Court
Affirmed in part, reversed in part. Chief Justice Rehnquist delivered the opinion for a unanimous court.
Rehnquist first stated that the tribe does not waive immunity by instituting an action in the district court, noting that the court had previously determined that tribes were immune from counter-claims or cross-suits, absent Congressional authorization to the contrary. He next addressed the state's argument that tribal land held in trust was not the same as reservation land, and found the state's position unpersuasive.  Tribal land, whether held in trust or as part of a reservation, is set apart for the use of the tribe, and as such qualifies for immunity.  The court then held that the Tenth Circuit erred in holding that tribe did not have to collect sales taxes on cigarettes sold to non-members.
Concurring Opinion
Justice Stevens issued a concurring opinion that mainly discussed the question of immunity as applied to the facts of the case.
References
External links
Category:1991 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Citizen Potawatomi Nation
Category:United States Native American tax case law
Category:United States tribal sovereign immunity case law
Category:Taxation in Oklahoma
Category:Legal history of Oklahoma
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Oklahoma Tax Commission v. Sac & Fox Nation" ==> """
Oklahoma Tax Commission v. Sac & Fox Nation, 508 U.S. 114 (1993), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that absent explicit congressional direction to the contrary, it must be presumed that a State does not have jurisdiction to tax tribal members who live and work in Indian country, whether the particular territory consists of a formal or informal reservation, allotted lands, or dependent Indian communities.Okla. Tax Comm'n v. Sac & Fox Nation, .
The Sac and Fox Nation is an Indian (Native American) tribe that governs itself under the Indian Self-Determination Act and imposes taxes based on that authority.  The State of Oklahoma sought to impose income and motor vehicle taxes on tribal members.  The tribe brought suit to prevent the state from imposing those taxes.
Both the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals and the Supreme Court held that Oklahoma, without a clear authorization from Congress, was prohibited from imposing taxes on tribal members in Indian country.  This case, together with several other cases, are known as the "Oklahoma tax cases" in Native American case law.
Background
History
thumb|left|alt=Seal of Sac & Fox Nation|Seal of Sac & Fox Nation
The Sac and Fox Nation is an Indian tribe originally from the Great Lakes area.  Following a series of treaties with the United States, in 1867Treaty with the Sauk and Foxes, 1867, .2 Indian Affairs: Laws and Treaties 951-956 (Charles J. Kappler, ed. 1904) they moved to the Sac and Fox reservation of  in Indian Territory (in what is now Pottawatomie County in the State of Oklahoma).  In 1887, Congress passed the Dawes Act which broke up the reservation and allotted land to the tribal members.General Allotment Act of 1887, .1 Indian Affairs: Laws and Treaties  33-36 (Charles J. Kappler, ed. 1904)  In implementing this law, the United States entered into another treaty with the tribe in 1891,Treaty with the Sac and Fox Nation of Indians, 1890, .1 Indian Affairs: Laws and Treaties 389–393 (Charles J. Kappler, ed. 1904) in which the tribe retained  as a tribal headquarters and tribal members were allotted  of land from the former reservation.
The Sac and Fox Nation governs itself under the authority of the Indian Self-Determination ActIndian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act of 1975, . and has its own tax commission.  The tribe imposes a tax on earnings of any person working within tribal jurisdiction, regardless of whether that person is a tribal member.  The tribe also provides for a motor vehicle tax and registration of any vehicle that are owned by a tribal member and garaged within tribal jurisdiction.  The State of Oklahoma, through the Oklahoma Tax Commission, also administers incomeOkla. Stat., Tit. 68, § 2351 et seq. and motor vehicle taxes.Okla. Stat., Tit. 68, § 2101 et seq.  The state considers that all income earned in the state is taxable, including on tribal land, and issues tax assessments against those who are delinquent.  Oklahoma contends that anyone within the state had to register their vehicles with the state, while the Sac and Fox Nation required tribal members residing in tribal jurisdiction to register the vehicle with the tribe.  The state viewed those members to be delinquent in their vehicle taxes, but made no effort to collect until the vehicle was sold to a new owner.  At that time, Oklahoma would require that the delinquent taxes and penalties be paid in order to register the vehicle.Sac and Fox Nation v. Okla. Tax Comm'n, 967 F.2d 1425 (10th Cir. 1992).Alex Tallchief Skibine, Teaching Indian Law in an Anti-Tribal Era , 82  777 (2006).
Lower courts
thumb|right|alt=Seal Oklahoma|Seal of Oklahoma
The Sac and Fox Nation then filed a lawsuit against the Oklahoma Tax Commission in U.S. District Court seeking a permanent injunction prohibiting the state from taxing income earned within tribal jurisdiction or of those who reside within the tribe's jurisdiction, and from vehicle taxes on vehicles that were lawfully registered with the tribe.  Both the Sac and Fox Nation and Oklahoma made motions for summary judgment and the district court, without determining reservation boundaries, held that while the state could collect income tax on non-tribal members, they could not collect income taxes from tribal members employed by the tribe on trust land.  The district court also held that the state could not collect vehicle taxes for periods that the vehicle was properly registered with the tribe.  Both sides appealed to the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals.
The Tenth Circuit Court affirmed the decision of the district court.  First the court noted that the reservation boundaries were not relevant to the case, the issue instead being tribal immunity from state jurisdiction.  The court noted the prior Supreme Court decision in Okla. Tax Comm'n v. Citizen Band, Potawatomi Indian Tribe of Okla.Okla. Tax Comm'n v. Potawatomi Indian Tribe of Okla., . and stated that "It appears as though the State of Oklahoma persists in fighting a battle it has already lost."  Since Oklahoma could provide no Congressional authority for collecting taxes from Sac and Fox tribal members it was clear that the state had exceeded its authority.Bradford D. Cooley, The Navajo Uranium Ban: Tribal Sovereignty v. National Energy Demands , 26  393 (2006).  On the income tax for non-tribal employees, the Sac and Fox Nation asserted that the Commerce Clause and treaty language granted it exclusive taxing authority on tribal land.  The appellate court was not persuaded and ruled that the state could impose an income tax on non-tribal members.Okla. Tax Comm'n v. Chickasaw Nation, .
On the issue of tribal motor vehicle taxes and registration, the Tenth Circuit Court did not make a distinction between tribal and non-tribal members.  The court held that the tribe could require the registration of vehicles on tribal land, regardless of whether the owner was a tribal member or not.  The court noted that both Moe v. Salish and Kootenai TribesMoe v. Salish and Kootenai Tribes, . and Washington v. Confederated Tribes of the Colville Indian ReservationWashington v. Confederated Tribes of the Colville Indian Reservation, . prohibit such state taxation on tribal members.  The state could enforce its vehicle tax on non-tribal members.
Both parties appealed to the Supreme Court, which, after noting a Wisconsin Supreme Court decision in the same area, granted certiorari and agreed to hear the case.
Opinion of the court
thumb|left|alt=Justice Sandra Day O'Connor portrait|Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, author of the unanimous opinion
Arguments
David Allen Miley argued the case for Oklahoma.  Edwin Kneedler argued the case for the United States as amicus curiae on behalf of the tribe, with Solicitor General Ken Starr.  G. William Rice argued the case for the Sac and Fox Nation.  Amicus curiae briefs in support of Oklahoma were filed by Arizona, Minnesota, North Dakota and Wisconsin.  Briefs in support of the tribe were filed by Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes of the Fort Peck Indian Reservation, Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma,,  307-308 (2004). Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma and Navajo Nation.
The state argued that the case law cited by the Tenth Circuit only dealt with established Indian reservations and that the appellate court erred since the Sac and Fox reservation had been disestablished in the 1890s.  The Tax Commission's position was that there were no more reservations in Oklahoma.,  200-202 (2000).   Oklahoma stated that without determining reservation boundaries, if any, the lower court would be unable to properly apply tribal immunity.  The state also argued that the vehicle tax and registration fees were more akin to a sales tax and a use fee than an excise tax.
Opinion
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor delivered the opinion of a unanimous court.  O'Connor stated that Oklahoma's argument that a tribal member must live on a reservation to be exempt from state taxes was incorrect.  All that is required is that the member live in "Indian country",.Angelique A. EagleWoman,  Re-establishing the Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate's Reservation Boundaries: Building a Legal Rationale from Current International Law, 29  239 (2005). which Congress has defined to "include  formal and informal reservations, dependent Indian communities, and Indian allotments, whether restricted or held in trust by the United States."  O'Connor noted that the Tenth Circuit should have determined the residence of the tribal members as inside or outside of Indian country, not if they were within the reservation.Skibine, supra, at 783 n.50.Joseph D. Matal,  A Revisionist History of Indian Country, 14  283 (1997).  She noted that in Potawatomi case, Oklahoma made exactly the same argument which was also rejected by the court.
O'Connor also rejected the state's argument that the motor vehicle tax was not an excise tax and that the registration fee was a use fee.  She stated that the tax strongly resembled the taxes prohibited by Colville and Moe, and noted that if the registration fee was a use fee, then non-residents of Oklahoma would not be exempt.  The court upheld the decision of the Tenth Circuit Court.Skibine, supra, at 782.,  11 (1996)., supra, at 307-308.
Subsequent developments
This case, together with two other involving the Oklahoma Tax Commission have defined tribal sovereignty in a clearer manner.Matal, supra, at 327, 333., supra, at 11.  The case has been cited in numerous lower court opinions, as well as the Supreme Courts own opinions, as limiting the ability of state governments to act in Indian country.  Sac and Fox, together with Potawatomi and Oklahoma Tax Commission v. Chickasaw Nation,Chickasaw Nation, supra, at 450. have become known as the "Oklahoma tax cases".Cooley, supra, at 414.  The decision is also unique in that it uses a federal criminal jurisdiction statute as the basis for civil jurisdiction.Marc Slonim, Indian Country, Indian Reservations, and the Importance of History in Indian Law, 45  517, (2010).
References
External links
Category:1993 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:United States Native American tax case law
Category:Sac and Fox
Category:1993 in Oklahoma
Category:Legal history of Oklahoma
Category:Native American history of Oklahoma
"""

From "Oklahoma Tax Commission v. United States" ==> """
Oklahoma Tax Commission v. United States, 319 U.S. 598 (1943), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that Indian land that Congress has exempted from direct taxation by a state is also exempt from state estate taxes.
Background
In 1908 Congress passed ,, courtesy of the Oklahoma State University Library. amended by  (1926), which provided that lands allotted to members of the Five Civilized Tribes were restricted to members of that tribe unless the restrictions were lifted by the United States Secretary of the Interior.  Three enrolled full-blood members of the tribes died in 1930, 1932, and 1938, leaving their estates to their heirs, all of whom were Indians.  The estates included restricted lands and similarly restricted securities and funds held in trust by the Secretary of Interior.Oklahoma Tax Commission v. United States, 
The Oklahoma Tax Commission imposed an estate tax on the three estates, the Secretary of the Interior paid the taxes under protest and then filed an action in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Oklahoma to recover the taxes.  The District Court entered a judgment for Oklahoma and the United States appealed.
On appeal, the Tenth Circuit Court reversed.  The United States contended that the right to transfer land in these cases flowed not from state law, but from federal law, and therefore the state did not have the power to impose taxes without the consent of the United States.  The appellate court cited Childers v. Beaver, ,Childers v. Beaver,  a case that was fundamentally the same as the instant case, in support of their decision.  Oklahoma appealed and the Supreme Court granted certiorari to hear the case.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Hugo Black delivered the opinion of the court.  Black stated that the estates of the Indians could be divided into four categories, a) restricted land exempt from direct taxation; b) land not exempt from direct taxation; c) restricted cash and securities held in trust by the Secretary of the Interior; and d) other property.  Black held that the restricted land in the first category was exempt from state taxation, but the remainder of the estates were not exempt.  The case was then remanded to the District Court.
Concurrance
Justice William O. Douglas concurred in the result in a short opinion.
Dissent
Justice Frank Murphy dissented, stating that the court was rejecting over a century of jurisprudence in their opinion.  Murphy stated that while tax exemptions are typically viewed with skepticism by the court system, this was not an ordinary case involving ordinary citizens.  Instead, it involved a people that are wards of the United States, "and towards whom Congress has fashioned a policy of protection due to obligations well known to all of us."  Murphy believed that for a state to tax Indians, there must be an affirmative, unequivocal grant by Congress to the states.  Since there was no such grant, he would have held that the estates were exempt from state taxation.
References
External links
−
Category:1943 in United States case law
Category:Muscogee
Category:Seminole
Category:United States Native American tax case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:Legal history of Oklahoma
Category:1943 in Oklahoma
"""

From "Oklahoma v. Castro-Huerta" ==> """
Oklahoma v. Castro-Huerta, 597 U.S. ___ (2022), was a United States Supreme Court  case related to McGirt v. Oklahoma, decided in 2020. In McGirt, the Supreme Court ruled that the U.S. Congress never properly disestablished the Indian reservations of the Five Civilized Tribes in Oklahoma when granting its statehood, and thus almost half the state was still considered to be Native American land. As a result of McGirt, crimes under the Major Crimes Act by Native Americans in the former reservations are treated as federal crimes rather than state crimes.  
In the wake of McGirt, the Oklahoma state courts started vacating past criminal cases to turn them over to federal courts. However, the Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals ruled that this would include crimes where the defendant was not a Native American but still occurred against Native Americans on Native American lands. The Supreme Court agreed to hear the state's challenge to this rule, but only investigating the issues of breadth of McGirt, and will not review McGirt itself.
In the 5–4 ruling issued on June 29, 2022, the Court ruled that both federal and the state held joint jurisdiction to prosecute non-Native Americans for crimes on native lands.
 Background 
In McGirt v. Oklahoma (2020), the Supreme Court of the United States held by a 5–4 vote that the Muscogee (Creek) Nation's reservation (and by extension, five other reservations) in eastern Oklahoma had not been disestablished by Congress when Oklahoma gained statehood over 100 years prior. Consequently, Oklahoma was no longer able to prosecute Indians for crimes committed in what is now recognized as Indian country. The question of whether Oklahoma could continue to prosecute non-Indians if the victims of their crimes were Native American and the crimes were committed in reservation lands was an unsettled issue. Oklahoma state courts had come to rule in favor of considering these crimes to fall within tribal and federal oversight and out of state oversight. The state claimed that tribal and federal law enforcement officials did not have the capacity to handle the number of crimes in considering this authority aspect; while the state authorities may hand over such crimes to federal and tribal ones, many of these remain unprosecuted, according to an FBI agent working in Oklahoma. The state feared an increase in the rate of crime due to the lack of capacity to enforce the law from the tribal and federal site. The state further was concerned that federal courts were more lenient than state courts.
Over the course of 2021, Oklahoma attempted to have the Supreme Court reconsider McGirt. In May, over the dissents of three justices, the Supreme Court stayed the Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals' mandate in the case of Shaun Michael Bosse, a non-Indian who was convicted and sentenced to death for a 2012 murder of a Native American. That case became moot in August, when the state court held that McGirt was not retroactive on state post-conviction review, and overruled its prior decisions to the contrary in past cases, including Bosse.
Oklahoma filed a petition for a writ of certiorari in Victor Manuel Castro-Huerta's case in September 2021, seeking to have McGirt overruled and for clarity on the question of whether the state could prosecute non-Indians for crimes against Indians in Indian country. Castro-Huerta was convicted of child neglect and was sentenced to 35 years in prison; he is a non-Indian and his stepdaughter is an Indian. The crime was committed in Indian territory.
In January 2022, the U.S. Supreme Court denied multiple petitions seeking review of the state post-conviction retroactivity issue, and granted this case, limited to the question of state prosecutorial authority.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case on January 21, 2022. Oral arguments were heard on April 27, 2022.
On June 29, 2022, the Supreme Court reversed the Court of Criminal Appeals in a 5–4 vote and ruled that both tribal/federal and state law enforcement have simultaneous jurisdiction to prosecute crimes committed against Indians in Indian country. The majority opinion was written by Justice Brett Kavanaugh. Kavanaugh stated that the presumption that states have no jurisdiction in tribal lands, as established in Worcester v. Georgia (1832), had been weakened in the years since and that "the Worcester-era understanding of Indian country as separate from the State was abandoned later in the 1800s". Kavanaugh then wrote that the General Crimes Act, as codified in 1948, no longer considered tribal lands as distinct from that of the state. Kavanaugh then concluded that state prosecution of non-Native Americans would not interfere with tribal governance, as established through White Mountain Apache Tribe v. Bracker. Kavanaugh wrote "a state prosecution of a crime committed by a non-Indian against an Indian would not deprive the tribe of any of its prosecutorial authority. That is because, with exceptions not invoked here, Indian tribes lack criminal jurisdiction to prosecute crimes committed by non-Indians such as Castro-Huerta, even when non-Indians commit crimes against Indians in Indian Country."
Justice Neil Gorsuch, who had written the majority opinion in McGirt, wrote the dissent in Castro-Huetra. Gorsuch asserted that tribal lands still have sovereignty from the state, and that Worcester still should be considered, writing "Where this Court once stood firm, today it wilts." Gorsuch urged Congress to pass laws similar to Public Law 280 that would clearly define the bounds of tribal sovereignty.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Native American criminal jurisdiction case law
Category:Native American history of Oklahoma
Category:United States Native American case law
"""

From "Oklahoma v. United States Civil Service Commission" ==> """
Oklahoma v. United States Civil Service Commission, 330 U.S. 127 (1947), is a 5-to-2 ruling by the United States Supreme Court which held that the Hatch Act of 1939 did not violate the Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution..
Background
The Hatch Act of 1939 barred federal employees from engaging in any political activity, either during working hours or non-working hours.
The Oklahoma State Highway Commission had received funds from an agency of the United States government to build roads and bridges in that state. An employee of the State Highway Commission was also chairman of a committee of a political party. The United States Civil Service Commission ruled the employee's conduct to be in violation of the Hatch Act. The Civil Service Commission asked that the employee be fired. If the employee was not fired, the Civil Service Commission recommended that all federal highway funds be withheld from the state of Oklahoma.
The state of Oklahoma sued to overturn the Civil Service Commission's ruling.  The district court upheld the ruling.  The appellate court upheld the district court's ruling.
Oklahoma appealed again, and the Supreme Court granted certiorari.. The state made four claims:Oklahoma v. United States Civil Service Commission, 330 U.S. at 133-134.
The Hatch Act violates the sovereignty of the states and is an unlawful delegation of power.
The Hatch Act applies only to "active" political participation, which the employee did not engage in.
Nothing in the Act permits the Civil Service Commission to order the removal of a state officer or apply a penalty to a state.
The decisions of the district and appellate courts erred in not permitting the State of Oklahoma to pursue judicial review of the Act's constitutionality.
The federal government contended the state had no standing to sue.Oklahoma v. United States Civil Service Commission, 330 U.S. at 134.
 Opinion of the Court 
Associate Justice Stanley Forman Reed wrote the decision for the majority. The case was decided concurrently with United Public Workers v. Mitchell, 330 U.S. 75 (1947).
Justice Reed noted that the United States did not raise the issue of standing in a timely fashion. However, he interpreted the government's argument to be that no actual penalty had yet been applied and thus the case was not yet ripe for review. This latter interpretation was not barred because it was raised for the first time before the Supreme Court. Section 12, Subsection (c) of the Act gave the courts jurisdiction over questions of law, which Reed interpreted to mean constitutional questions as well as questions of fact. Thus, the courts had jurisdiction.Oklahoma v. United States Civil Service Commission, 330 U.S. at 135. Reed subsequently engaged in an extensive review of the Court's jurisdiction.
Reed relied heavily on United Public Workers v. Mitchell, decided earlier that day, for his rationale that the Civil Service Commission and Hatch Act had not violated Oklahoma's Tenth Amendment rights.Oklahoma v. United States Civil Service Commission, 330 U.S. at 142-144.
As for whether the employee's service was active or passive, Reed relied on two facts. First, he deferred to the Civil Service Commission's expertise, which had previously determined that "service on or for" a political committee constituted participation.Oklahoma v. United States Civil Service Commission, 330 U.S. at 144. Second, he relied on the congressional debate during passage of the Act, which clearly indicated that there was no distinction between active and passive participation.
Did the Civil Service Commission have the authority to impose the penalties it did?  Reed believed so, and entertained no doubts that the Commission had the right to order the employee fired (a right explicitly granted in the Act) even though the employee was a state one. 
 Concurrence 
Associate Justice Felix Frankfurter concurred in the decision.  However, he felt that the government was untimely in raising the issue of Oklahoma's standing to sue.Oklahoma v. United States Civil Service Commission, 330 U.S. at 146-147. He also believed that the state of Oklahoma lacked standing to challenge the constitutional validity of the Act.Oklahoma v. United States Civil Service Commission, 330 U.S. at 147. But since the majority had held otherwise on both these issues, he concurred in the majority's reasoning regarding the interpretation of law.
 Dissent 
Associate Justices Hugo Black and Wiley Blount Rutledge dissented, but wrote no opinion.
Footnotes
External links
Category:1947 in United States case law
Category:United States elections case law
Category:United States ripeness case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:History of Oklahoma
"""

From "Old Chief v. United States" ==> """
Old Chief v. United States, 519 U.S. 172 (1997), discussed the limitation on admitting relevant evidence set forth in Federal Rule of Evidence 403.  Under this rule, otherwise relevant evidence may be excluded if the probative value of the evidence is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, misleading the jury, or considerations of undue delay, wasting time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence.  In this case, Old Chief offered to stipulate to the fact of a prior conviction, which was an element of the crime with which he was charged.  The prosecution resisted this stipulation, arguing that it had the right to present its case in any manner it chose.  In Old Chief, the Court applied Rule 403 to the particular situation presented by this case, and concluded that Rule 403 required the trial court to accept the defendant's stipulation to a prior conviction over the prosecution's objection.
Facts
Johnny Lynn Old Chief was arrested after a "fracas" involving "at least one gunshot."  He was eventually charged with assault with a dangerous weapon, using a firearm in relation to a crime of violence, and being a felon in possession of a firearm.  At trial, he asked the court to order the prosecution to refrain from mentioning any fact surrounding the prior felony that made him a prohibited possessor of a firearm.  He also offered to stipulate to the fact that he had suffered a prior conviction that made him a prohibited possessor.  The reason for asking the prosecution not to mention the facts of the prior crime, he said, was to preserve his right to be convicted by a jury beyond a reasonable doubt on the basis of the facts relating to only the conduct with which he was currently charged.  In light of the stipulation, he contended that introducing any evidence relating to the facts of his prior crimes would be unfairly prejudicial under   Rule 403 of the Federal Rules of Evidence.  The prosecutor refused to agree to Old Chief's stipulation, arguing that he had the right to prove his case his own way.  The district court sided with the prosecutor, resulting in the admission of evidence at trial that Old Chief had previously been convicted of "knowingly and unlawfully assault[ing] Rory Dean Fenner, said assault resulting in serious bodily injury."  Old Chief was convicted on all the federal counts against him.
The Ninth Circuit affirmed the conviction.  Under its case law at the time, the prosecution had the right to prove its case through probative evidence, and a "stipulation is not proof, and, thus, it has no place in the FRE 403 balancing process."  In light of this circuit precedent, the Ninth Circuit held that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in admitting the facts of Old Chief's prior conviction against him at his trial.  The U.S. Supreme Court then agreed to hear the case.
Majority opinion
The Court quickly disposed of Old Chief's first argument, which was that  Rule 401 required the district court to exclude the name of the crime of which he had been convicted.  Rule 401 defines "relevant" evidence as evidence that makes a fact of consequence more or less probable than without it.  Because the fact of a prior felony conviction was an element of the crime of being a felon in possession of a firearm, the Court reasoned that the record of Old Chief's prior conviction was relevant under Rule 401.  Hence, if "relevant evidence is inadmissible in the presence of other evidence related to it, its exclusion must rest not on the ground that the other evidence has rendered it "irrelevant," but on its character as unfairly prejudicial, cumulative or the like, its relevance notwithstanding."
Rule 403 allows the exclusion of relevant evidence on the grounds of "unfair prejudice."  Unfair prejudice to a criminal defendant means the danger that the jury will "generaliz[e] a defendant's earlier bad act into bad character and taking that as raising the odds that he did the later bad act now charged (or worse, as calling for preventive conviction even if he should happen to be innocent momentarily)."    Rule 404(b) addresses this danger directly, to be sure; however, prior convictions also present a danger of unfair prejudice and are thus subject to the Rule 403 balancing test.
Because Rule 403 contemplates a balancing test, the Court then had to describe how to conduct that balancing.  Two possibilities arose for doing so.  First, "an item of evidence might be viewed as an island," such that its probative value and danger for unfair prejudice would be assessed in a vacuum.  Second, the item of evidence in question could be measured in relation to "the full evidentiary context of the case as the court understands it when the ruling must be made."  Under the first approach, the party offering the evidence would have an incentive to organize its case around the most unfairly prejudicial evidence it can find that is highly probative, and leave out equally probative evidence that is less prejudicial.  Thus, even if the trial court were to exclude the proffering party's preferred evidence, that party would still have equally probative evidence to fall back on.  Thus, the Court reasoned that an assessment of prejudice must be conducted with reference to all the other actually available evidence in the hands of the proffering party.
As a general rule, the prosecution is generally entitled to prove its case in the manner it sees fit.  Jurors come to court expecting that evidence will be presented to them in narrative fashion, and there is a possibility that jurors may punish a party that does not meet this expectation.  Even if jurors do not expressly punish the prosecution for the sin of making its case with stipulations, they may still be confused by a story that moves in fits and starts, with essential gaps filled in by stipulations instead of succinct storytelling.  Yet, as far as the element of a prior conviction is concerned, a defendant's stipulation is just as conclusive as the underlying facts of the crime.  The prosecution's need to prove its case via storytelling has no force when it comes to the fact of a prior conviction.  In order to find this element of the felon-in-possession crime satisfied, all the jury needs to know is that the defendant has been convicted of a crime that qualifies him as a prohibited possessor, and this can just as easily be accomplished by stipulation as by narrative storytelling.  Therefore, although the prosecution ordinarily may insist on proving its case via narrative evidence, Rule 403 allows the defendant to stipulate to prior convictions in order to avoid the unfair prejudice that would result from the prosecution introducing the facts of that prior crime into evidence during the later prosecution.
Dissenting opinion
Justice O'Connor contested the majority opinion, which held that introducing the facts of a defendant's prior conviction could be unfairly prejudicial. After all, Congress had made the fact of a prior conviction an element of the crime of being a felon in possession of a firearm.  It therefore intended for a jury trying such a case to hear the facts of the defendant's prior crime. If the jury was not intended to hear the facts of a defendant's prior crime, certainly there was minimal risk that the jury would convict the defendant for an "improper" reason.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 519
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Federal Rules of Evidence case law
Category:1997 in United States case law
"""

From "Old Colony Trust Co. v. Commissioner" ==> """
Old Colony Trust Co. v. Commissioner, 279 U.S. 716 (1929), was an income tax case before the Supreme Court of the United States..
HELD:
When an employer pays an employee's income tax on the employee's behalf, the payment is taxable as income to the employee.
Facts and procedural history
In 1916, the American Woolen Company adopted a resolution which provided that the company would pay all taxes due on the salaries of the company's officers.  It calculated the employees' tax liabilities based on a gross income that omitted, or excluded, the amount of the income taxes themselves.
In 1925, the Bureau of Internal Revenue assessed a deficiency for the amount of taxes paid on behalf of the company's president, William Madison Wood, arguing that his $681,169.88 tax payment had wrongly been excluded from his gross income in 1919, and that his $351,179.27 tax payment had wrongly been excluded from his gross income in 1920.  Old Colony Trust Co., as the executors of Wood's estate, filed suit in the District Court for a refund, then appealed to the Board of Tax Appeals (the predecessor to the United States Tax Court).  The petitioners then appealed the Board's decision to the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, which certified the following question to be decided by the U.S. Supreme Court: "Did the payment by the employer of the income taxes assessable against the employee constitute additional taxable income to such employee?"
Majority opinion
Justiciability. Chief Justice Taft, writing for the majority, first held that the appeal of Wood's executors was a justiciable case or controversy for the court to decide.  Furthermore, the fact that the Revenue Act of 1926 (which altered the appeals process for tax deficiencies) was passed while the case was under review by the Board of Tax Appeals did not cut off the judicial process sought by the petitioners.  Taft held that the principle of res judicata resolved the jurisdictional issue, because regardless of whether the District Court action or the Board's action were decided first, the judgment which was first in time would then be properly appealable.
Merits. Taft held that payment of Mr. Wood's taxes by his employer constituted additional taxable income to him for the years in question.  The fact that a person induced or permitted a third party to pay income taxes on his behalf does not excuse him from filing a tax return.  Furthermore, Taft added, "The discharge by a third person of an obligation to him is equivalent to receipt by the person taxed."  279 U.S. 716 at 729.
Thus, the company's payment of Wood's tax bill was the same as giving him extra income, regardless of the mode of payment. Further, the payment of taxes of Wood's behalf did not constitute a gift in the legal sense, because it was made in consideration of his services to the company, thus making the payment part of his compensation package. (This case did not change the general rule that gifts are not includable in gross income for the purposes of U.S. Federal income taxation, while some gifts but not all gifts from an employer to an employee are taxable to the employee.See ,  and .).
Dissent
Justice McReynolds wrote a brief dissent.  He felt that the Court of Appeals was without jurisdiction because the Revenue Act of 1926 interfered with the executive power of the Board of Tax Appeals.
Academic commentary
Petitioner was essentially arguing that Federal income taxes should be tax deductible. The holding of this case is today embodied in Internal Revenue Code §275, which was added to the Code in 1964 and which specifically disallows a deduction for federal income taxes.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 279
References
External links
Category:1929 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:American Woolen Company
"""

From "Oliphant v. Suquamish Indian Tribe" ==> """
Oliphant v. Suquamish Indian Tribe, 435 U.S. 191 (1978), is a United States Supreme Court case deciding that Indian tribal courts have no criminal jurisdiction over non-Indians.. The case was decided on March 6, 1978 with a 6–2 majority. The court opinion was written by William Rehnquist, and a dissenting opinion was written by Thurgood Marshall, who was joined by Chief Justice Warren Burger. Justice William J. Brennan did not participate in the decision.
Congress partially abrogated the Supreme Court's decision by enacting the Violence Against Women Reauthorization Act of 2013, which recognizes the criminal jurisdiction of tribes over non-Indian perpetrators of domestic violence that occur in Indian Country when the victim is Indian., VAWA Reauthorization Act available at https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/BILLS-113s47enr/pdf/BILLS-113s47enr.pdf
Background
In August 1973 Mark David Oliphant, a non-Indian living as a permanent resident with the Suquamish Tribe on the Port Madison Indian Reservation in northwestern Washington,French, Laurence Armand. Native American Justice. Chicago, IL: Burnham Inc., Publishers, 2003. pg. 59 was arrested and charged by tribal police with assaulting a tribal officer and resisting arrest during the Suquamish Tribe's Chief Seattle Days.435 U.S. at 194. Knowing that thousands of people would gather in a small area for the celebration, the tribe requested Kitsap County and the Bureau of Indian Affairs for additional law enforcement assistance.Oliphant v. Schlie, 544 F.2d 1007, 1013 (9th Cir. 1976), rev'd sub nom. Oliphant v. Suquamish Indian Tribe, 435 U.S. 191 (1978) (quoting appellees' brief, pages 27-28) The county sent just one deputy, and the Bureau of Indian Affairs sent no one. When Oliphant was arrested, at 4:30 a.m., only tribal officers were on duty. 
Oliphant applied for a writ of habeas corpus in federal court and claimed he was not subject to tribal authority because he was not Native American. He challenged the exercise of criminal jurisdiction by the tribe over non-Indians.Duthu, N. Bruce. American Indians and the Law. New York, NY: Penguin Group, 2008. p.19
 Procedural history 
Oliphant's application for a writ of habeas corpus was rejected by the lower courts. The Ninth Circuit upheld tribal criminal jurisdiction over non-Indians on Indian land because the ability to keep law and order on tribal lands was an important attribute of tribal sovereigntyOliphant v. Schlie, 544 F.2d at 1009 ("Surely the power to preserve order on the reservation, when necessary by punishing those who violate tribal law, is a sine qua non of the sovereignty that the Suquamish originally possessed.") that had been neither surrendered by treaty nor removed by the US Congress under its plenary power over Tribes.Oliphant v. Schlie, 544 F.2d at 1010–1012. Judge Anthony Kennedy, then a judge of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, dissented from the decision and said he found no support for the idea that only treaties and acts of Congress could take away the retained rights of tribes. He considered that doctrine of tribal sovereignty was not "analytically helpful" in resolving the issue.Oliphant v. Schlie, 544 F.2d at 1015.
Ruling
The Supreme Court ruled in Oliphant's favor by holding that Indian tribal courts do not have criminal jurisdiction over non-Indians for conduct occurring on Indian land and reversed the Ninth Circuit's decision. More broadly, the Supreme Court held that Indian tribes cannot exercise powers "expressly terminated by Congress" or "inconsistent with their status" as "domestic dependent nations."435 U.S. at 208-09 (internal quotations omitted). 
Analyzing the history of Congressional actions related to criminal jurisdiction in Indian Country, the Supreme Court concluded that there was an "unspoken assumption" that tribes lacked criminal jurisdiction over non-Indians.435 U.S. at 201–206. While "not conclusive," the "commonly shared presumption of Congress, the Executive Branch, and lower federal courts that tribal courts do not have the power to try non-Indians carrie[d] considerable weight."435 U.S. at 206. 
The Court incorporated that presumption into its analysis of the Treaty of Point Elliot, which was silent on the issue of tribal criminal jurisdiction over non-Indians. The Court rejected the Ninth Circuit's approach, which interpreted the treaty's silence in favor of tribal sovereignty and applied the "long-standing rule that legislation affecting the Indians is to be construed in their interest."Oliphant v. Schlie, 544 F.2d at 1010. Instead, the Court revived the doctrine of implicit divestiture. Citing Johnson v. M'Intosh and Cherokee Nation v. Georgia, the Court considered criminal jurisdiction over non-Indians an example of the "inherent limitations on tribal powers that stem from their incorporation into the United States," similar to tribes' abrogated rights to alienate land.435 U.S. at 209. 
By incorporating into the United States, the Court found that Tribes "necessarily [gave] up their power to try non-Indian citizens of the United States except in a manner acceptable to Congress". Arguing that non-Indian citizens should not be subjected to another sovereign's "customs and procedure", the Court analogizes to Crow Dog. In Crow Dog, which was decided before the Major Crimes Act, the Court found exclusive Tribal jurisdiction over Tribe-members because it would be unfair to subject Tribe-members to an "unknown code" imposed by people of a different "race [and] tradition" from their own.435 U.S. at 210–11 (quoting ).  
Although the Court found no inherent Tribal criminal jurisdiction, it acknowledged the "prevalence of non-Indian crime on today's reservations which the tribes forcefully argue requires the ability to try non-Indians" and invited "Congress to weigh in" on "whether Indian tribes should finally be authorized to try non-Indians".435 U.S. at 212.
Dissenting opinion
thumbnail|Justice Thurgood Marshall
Justice Thurgood Marshall dissented. In his view, the right to punish all individuals who commit crimes against tribal law within the reservation was a necessary aspect of the tribe's sovereignty:435 U.S. at 212 (Marshall, J., dissenting).
I agree with the court below that the "power to preserve order on the reservation ... is a sine qua non of the sovereignty that the Suquamish originally possessed." Oliphant v. Schlie, 544 F.2d 1007, 1009 (CA9 1976). In the absence of affirmative withdrawal by treaty or statute, I am of the view that Indian tribes enjoy, as a necessary aspect of their retained sovereignty, the right to try and punish all persons who commit offenses against tribal law within the reservation. Accordingly, I dissent.
Chief Justice Warren Burger joined the dissenting opinion.
Effects
In 1990 the Supreme Court extended Oliphant to hold that tribes also lacked criminal jurisdiction over Indians who were not members of the tribe, exercising jurisdiction in Duro v. Reina. Within six months, however, Congress abrogated the decision by amending the Indian Civil Rights Act to affirm that tribes had inherent criminal jurisdiction over nonmember Indians. In 2004, the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the legislation in United States v. Lara. 
Scholars have extensively criticized Oliphant. According to Professor Bethany Berger, "By patching together bits and pieces of history and isolated quotes from nineteenth century cases, and relegating contrary evidence to footnotes or ignoring it altogether, the majority created a legal basis for denying jurisdiction out of whole cloth." Rather than legal precedent, the holding was "dictated by the Court's assumptions that tribal courts could not fairly exercise jurisdiction over outsiders and that the effort to exercise such jurisdiction was a modern upstart of little importance to tribal concerns." Professor Philip Frickey describes Oliphant, along with the subsequent decisions limiting tribal jurisdiction over non-Indians, as rooted in a "normatively unattractive judicial colonial impulse," and Professor Robert Williams condemns the decision as "legal auto-genocide." According to Dr. Bruce Duthu, the case showed "that the project of imperialism is alive and well in Indian Country and that courts can now get into the action."Duthu, supra, at 21.
The Oliphant Court essentially elevated a local level conflict between a private citizen and an Indian tribe into a collision of framework interests between two sovereigns, and in the process revived the most negative and destructive aspects of colonialism as it relates to Indian rights. This is a principal reason the decision has attracted so much negative reaction ... Oliphant impact on the development of federal Indian law and life on the ground in Indian Country has been nothing short of revolutionary. The opinion gutted the notion of full territorial sovereignty as it applies to Indian tribes.Duthu, supra, at 20–21.
Evolution
Congress allowed the tribal courts the right to consider a lawsuit if a non-Indian man commits domestic violence towards a Native American woman on the territory of a Native American tribe by passing Violence Against Women Reauthorization Act of 2013 (VAWA 2013), signed into law on March 7, 2013, by President Barack Obama. It was motivated by the high percentage of Native American women being assaulted by non-Indian men, who felt immune because of the lack of jurisdiction of tribal courts. The new law allowed tribal courts to exercise jurisdiction over non-Indian domestic violence offenders but also imposed other obligations on tribal justice systems, including the requirement for tribes to provide licensed attorneys to defend the non-Indians in tribal court. The new law took effect on March 7, 2015, but also authorized a voluntary "Pilot Project" to allow certain tribes to begin exercising special jurisdiction earlier.Department of Justice, "Tribal Justice and Safety" On February 6, 2014, three tribes were selected for this Pilot Project:Department of Justice, "Justice Department Announces Three Tribes to Implement Special Domestic Violence Criminal Jurisdiction Under VAWA 2013" the Pascua Yaqui Tribe (Arizona), the Tulalip Tribes of Washington, and the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation (Oregon).
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 435
 References 
Further reading
 Paul Spruhan, "Indians in a Jurisdictional Sense: Tribal Citizenship and other Forms of non-Indian Consent to Tribal Criminal Jurisdiction", 1 American Indian Law Journal 79 (2012) https://ssrn.com/abstract=2179149
External links
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:United States Native American criminal jurisdiction case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Native American history of Washington (state)
"""

From "Oliver v. United States" ==> """
Oliver v. United States, 466 U.S. 170 (1984), is a United States Supreme Court decision relating to the open fields doctrine limiting the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Background
Acting upon a tip that defendant was growing marijuana on his property, two Kentucky State Police officers drove onto defendant's land, past his house, up to a gate which was marked with a "no trespassing" sign. The officers left their vehicle and walked along a footpath around the gate onto defendant's property and continued down the road for nearly a mile.  At that distance from the house, the two officers spotted a large marijuana crop on defendant's property.  The defendant was later charged with drug offenses for this cultivation. At trial the defendant challenged the evidence on Fourth Amendment grounds.
Opinion of the Court
After appeals, the Supreme Court affirmed the open fields rule derived from Hester v. United States (1924), and decided that the officers' actions did not constitute a "search" under the Fourth Amendment. The Court held:
[A]n individual may not legitimately demand privacy for activities conducted out of doors in fields, except in the area immediately surrounding the home...The [Fourth] Amendment reflects the recognition of the Framers that certain enclaves should be free from arbitrary government interference. For example, the Court since the enactment of the Fourth Amendment has stressed ‘the overriding respect for the sanctity of the home that has been embedded in our traditions since the origins of the Republic.’ Id at 178. 
The Court cited policy reasons for preserving the open fields rule, stating that "open fields do not provide the setting for those intimate activities that the Amendment is intended to shelter from government interference or surveillance."  Id at 178.  The Court also cited practical considerations as weighing on its decision, since open fields "usually are accessible to the public," and "no trespassing" signs are generally ineffective at "bar[ring] the public from viewing open fields in rural areas," and "the public and police lawfully may survey lands from the air." Id at 178-179.  Because of these considerations, the Court declined to accept the defendants' expectation of privacy as one that "society recognizes as reasonable." Id at 178-179.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 466
Katz v. United States (1967)
United States v. Dunn (1987)
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Cannabis in Kentucky
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:Kentucky State Police
"""

From "Olmstead v. L.C." ==> """
Olmstead v. L.C., 527 U.S. 581 (1999), is a United States Supreme Court case regarding discrimination against people with mental disabilities.  The Supreme Court held that under the Americans with Disabilities Act, individuals with mental disabilities have the right to live in the community rather than in institutions if, in the words of the opinion of the Court, "the State's treatment professionals have determined that community placement is appropriate, the transfer from institutional care to a less restrictive setting is not opposed by the affected individual, and the placement can be reasonably accommodated, taking into account the resources available to the State and the needs of others with mental disabilities." The case was brought by the Atlanta Legal Aid Society on behalf of Lois Curtis.
 Background 
Tommy Olmstead, Commissioner, Georgia Department of Human Resources, et al. v. L. C., by Zimring, guardian ad litem and next friend, et al.Syllabus and opinions of the Supreme Court regarding Olmstead, Supct.law.cornell.edu (Olmstead v. L.C.) was a case filed in 1995 and decided in 1999 before the United States Supreme Court. The plaintiffs, L.C. (Lois Curtis, deceased November 3, 2022) and E.W. (Elaine Wilson, deceased December 4, 2005), were two women who were diagnosed with schizophrenia, intellectual disability and personality disorder. They had both been treated in institutional settings and in community based treatments in the state of Georgia.
Following clinical assessments by state employees, both plaintiffs were determined to be better suited for treatment in a community-based setting rather than in the institution. The plaintiffs remained confined in the institution, each for several years after the initial treatment was concluded. Both sued the state of Georgia to prevent them from being inappropriately treated and housed in the institutional setting.
 Opinion of the Court 
The case rose to the level of the United States Supreme Court, which decided the case in 1999, and plays a major role in determining that mental illness is a form of disability and therefore covered under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).  Title II of the ADA applies to 'public entities' and include 'state and local governments' and 'any department, agency or special purpose district' and protects any 'qualified person with a disability' from exclusion from participation in or denied the benefits of services, programs, or activities of a public entity.
The Supreme Court decided mental illness is a form of disability and that "unjustified isolation" of a person with a disability is a form of discrimination under Title II of the ADA. The Supreme Court held that community placement is only required and appropriate (i.e., institutionalization is unjustified), when –"[a] the State's treatment professionals have determined that community placement is appropriate, [b] the transfer from institutional care to a less restrictive setting is not opposed by the affected individual, and [c] the placement can be reasonably accommodated, taking into account the resources available to the State and the needs of others with mental disabilities.
Unjustified isolation is discrimination based on disability.
The Supreme Court explained that this holding "reflects two evident judgments." First, "institutional placement of persons who can handle and benefit from community settings perpetuates unwarranted assumptions that persons so isolated are incapable or unworthy of participating in community life." Second, historically "confinement in an institution severely diminishes the everyday life activities of individuals, including family relations, social contacts, work options, economic independence, educational advancement, and cultural enrichment." Id. at 600–601.
However, a majority of Justices in Olmstead also recognized an ongoing role for publicly and privately operated institutions: "We emphasize that nothing in the ADA or its implementing regulations condones termination of institutional settings for persons unable to handle or benefit from community settings...Nor is there any federal requirement that community-based treatment be imposed on patients who do not desire it." Id. at 601–602.
A plurality of Justices noted: "[N]o placement outside the institution may ever be appropriate . . . 'Some individuals, whether mentally retarded or mentally ill, are not prepared at particular times - perhaps in the short run, perhaps in the long run - for the risks and exposure of the less protective environment of community settings ' for these persons, 'institutional settings are needed and must remain available'" (quoting Amicus Curiae Brief for the American Psychiatric Association, et al.). "As already observed [by the majority], the ADA is not reasonably read to impel States to phase out institutions, placing patients in need of close care at risk... 'Each disabled person is entitled to treatment in the most integrated setting possible for that person—recognizing on a case-by-case basis, that setting may be an institution'[quoting VOR's Amici Curiae brief]." Id. at 605.
Justice Kennedy noted in his concurring opinion, "It would be unreasonable, it would be a tragic event, then, were the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) to be interpreted so that states had some incentive, for fear of litigation to drive those in need of medical care and treatment out of appropriate care and into settings with too little assistance and supervision." Id. at 610.
The Supreme Court did not reach the question of whether there is a constitutional right to community services in the most integrated setting.Ferleger, The Constitutional Right to Community Services, 26 Georgia State University Law Rev. 763 (2010)
thumb|280px|right|Lois Curtis, the plaintiff in Olmstead v. L.C., (center) presents President Barack Obama with a self-portrait of herself as a child that she painted. Joining them are, from left, Janet Hill and Jessica Long, from the Georgia Department of Labor, and Lee Sanders, of Briggs and Associates. The Oval Office, 20 June 2011 (Official White House Photo by Pete Souza)
About ten years after the Olmstead decision, the State of Georgia and the United States Department of Justice entered a settlement agreement to cease all admissions of individuals with developmental disabilities to state-operated, federally licensed institutions ("State Hospitals") and, by July 1, 2015, "transition all individuals with developmental disabilities in the State Hospitals from the Hospitals to community settings," according to a Department of Justice Fact Sheet about the settlement. The settlement also calls for serving 9,000 individuals with mental illness in community settings. Recently, the federal court's Independent Reviewer for the settlement found significant health and safety risks, including many deaths, harming former State Hospital residents due to their transition from a licensed facility home to community-settings per the settlement. The Court has approved a moratorium on such transfers until the safety of those impacted can be assured.
See also
 ADA Litigation in the United States
 Jarvis hearings
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 527
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 References 
 External links 
 Bazelon Center for Mental Health Law: Olmstead Introduction Page
 Olmstead Rights Website Olmstead Rights
Category:United States disability case law
Category:Mental health case law in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1999 in United States case law
Category:Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
Category:Deinstitutionalization in the United States
"""

From "Olmstead v. United States" ==> """
Olmstead v. United States, 277 U.S. 438 (1928), was a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States, on the matter of whether wiretapping of private telephone conversations, obtained by federal agents without a search warrant and subsequently used as evidence, constituted a violation of the target’s rights under the Fourth and Fifth Amendments. In a 5–4 decision, the Court held that the Constitutional rights of a wiretapping target have not been violated.Olmstead v. United States, 277 US 438 (1928). This decision was overturned by Katz v. United States in 1967.Katz v. United States, 389 US 347 (1967).
Background
Seizure of evidence
Until 1914, the American judicial system largely followed the precepts of English common law when it came to matters pertaining to the validity of introducing evidence in criminal trials. In most cases, the general philosophy was that the process to obtain the evidence had little to do with admissibility in court. The only limiting factor was that police agents could not break the law when seizing the evidence.
In 1914, in the landmark case Weeks v. United States, the Supreme Court held unanimously that illegal seizure of items from a private residence was a violation of the Fourth Amendment, and established the exclusionary rule that prohibits admission of illegally obtained evidence in federal courts. Because the Bill of Rights did not at the time extend to the states, such a prohibition applied only to federal agents and covered only federal trials. It was not until the Supreme Court ruling in Mapp v. Ohio (1961) that the exclusionary rule was extended to state law enforcement officers as well.Mapp v. Ohio, 367 US 643 (1961).
Olmstead's complaint
The Olmstead case included several petitioners, including Roy Olmstead, who challenged their criminal convictions, arguing that the use of evidence obtained from wiretapped private telephone conversations amounted to a violation of the Fourth and Fifth Amendments.
The petitioners were convicted in the mid-1920s for conspiracy to violate the National Prohibition Act by unlawfully possessing, transporting, and selling alcohol. The evidence provided by the wiretapped telephone conversations disclosed "a conspiracy of amazing magnitude" to engage in bootlegging, involving the employment of some fifty persons, use of sea vessels for transportation, an underground storage facility in Seattle, and the maintenance of a central office fully equipped with executives, bookkeepers, salesmen, and an attorney.
Olmstead was the general manager of this bootlegging operation. The information that led to the conspiracy charges was largely obtained by four federal Prohibition officers who were able to intercept messages on his and other conspirators' telephones. No laws were violated in installing the wiretapping equipment, as the officers did not trespass upon either the homes or the offices of the defendants; instead, the equipment was placed in the streets near the houses and in the basement of the large office building. The wiretapping went on for several months, and the records revealed significant details on the business transactions of the petitioners and their employees. Stenographic notes were made of the conversations, and their accuracy was affirmed by government witnesses.
Olmstead and the others were convicted on their criminal charges in Washington State in 1925 and sentenced to prison terms. They appealed their convictions via an argument of Constitutional violations; their first attempt at the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals was unsuccessful.Olmstead v. United States, 19 F. 2d 842 (9th Cir., 1927). That decision was then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.  
 Opinion of the court 
Chief Justice William Howard Taft delivered the Opinion of the Court. Taft examined "perhaps the most important" precedent, Weeks v. United States, which involved a conviction for using the mail to transport lottery tickets.Weeks v. United States,  Taft wrote that per this precedent, the Fourth Amendment forbade the introduction of evidence in court if it had been obtained in violation of the amendment. This interpretation complies with the historical purpose of the Fourth Amendment, as it was intended to prevent the use of governmental force to search and seize a citizen’s personal property and effects.
However, Taft held that the United States did not consider telephone conversations to be protected as much as mailed and sealed letters: "The amendment does not forbid what was done here. There was no searching. There was no seizure. The evidence was secured by the use of the sense of hearing and that only. There was no entry of the houses or offices of the defendants." A search and seizure needed to occur physically on the defendants' premises; wiretapping did not because it took place on a publicly-available telephone network that people used voluntarily. Taft pointed out that one can talk with another at a great distance via telephone, and suggested that because the connecting wires were not a part of either the petitioners’ houses or offices, they could not be held subject to the protections of the Fourth Amendment.
Taft suggested that Congress may extend such protections to telephone conversations by passing legislation that would prohibit their use in federal criminal trials. Until such legislation is passed, however, "the courts may not adopt such a policy by attributing an enlarged and unusual meaning to the Fourth Amendment," as there are no precedents that permit the Fourth Amendment to apply as a viable defense in cases where there had been no official search and seizure of the person, his papers, tangible material effects, or an actual physical invasion of property. Taft concluded that such wiretapping as occurred in this case did not amount to a search or seizure within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment.
 Dissenting opinions 
Associate Justice Louis Brandeis wrote a dissenting opinion that became influential in subsequent years. Brandeis began by noting that the government made no attempt to defend the methods employed by federal agents, and in fact conceded that wiretapping could be deemed a search or seizure. Brandeis attacked the proposition that expanding the Fourth Amendment to include protection of telephone conversations was inappropriate. At the time of the adoption of the Fourth and Fifth Amendments, he wrote, “force and violence” were the only means by which the government could compel self-incrimination.
However, with ongoing technological advances, the government had gained the ability to invade privacy in more subtle ways; further, there is no reason to think that the rate of such technological advances will slow down. Brandeis argued that the mail is a public service furnished by the government, and the telephone is "a public service furnished by its authority." He concluded that there is no difference between a private telephone conversation and a sealed letter. In fact, "the evil incident to invasion of the privacy of the telephone is far greater than that involved in tampering with the mails." Brandeis concluded that the convictions against Olmstead and the others should be reversed due to the use of inadmissible evidence, while the government had invaded their privacy: “Can it be that the Constitution affords no protection against such invasions of individual security?”  
Later commentators often made use of Brandeis's statement that "if the government becomes a lawbreaker, it breeds contempt for law; it invites every man to become a law unto himself; it invites anarchy. To declare that in the administration of the criminal law the end justifies the means—to declare that the government may commit crimes in order to secure the conviction of a private criminal—would bring terrible retribution. Against that pernicious doctrine this court should resolutely set its face." This includes Timothy McVeigh at his trial for the bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City in 1997.
In 2018, the "famous dissent" by Brandeis was cited affirmatively by the Supreme Court in Carpenter v. United States for the proposition that the courts are obligated to ensure that the "progress of science" does not erode Fourth Amendment protections as "subtler and more far-reaching means of invading privacy... become available to the Government".
Justices Holmes, Butler, and Stone also delivered dissenting opinions in Olmstead, but largely on Constitutional technicalities.
 Impact 
After his failed appeals, Roy Olmstead spent his 4-year prison sentence at the McNeil Island Correctional Institute in Washington State. He then became a carpenter. On December 25, 1935, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt granted him a full presidential pardon. Besides restoring his constitutional rights, the pardon remitted his court costs. Eventually, Olmstead became a well-known Christian Science practitioner who worked with prison inmates on an anti-alcoholism agenda until his death in 1966 at age 79.Roy Olmstead, biography on the website of the 2011 PBS miniseries Prohibition. Accessed January 6, 2012.
In the year after Olmstead's death, the Supreme Court vacated his conviction via the Katz v. United States ruling, in which the nearly 40 year-old Olmstead precedent was overturned via a new interpretation of the Fourth Amendment as applicable "to certain areas or to tangible objects" beyond basic police searches of a suspect's home.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 277
References
External links
Category:1928 in United States case law
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:Telephone tapping
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
"""

From "Olsen v. Nebraska" ==> """
Olsen v. Nebraska, 313 U.S. 236 (1941), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that the Supreme Court of Nebraska misapplied the 14th amendment's Due Process Clause, when it was used to strike down a state statute limiting the amount of compensation that private employment agencies could withhold from employees.. 
Background
A Nebraska statute restricted employment agencies from collecting more than ten percent of the salary of individuals for whom the agency obtained employment.Olsen, 313 U.S. at 243 (citing Neb.Comp.Stat. 1929, § 48-508). A realtor applied for a license to operate an employment agency, but the Secretary of Labor of Nebraska refused to issue the license because the realtor refused to limit its deductions to ten percent of the salaries of individuals who obtained employment.Olsen, 313 U.S. at 243. The realtor filed a lawsuit in an attempt to obtain a writ of mandamus to order the secretary to grant the license. Relying on Ribnik v. McBride,. the Supreme Court of Nebraska ruled that the statute was unconstitutional because it violated the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause.Olsen, 313 U.S. at 240-42.
Opinion of the Court
In an opinion written by Justice William O. Douglas, the Court held that the Supreme Court of Nebraska should not have relied upon Ribnik v. McBride because "[t]he drift away from Ribnik v. McBride ... has been so great that it can no longer be deemed a controlling authority."Olsen, 313 U.S. at 244. Justice Douglas explained that "[w]e are not concerned, however, with the wisdom, need, or appropriateness of the legislation" and concluded that the Court should defer to the state's determinations about the propriety of the legislation.Olsen, 313 U.S. at 246. The Court reversed the decision of the Supreme Court of Nebraska remanded the case to the Supreme Court of Nebraska for further proceedings.Olsen, 313 U.S. at 247.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Hughes Court
References
External links
Category:1941 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
"""

From "Olympic Airways v. Husain" ==> """
Olympic Airways v. Husain, 540 U.S. 644 (2004), was a United States Supreme Court (SCOTUS) case related to Olympic Airways Flight 417. The case arose from the death on 4 January 1998 of Dr. Abid Hanson,Lithwick, Dahlia. "The Accidental Tourist." Slate. Wednesday 12 November 2003. Retrieved on 4 July 2009. a passenger on Olympic Airways Flight 417 from Cairo, Egypt, via Athens, Greece, to New York City in the United States. Hanson died following exposure to secondhand smoke.Supreme Court brief
Dr. Hanson, who had a "history of recurrent anaphylactic reactions" and sensitivity to secondhand smoke, had requested a non-smoking seat. When the family boarded the Boeing 747 aircraftHusain v. Olympic Airways (), 316 F.3d 829 (9th Cir. 2002), in Athens, the family found that the assigned seats were three rows ahead of the economy-class smoking area; there was no partition between the smoking and non-smoking sections. The family repeatedly requested a seat farther away from the smoking section but the flight attendant, Maria Leptourgou, would not move the passenger to any of the eleven other unoccupied seats on the aircraft. Hanson felt a reaction to the smoke and died several hours later, despite his doctor's aid.
Background
thumb|"No smoking" sign, as seen on most passenger flights worldwide
Smoking on international flights was already seen as a safety issue by the International Civil Aviation Organization's aviation medicine section, which had sought an outright ban by 1996.Smoking restrictions on international passenger flights
Abid Hanson and his wife, Rubina Husain, were sitting in non-smoking seats on Olympic Airways Flight 417, but were very near the smoking section. Dr. Hanson was allergic to second-hand smoke. The couple's request to be moved was denied by the flight crew, and because of the inhalation of smoke during the flight, Dr. Hanson died. Rubina Husain filed suit in a California federal district court seeking damages under Article 17 of the Warsaw Convention. This Article allowed damages to be recovered by international air travelers for accidents that occur during a flight. Applying the statute from the Warsaw convention, the district court ruled that Mr. Hanson's death was an "accident" and awards Rubina Husain $1.4 million. This ruling was affirmed by the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals.
Legal case
The Supreme Court of the United States decided the appeal in Olympic Airways v. Husain.  Before the case reached the Supreme Court, the lower courts had decided as follows:
The District Court found petitioner liable for Dr. Hanson’s death, and the Ninth Circuit affirmed, concluding that, under the definition in [Air France v. Saks, ] of “accident,” the flight attendant’s refusal to re-seat Dr. Hanson was clearly external to him, and unexpected and unusual in light of industry standards, Olympic policy, and the simple nature of the requested accommodation.Court Syllabus
On initial appeal, a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit unanimously affirmed the finding of the District Court that Leptourgou's actions not only met the definition of “accident” under Article 17 of the Warsaw Convention, but also rose to the level of being “wilful misconduct” under Article 25; by passing that threshold, it removed a $75,000 cap on damages.
The Supreme Court affirmed the Court of Appeals award of US$700,000 in compensatory damages against Olympic Airways, holding that: "the conduct here constitutes an 'accident' under Article 17 of the Warsaw Convention."Decision of the USSC
Question before the Court
The question before SCOTUS was whether a preexisting medical condition aggravated by airplane conditions can be considered an "accident" under the Warsaw Convention's Article 17, holding the airline responsible for the damages.
Decision of the Supreme Court
In a 6-2 decision in favor of Husain, Justice Clarence Thomas delivered the opinion of the Court. The Court cited the decision in Air France v. Saks, which held that "any injury is the product of a chain of causes....some link in the chain was an unusual or unexpected event external to the passenger." Further, the flight attendant's refusal to allow the couple to change seats was the "link in the chain" that caused Dr. Hanson's death.
See also
Inflight smoking
References
External links
Category:Olympic Airlines
Category:Smoking cessation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:United States tobacco case law
Category:1998 in New York (state)
Category:Smoking in the United States
Category:January 1998 events in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Services, Inc." ==> """
Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Services, 523 U.S. 75 (1998), is a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court. The case arose out of a suit for sex discrimination by a male oil-rig worker, who claimed that he was repeatedly subjected to sexual harassment by his male co-workers with the acquiescence of his employer. The Court held that the protection of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 against workplace discrimination "because of... sex" applied to harassment in the workplace between members of the same sex..
Background
In late October 1991, Joseph Oncale was working for Sundowner Offshore Services on a Chevron USA Inc. oil platform in the Gulf of Mexico. He was employed as a roustabout on an eight-man crew. On several occasions, Oncale was forcibly subjected to sex-related, humiliating actions against him by his coworkers in the presence of the rest of the crew. Oncale was also sodomized with a bar of soap and threatened with rape. Oncale's complaints to supervisory personnel produced no remedial action. Instead, the company's Safety Compliance Clerk called him a name suggesting homosexuality. Oncale eventually quit, asking that his pink slip reflect that he "voluntarily left due to sexual harassment and verbal abuse."
Oncale filed a complaint against Sundowner in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana, alleging that he was discriminated against in his employment because of his sex. Relying on earlier precedents, the district court granted summary judgment to the defendant: "Mr. Oncale, a male, has no cause of action under Title VII for harassment by male co-workers." Oncale appealed, and the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit affirmed the decision. After granting a petition for writ of certiorari, the Supreme Court reversed the decision.
Decision
Justice Scalia, writing for the unanimous court (with Justice Thomas concurring), reversed the decision of the district court and remanded the case for further proceedings in accordance with the instruction that a male can be discriminated against by members of the same sex under Title VII.
Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Services set the precedent for analyzing same-sex harassment and sexual harassment without motivation of "sexual desire" by stating that any discrimination based on sex is actionable if it places the victim in an objectively-disadvantageous working condition, regardless of the gender of the victim or the harasser.
The case was subsequently remanded by the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit to the trial court.Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Services, 140 F.3d 595 (5th Cir. 1998).  The case was then settled out of court."Offshore-Rig Worker Reaches Settlement In His Harassment Suit", Associated Press via Seattle Times (October 25, 1998).
Impact and implementation
The application of the Oncale case has caused some difficulty in the lower federal courts, which have struggled with how to determine whether any particular case of same-sex harassment is "because of sex." In particular, courts have struggled with how to deal with harassment that appears to be based on actual or perceived sexual orientation because employment discrimination based on sexual orientation was not explicitly forbidden by federal law.
In July 2015, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission determined that employment discrimination based on sexual orientation was illegal under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and used the Oncale decision as a basis.
Because it set a precedent regarding harassment "because of sex," Oncale v. Sundowner has been lauded as a landmark gay rights case, even though all those involved were heterosexual. In the Court's opinion in Oncale, the inclusion of sexual discrimination between same sex individuals as a protected class under Title VII set an important precedent of expanding the interpretation of protected classes under § 2000e-2(a)(1).Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Services, Inc. (n.d.). Oyez. https://www.oyez.org/cases/1997/96-568 This precedent was later reflected upon in Bostock v. Clayton County along with two other important cases, all of which considered the word "sex" and its definition in regards to Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.Eskridge Jr., William N. (November 2017). "Title VII's Statutory History and the Sex Discrimination Argument for LGBT Workplace Protections". Yale Law Journal. 127 (2): 322.
See also
Hostile work environment
English v. Sanderson Blinds Ltd
Meritor Savings Bank v. Vinson
Bostock v. Clayton County
Hostile Advances: The Kerry Ellison Story movie about Ellison v. Brady which set the "reasonable woman" precedent in sexual harassment law.
Jenson v. Eveleth Taconite Co.
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 523
 List of LGBT-related cases in the United States Supreme Court
References
External links
 Database of important sexual harassment cases and litigation
Category:1998 in LGBT history
Category:1998 in United States case law
Category:Business ethics cases
Category:Harassment case law
Category:Sexual harassment in the United States
Category:United States employment discrimination case law
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
Category:United States LGBT rights case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Violence against men in North America
"""

From "One 1958 Plymouth Sedan v. Pennsylvania" ==> """
One 1958 Plymouth Sedan v. Pennsylvania, 380 U.S. 693 (1965), was a Supreme Court of the United States case handed down in 1965. The Court ruled that civil forfeiture could not apply where the evidence used to invoke the forfeiture was obtained illegally.
Some police officers followed the suspect vehicle, and pulled over the car because it was "riding low". Without a warrant, they searched the trunk and found untaxed liquor. The car was seized, and the state also attempted to confiscate the automobile in question as a civil penalty. The Court ruled unanimously that the Fourth Amendment's protection against unreasonable searches and seizures, held applicable to the states by the Fourteenth Amendment, applies to civil actions by the states as well as criminal ones, noting that one could be subject to an even worse penalty in a civil proceeding, where the value of the items being forfeited might be more than the maximum possible fine in a criminal case.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 380
United States v. Article Consisting of 50,000 Cardboard Boxes More or Less, Each Containing One Pair of Clacker Balls
United States v. $124,700 in U.S. Currency
United States v. Approximately 64,695 Pounds of Shark Fins
External links
Category:1965 in United States case law
Category:United States civil forfeiture case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States in rem cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Plymouth (automobile)
"""

From "One, Inc. v. Olesen" ==> """
One, Inc. v. Olesen, 355 U.S. 371 (1958), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court for LGBT rights in the United States. It was the first U.S. Supreme Court ruling to deal with homosexuality and the first to address free speech rights with respect to homosexuality. The Supreme Court reversed a lower court ruling that the gay magazine ONE violated obscenity laws, thus upholding constitutional protection for pro-homosexual writing. 
ONE, Inc., a spinoff of the Mattachine Society, published the early pro-gay ONE: The Homosexual Magazine beginning in 1953. After a campaign of harassment from the U.S. Post Office Department and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Los Angeles Postmaster Otto Olesen declared the October 1954 issue "obscene, lewd, lascivious and filthy" and therefore unmailable under the Comstock laws. In that issue, the Post Office objected to "Sappho Remembered", a story of a lesbian's affection for a twenty-year-old "girl" who gives up her boyfriend to live with her, the lesbian, because it was "lustfully stimulating to the average homosexual reader"; "Lord Samuel and Lord Montagu", a poem about homosexual cruising that it said contained "filthy words"; and (3) an advertisement for The Circle, a magazine containing homosexual pulp romance stories, that would direct the reader to other obscene material.
The magazine, represented by a young attorney who had authored the cover story in the October 1954 issue, Eric Julber, Julber's article was "You Can't Print It!", about how to steer clear of government censorship policies. He represented One, Inc. pro bono. In 2015 he was 90 years old and living in Carmel, California, with his wife. brought suit in U.S. District Court seeking an injunction against the Postmaster. In March 1956, U.S. District Judge Thurmond Clarke ruled for the defendant. He wrote: "The suggestion advanced that homosexuals should be recognized as a segment of our people and be accorded special privilege as a class is rejected." A three-judge panel of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld that decision unanimously in February 1957. Julber filed a petition with the U.S. Supreme Court on June 13, 1957. On January 13, 1958, that court both accepted the case and, without hearing oral argument, issued a terse per curiam decision reversing the Ninth Circuit. The decision, citing its June 24, 1957, landmark decision in Roth v. United States , read in its entirety:
On the same day, the court issued a similar per curiam decision also citing Roth in Sunshine Book Co. v. Summerfield, which concerned the distribution of two nudist magazines.
One, Inc. v. Olesen was the first U.S. Supreme Court ruling to deal with homosexuality and the first to address free speech rights with respect to homosexuality. The justices supporting the reversal were Frankfurter, Douglas, Clark, Harlan, and Whittaker. As an affirmation of Roth, the case itself has proved most important for, in the words of one scholar, "its on-the-ground effects. By protecting ONE, the Supreme Court facilitated the flourishing of a gay and lesbian culture and a sense of community" at the same time as the federal government was purging homosexuals from its ranks.
In its next issue, ONE told its readers: "For the first time in American publishing history, a decision binding on every court now stands. ... affirming in effect that it is in no way proper to describe a love affair between two homosexuals as constitut(ing) obscenity."
See also
 List of LGBT-related cases in the United States Supreme Court
References
Further reading
 , describing
External links
 One, Inc. v. Olesen, Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, February 27, 1957
 Index of ONE Magazine issues
 Homosexuality and Free Speech: The 1958 ONE Case* 
Category:United States LGBT rights case law
Category:United States obscenity case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1958 in United States case law
Category:1950s in LGBT history
"""

From "County of Oneida v. Oneida Indian Nation of New York State" ==> """
County of Oneida v. Oneida Indian Nation of New York State, 470 U.S. 226 (1985), was a landmark United States Supreme Court case concerning aboriginal title in the United States. The case, sometimes referred to as Oneida II, was "the first Indian land claim case won on the basis of the Nonintercourse Act.", 1988, at 145.
The Supreme Court held that Indian tribes have a common law cause of action for possessory land claims based upon aboriginal title, that the Nonintercourse Act did not preempt that cause of action, and that the cause of action was not barred by a statute of limitations, abatement, implicit federal ratification, or nonjusticiability. Four dissenting justices would have held for the counties on the defense of laches, a question which the majority did not reach, but expressed doubts about.
Furthermore, the Court held that, due to the Eleventh Amendment, federal courts could not exercise ancillary jurisdiction over cross-claims by counties against states. Although only two other justices agreed with the entirety of Justice Powell's majority opinion, Brennan and Marshall agreed with Parts I-IV and VI (the Oneida's claims against the counties) and Burger, White, and Rehnquist agreed with Part V (the counties claims against the state), thus forging separate majorities.
The case is often referred to as Oneida II because it is the second of three times the Oneida Indian Nation reached the Supreme Court in litigating its land rights claims. It followed Oneida Indian Nation of New York v. County of Oneida (Oneida I) (1974), holding that there was federal subject-matter jurisdiction, and was followed by City of Sherrill v. Oneida Indian Nation of New York (2005), rejecting the tribe's attempt in a later lawsuit to re-assert tribal sovereignty over parcels of land re-acquired by the tribe in fee simple.
Background
This was the second time the Supreme Court had granted certiorari to the Oneida's land claim. Over a decade earlier, in Oneida Indian Nation of New York v. County of Oneida (1974), the Supreme Court had allowed the same suit to proceed by unanimously holding that there was federal subject-matter jurisdiction to hear the claim.Oneida Indian Nation of New York v. County of Oneida (Oneida I), 414 U.S. 661 (1974). Since then, Justices William O. Douglas and Potter Stewart had departed, replaced by John Paul Stevens and Sandra Day O'Connor.
On remand, the United States District Court for the Northern District of New York had found the counties liable to the Oneida for wrongful possession of their lands, awarded damages of $16,694, plus interest, representing the fair rental value of the land in question for the 2-year period specified in the complaint. Finally, the District Court required New York state to indemnify the counties. The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed.719 F.2d 525 (2d Cir. 1983).
The Supreme Court granted certiorari "to determine whether an Indian tribe may have a live cause of action for a violation of its possessory rights that occurred 175 years ago," ultimately agreeing with the District Court and Second Circuit that the tribe may.470 U.S. at 230. On appeal, the counties did not dispute the District Court's findings that the Oneida held aboriginal title to the lands in question, and that the 1795 conveyances of the lands to the state violated the Nonintercourse Act.470 U.S. at 232–33. The counties instead argued that the Nonintercourse Act preempted the Oneida's cause of action, that any cause of action was time barred, non-justifiable, and abated, and that any conveyance was ratified by the federal government.470 U.S. at 233.
Change of counsel
The case was initiated by George Shattuck of Bond, Schoeneck & King(BS&K), on a contingency fee basis rather than as a pro bono matter., 1991, at 6. The retainer agreement between the firm and the tribe, approved (as required) by the Department of the Interior, provided that the firm would litigate the tribe's Nonintercourse Act claim only against the government and would not sue private land owners; another firm was handling the tribe's claim before the Indian Claims Commission., 1991, at 9–11, 26, 39, 41, 73, 94, 202. 
Shattuck argued Oneida I alone before the Supreme Court., 1991, at 34. The Native American Rights Fund (NARF), which had assisted initially assisted the firm,, 1991, at ix, 29–31, 33, 37, 59, 61, 64. served as co-counsel in the trial after the Oneida I decision, 1991, at 43, 48. and took over completely on the second appeal., 1991, at xii, xix. The NARF also filed another suit behalf of the Oneidas, pressing the Oneida's possessory claims against landowners over additional lands., 1991, at 75–79.
As of March 2011, BS&K had yet to receive any attorney's fees from the tribe.Glen Coin, Syracuse law firm wants more money for work it did early on in the Oneida land claim case , March 11, 2011. On July 11, 2011, the United States District Court for the Northern District of New York ruled that BS&K was entitled to $5,174.54 in fees; the district court reduced the fees to that number after finding that BS&K had breached its duty of loyalty to the Oneida's by also representing the Canadian claimants.Oneida Indian Nation v. Cnty. of Oneida, Nos. 5:70–CV–0035(LEK), 5:74–CV–187 (LEK/DRH)., 2011 WL 2728388 (N.D.N.Y. July 12, 2011).
 Opinion of the Court 
The majority opinion by Justice Lewis F. Powell, Jr. recognized the Oneida's federal common law cause of action, and rejected all the counties' affirmative defenses.
Cause of action
The Second Circuit held that the Oneida's had both a federal common law cause of action and an implied cause of action under the Nonintercourse Act of 1793 (the version that governed the 1795 transaction). The Supreme Court did not reach the statutory question because it held that "the Indians' common-law right to sue is firmly established." The court recognized that "[n]umerous decisions of this Court prior to Oneida I recognized at least implicitly that Indians have a federal common-law right to sue to enforce their aboriginal land rights," citing a string of examples back to Johnson v. M'Intosh (1823).470 U.S. at 235. The court concluded:
[W]e hold that the Oneidas can maintain this action for violation of their possessory rights based on federal common law.470 U.S. at 236.
As to the Nonintercourse Act, the Court held that it did not preempt the cause of action because "[t]he Nonintercourse Act of 1793 does not speak directly to the question of remedies for unlawful conveyances of Indian land."470 U.S. at 237. The court noted that the Act "did not establish a comprehensive remedial plan for dealing with violations of Indian property rights" and that there was "no indication in the legislative history that Congress intended to pre-empt common-law remedies." Because the Act contained no remedial provisions, and because subsequent Congressional enactments contemplated possessory land suits by Indians, the Court found that preemption was not indicated.470 U.S. at 237–39. The court reviewed its recent aboriginal title decisions, and reiterated its statement in Oneida I that the Act merely "put in statutory form what was or came to be the accepted rule."470 U.S. at 240 (quoting Oneida I, 414 U.S. at 678).
Statute of limitations
thumb|right|Justice Lewis F. Powell, Jr. sustained the Oneida's federal common law cause of action and rejected all of the counties' affirmative defenses.
Where there is no statute of limitations for a federal cause of action, the general rule is to borrow the analogous state statute of limitations unless such would be inconsistent with the underlying federal policies.470 U.S. at 240. However, here, the Court held that "borrowing of a state limitations period in these cases would be inconsistent with federal policy."470 U.S. at 241. Reviewing Congressional actions in the context of the Indian Claims Commission, the Court concluded that "It would be a violation of Congress' will were we to hold that a state statute of limitations period should be borrowed in these circumstances."470 U.S. at 244.
Laches
The majority noted that the four dissenting justices would have barred the Oneida's claim under laches. However, the majority noted that "we do not reach this issue today" because the District Court had ruled against the counties laches defense, and the counties had not raised the issue in the Second Circuit. In a footnote, the majority opined that "application of the equitable defense of laches in an action at law would be novel indeed."470 U.S. at 245 n.16. The same footnote cited  Ewert v. Bluejacket, 259 U.S. 129 (1922) for the proposition that laches "cannot properly have application to give vitality to a void deed and to bar the rights of Indian wards in lands subject to statutory restrictions." The majority called the application of laches "questionable" and noted that such "would appear to be inconsistent with established federal policy."
In its final footnote, the majority noted that, on  "[t]he question whether equitable considerations should limit the relief available to the present day Oneida Indians . . ., we express no opinion as to . . . the final disposition of this case should Congress not exercise its authority to resolve these far-reaching Indian claims."470 U.S. at 254 n.27.
Abatement
The counties advanced the theory that the causes of action under Nonintercourse Acts of 1790, 1793, 1796, 1799, and 1802 (unlike the final 1833 version) abated upon the expiration of the statutes. However, the Court held that because the different versions of the Act contained "substantially the same restraint on the alienation of Indian lands . . . , the precedents of this Court compel the conclusion that the Oneidas' cause of action has not abated."470 U.S. at 246.
Ratification
The counties advanced the theory that later treaties between the Oneidas and the United States, which ceded different lands to New York, constituted a ratification of the earlier conveyances (and thus those conveyances were in compliance with the Nonintercourse Act). The Court found this interpretation untenable under the canons of construction of federal Indian law, which provide that, inter alia, "treaties should be construed liberally in favor of the Indians."470 U.S. at 247.
Nonjusticiability
The counties final argument was that the Oneida's land claim was a nonjusticiable political question. The Court found this argument to be non-meritorious in light of similar Indian law precedents.470 U.S. at 248–50.
Ancillary jurisdiction
The final question before the Court was whether the District Court rightly exercised ancillary jurisdiction over the counties' cross-claim against the state for indemnification. The Court rejected, as having "no basis in law," the Second Circuit's theory that "by violating a federal statute, the State consented to suit in federal court by any party on any claim, state or federal, growing out of the same nucleus of operative facts as the statutory violation."470 U.S. at 251. Although the counties' cross-claim would meet the traditional criteria for ancillary jurisdiction, the Court found those criteria foreclosed by the Eleventh Amendment.
Conclusion
The Court concluded by remarking upon the "potential consequences of affirmance," arguing that "this litigation makes abundantly clear the necessity for congressional action" to extinguish Indian title by statute.470 U.S. at 253. In the words of the Court:
 One would have thought that claims dating back for more than a century and a half would have been barred long ago. As our opinion indicates, however, neither petitioners nor we have found any applicable statute of limitations or other relevant legal basis for holding that the Oneidas' claims are barred or otherwise have been satisfied.
Brennan and Marshall
Justices William J. Brennan, Jr. and Thurgood Marshall joined the entirety of the majority's opinion, except the ancillary jurisdiction portion. In a brief opinion, Brennan reiterated his view from Yeomans v. Kentucky (1975) that the Eleventh Amendment "bars federal court suits against States only by citizens of other States."470 U.S. at 254 (Brennan, J., joined by Marshall, J., concurring).
Stevens, Burger, White, and Rehnquist
thumb|right|Justice John Paul Stevens would have barred the Oneida's claim under the equitable doctrine of laches.
Justice John Paul Stevens, joined by Chief Justice Warren E. Burger and Justices Byron White and William Rehnquist joined the majority's opinion as to No. 83-1240 (the cross-claims against the state) but dissented as to No. 83-1065 (the Oneida's claims against the counties).470 U.S. at 255 (Stevens, J., joined by Burger, C.J., White, J., and Rehnquist, J., dissenting). The dissenters would have barred the Oneida's claim under the equitable doctrine of laches, noting:
[In 1795, the Oneidas] made no attempt to assert the claim, and their successors in interest waited 175 years before bringing suit to avoid a 1795 conveyance that the Tribe freely made, for a valuable consideration. The absence of any evidence of deception, concealment, or interference with the Tribe's right to assert a claim, together with the societal interests that always underlie statutes of repose-particularly when title to real property is at stake-convince me that this claim is barred by the extraordinary passage of time. It is worthy of emphasis that this claim arose when George Washington was the President of the United States.470 U.S. at 255–56.
The dissenters noted various historical examples of the Court applying laches to Indian equitable claims, and argued that the doctrine should also be applied to the action of ejectment (which they admitted was an action at law, not equity).470 U.S. at 256. Specifically, they cited "[t]hree decisions of this Court illustrate the application of the doctrine of laches to actions seeking to set aside conveyances made in violation of federal law."470 U.S. at 263. Moreover, the dissenters quoted Lewis v. Marshall, 30 U.S. 470 (1831), for the proposition that:
The best interests of society require that causes of action should not be deferred an unreasonable time. This remark is peculiarly applicable to land titles. Nothing so much retards the growth and prosperity of a country as insecurity of titles to real estate. Labor is paralysed where the enjoyment of its fruits is uncertain; and litigation without limit produces ruinous consequences to individuals.
The dissent concluded:
The Court, no doubt, believes that it is undoing a grave historical injustice, but in doing so it has caused another, which only Congress may now rectify.470 U.S. at 273.
The dissent did not address the other defenses raised by the counties.
 Subsequent developments 
Remand
On remand, after decades of settlement efforts, Judge McCurn entered judgments of $15,994 against Oneida County and $18,970 against Madison County, representing the full fair market rental value, minus set-offs for improvements, plus pre-judgment interest.Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y. v. Cnty. of Oneida, 217 F. Supp. 2d 292 (N.D.N.Y. 2002). The following year, McCurn denied cross-motions for relief from the judgment–seeking to correct various mathematical errors previously made by Judge Port—due to a pending appeal before the Second Circuit.Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y. v. Cnty. of Oneida, 214 F.R.D. 83 (N.D.N.Y. 2003). After a stipulated remand, McCurn granted both motions.Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y. v. Cnty. of Oneida, No. 70-cv-35, 2003 WL 21026573 (N.D.N.Y. Apr. 28, 2003).
Companion cases
Oneida Indian Nation of New York v. New York (2d Cir. 1988)
Another Oneida claim, challenging the pre-constitutional conveyance of another  tract, was rejected by the Second Circuit in 1988, on the grounds that the Confederation Congress Proclamation of 1783 had neither the authority nor the intent to limit the acquisition of Indian lands within the borders of the states.Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y. v. New York, 860 F.2d 1145 (2d Cir. 1988).
City of Sherrill v. Oneida Indian Nation of New York (U.S. 2005)
After decades, the Oneida became frustrated by the failure of the case to settle. Instead, they began to purchase land within the claim area in fee simple, asserting sovereignty over the re-acquired parcels and refusing to pay property tax. In City of Sherrill v. Oneida Indian Nation of New York (2005), the Supreme Court held that laches barred the re-assertion of sovereignty over ancestral land re-acquired in fee simple; the Court did not consider whether the original aboriginal title over the disputed parcels was validly extinguished, and thus did not disturb its holding in Oneida II.City of Sherrill v. Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y., 544 U.S. 197 (2005).
On remand, the district court held that, although the counties could tax the Oneida, due to tribal sovereign immunity, they could not foreclose on land held by the tribe in satisfaction of these unpaid taxes.  The Second Circuit affirmed, but two of the judges urged the Supreme Court to overrule some of its tribal sovereign immunity precedents. After the Supreme Court granted certiorari, the tribe passed an ordinance consenting to taxation, and the Court vacated and remanded.Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y. v. Madison Cnty., 401 F. Supp. 2d 219 (N.D.N.Y. 2005), motion to amend denied, 235 F.R.D. 559 (N.D.N.Y. 2006), aff'd, 605 F.3d 149 (2nd Cir. 2010), cert. granted, 131 S. Ct. 459 (2010), vacated and remanded sub nom. Madison Cnty. v. Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y., 131 S. Ct. 704 (2011) (per curiam).
Oneida Indian Nation of New York v. County of Oneida (2d Cir. 2010)
Oneida I and Oneida II were litigated as test cases by both sides; the Oneidas suit against the counties for 200 years of damages was stayed pending its resolution. After settlement efforts, that suit resumed in 2000.Marble Hill Oneida Indians v. Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y. State, 62 F. App'x 389 (2d Cir. 2003) (affirming denial of Marble Hill Oneida Indian's motion to intervene); Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y. v. New York, 194 F. Supp. 2d 104 (N.D.N.Y. 2002) (striking some, and declining to strike other, affirmative defenses, and dismissing some, and declining to dismiss other counterclaims); Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y. v. New York, 201 F.R.D. 64 (N.D.N.Y. 2001) (granting New York Brotherton Indian Nation's motion to intervene); Oneida Indian Nation of New York v. Cnty. of Oneida, 132 F. Supp. 2d 71 (N.D.N.Y. 2000) (denying injunction against state-court challenge to Gaming Compact); Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y. v. Cnty. of Oneida, No. 74-cv-187, 2000 WL 33682810 (N.D.N.Y. June 22, 2000) (terminating mediation order); Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y. v. Cnty. of Oneida, 199 F.R.D. 61 (N.D.N.Y. 2000) (granting in part, and denying in part, tribe's motion to amend complaint); Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y. v. Cnty. of Oneida, No. 74-cv-187, 1999 WL 1281502 (N.D.N.Y. Dec. 23 1999) (deeming as withdrawn the portions of the litigation related to Upstate Citizens for Equality's challenge to the Oneida's casino). In a similar suit by a different tribe, the Second Circuit adopted the view of the four dissenting Oneida II justices in Cayuga Indian Nation of New York v. Pataki (2005).Cayuga Indian Nation of N.Y. v. Pataki, 413 F.3d 266 (2d Cir. 2005). The same laches defense defeated the larger Oneida claim.Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y. v. New York, 500 F. Supp. 2d 128 (N.D.N.Y. 2007) (holding that laches bars possessory, but not non-possessory, claims), aff'd in part, rev'd in part, and remanded sub nom. Oneida Indian Nation of New York v. County of Oneida, 617 F.3d 114 (2d Cir. 2010) (holding that laches bars both possessory and non-possessory claims). The Oneida and the United States petitioned the Supreme Court for certiorari on May 16, 2011. The Court denied certiorari on October 17, with Justices Ginsburg and Sotomayor dissenting from the denial.Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y. v. Cnty. of Oneida, 132 S. Ct. 452 (2011); United States v. New York, 132 S. Ct. 452 (2011).
Notes
References
Kristina Ackley, Renewing Haudenosaunee Ties: Laura Cornelius Kellogg and the Idea of Unity in the Oneida Land Claim, 32  57 (2008).
John Edward Barry, Comment, Oneida Indian Nation v. County of Oneida: Tribal Rights of Action and the Indian Trade and Intercourse Act, 84  1852 (1984).
Jack Campisi, The New York-Oneida Treaty of 1795: A Finding of Fact, 4  71 (1976).
Kathryn E. Fort, Disruption and Impossibility: The Unfortunate Resolution of the Modern Iroquois Land Claims, 11  375 (2011).
Joshua N. Lief, The Oneida Land Claims: Equity and Ejectment, 39  825 (1988).
 (1991).
 (1988).
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:Aboriginal title case law in the United States
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:Federal common law case law
Category:Aboriginal title in New York
Category:Oneida
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Oneida Indian Nation of New York v. County of Oneida" ==> """
Oneida Indian Nation of New York v. County of Oneida, 414 U.S. 661 (1974), is a landmark decision by the United States Supreme Court concerning aboriginal title in the United States. The original suit in this matter was the first modern-day Native American land claim litigated in the federal court system rather than before the Indian Claims Commission. It was also the first to go to final judgement.Vecsey & Starna, 1988, at 148.
The Supreme Court held that there is federal subject-matter jurisdiction for possessory land claims brought by Indian tribes based upon aboriginal title, the Nonintercourse Act, and Indian treaties. In delivering the opinion of the Court, Associate Justice Byron White wrote that jurisdiction for such suits arose both from 28 U.S.C. § 1331, conferring jurisdiction for cases arising under the Constitution, laws, or treaties of the United States and 28 U.S.C. § 1362, conferring similar jurisdiction to cases brought by Indian tribes regardless of the amount in controversy.
The case is often referred to as Oneida I because it is the first of three times the Oneida Indian Nation reached the Supreme Court in litigating its land rights claims. It was followed by County of Oneida v. Oneida Indian Nation of New York State (Oneida II) (1985), rejecting all of the affirmative defenses raised by the counties in the same action, and City of Sherrill v. Oneida Indian Nation of New York (Sherrill) (2005), rejecting the tribe's attempt in a later lawsuit to reassert tribal sovereignty over parcels of land reacquired by the tribe in fee simple.
Background
District Court
In 1970, the Oneida Indian Nation of New York State and Oneida Indian Nation of Wisconsin filed suit against Oneida County, New York and Madison County, New York in the United States District Court for the Northern District of New York. The Oneidas alleged that vast swathes of tribal lands had been conveyed to the state of New York in violation of the Nonintercourse Act and three Indian treaties: the Treaty of Fort Stanwix (1784), the Treaty of Fort Harmar (1789), and the Treaty of Canandaigua (1794). Although the complaint named over  conveyed in such manner, the suit involved only the portion of that land held by the two counties. As damages, the tribes asked only for the fair rental value of the lands from the period January 1, 1968 through December 31, 1969.
The District Court held that the complaint asserted only state law claims, implicating federal law only indirectly, and thus granted the motion to dismiss under the well-pleaded complaint rule.
Circuit Court
A divided panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed the dismissal. Chief Judge Henry Friendly, for the Second Circuit, held that the assertion of jurisdiction "shatters on the rock of the 'well-pleaded complaint' rule." The Second Circuit placed weight upon Taylor v. Anderson, 234 U.S. 74 (1914), holding that there was no federal jurisdiction for an ejectment action that alleged wrongful alienation of lands allotted to Choctaw and Chickasaw Indians.
Opinion of the Court 
thumb|right|250px|Supreme Court Associate Justice Byron White, author of the majority opinion in Oneida I
The Supreme Court reversed. Justice White noted "Accepting the premise of the Court of Appeals that the case was essentially a possessory action, we are of the view that the complaint asserted a current right to possession conferred by federal law, wholly independent of state law."414 U.S. at 666. The Court distinguished Taylor v. Anderson on these grounds
Here, the right to possession itself is claimed to arise under federal law in the first instance. Allegedly, aboriginal title of an Indian tribe guaranteed by treaty and protected by statute has never been extinguished. In Taylor, the plaintiffs were individual Indians, not an Indian tribe; and the suit concerned lands allocated to individual Indians, not tribal rights to lands.... In the present case, however, the assertion of a federal controversy does not rest solely on the claim of a right to possession derived from a federal grant of title whose scope will be governed by state law. Rather, it rests on the not insubstantial claim that federal law now protects, and has continuously protected from the time of the formation of the United States, possessory rights to tribal lands, wholly apart from the application of state law principles which normally and separately protect a valid right of possession.414 U.S. at 676–77.
The majority emphasized the supremacy of federal Indian law to state law:
There has been recurring tension between federal and state law; state authorities have not easily accepted the notion that federal law and federal courts must be deemed the controlling considerations in dealing with the Indians. Fellows v. Blacksmith, The New York Indians, United States v. Forness, and the Tuscarora litigation are sufficient evidence that the reach and exclusivity of federal law with respect to reservation lands and reservation Indians did not go unchallenged; and it may be that they are to some extent challenged here. But this only underlines the legal reality that the controversy alleged in the complaint may well depend on what the reach and impact of the federal law will prove to be in this case.414 U.S. 678–79.
Because the District Court had disposed on the case on a motion to dismiss, the Supreme Court reversed and remanded for further proceedings.
Concurrence
Justices Rehnquist and Powell concurred separately, emphasizing their understanding that the majority's holding would not apply to ejectment actions brought by non-Indians. The concurrence concluded: "The opinion for the Court today should give no comfort to persons with garden-variety ejectment claims who, for one reason or another, are covetously eyeing the door to the federal courthouse."414 U.S. at 684.
 Subsequent developments 
On remand, the District Court and Second Circuit rejected the counties' affirmative defenses and awarded money damages. This time, the counties appealed to the Supreme Court, which again granted certiorari. The impact of Oneida I was summed up, in the interpretation of Allan Van Gestal, the lawyer for Oneida County, in his argument in Oneida II: 
This case is a test case, having been so designated by the plaintiffs, having been so tried by the courts below.... The 1974 opinion in this case has already spawned a vast number of Indian land claims. A number of cases are pending throughout the eastern states and southern states, citing the 1974 jurisdictional opinion as if it were an opinion on the merits of the issues. That case, indeed, has already been cited 162 times since 1974.
County of Oneida v. Oneida Indian Nation of New York State, 470 U.S. 226 (1985), affirmed the rejection of the counties' affirmative defenses, leaving the damages award intact. The larger portion of the Oneida  claim, to the  tract, was rejected by the Second Circuit in 1988 on the grounds that the Confederation Congress Proclamation of 1783 had neither the authority nor the intent to limit the acquisition of Indian lands within the borders of US states.Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y. v. New York, 860 F.2d 1145 (2d Cir. 1988).
Notes
References
Kristina Ackley, Renewing Haudenosaunee Ties: Laura Cornelius Kellogg and the Idea of Unity in the Oneida Land Claim, 32 Am. Indian Culture & Res. J. 57 (2008).
John Edward Barry, Comment, Oneida Indian Nation v. County of Oneida: Tribal Rights of Action and the Indian Trade and Intercourse Act, 84 Colum. L. Rev. 1852 (1984).
Jack Campisi, The New York-Oneida Treaty of 1795:  A Finding of Fact, 4 Am. Indian L. Rev. 71 (1976).
Kathryn E. Fort, Disruption and Impossibility: The Unfortunate Resolution of the Modern Iroquois Land Claims, 11 Wyo. L. Rev. 375 (2011).
Joshua N. Lief, The Oneida Land Claims: Equity and Ejectment, 39 Syracuse L. Rev. 825 (1988).
George C. Shattuck, The Oneida Land Claims:  A Legal History (1991).
Christopher Vecsey & William A. Starna, Iroquois land claims (1988).
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Aboriginal title case law in the United States
Category:United States federal question jurisdiction case law
Category:Oneida
Category:Aboriginal title in New York
Category:1974 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "City of Ontario v. Quon" ==> """
Ontario v. Quon, 560 U.S. 746 (2010), is a United States Supreme Court case concerning the extent to which the right to privacy applies to electronic communications in a government workplace. It was an appeal by the city of Ontario, California, from a Ninth Circuit decision holding that it had violated the Fourth Amendment rights of two of its police officers when it disciplined them following an audit of pager text messages that discovered many of those messages were personal in nature, some sexually explicit. The Court unanimously held that the audit was work-related and thus did not violate the Fourth Amendment's protections against unreasonable search and seizure.
Ontario police sergeant Jeff Quon, along with other officers and those they were exchanging messages with, had sued the city, their superiors and the pager service provider in federal court. They had alleged a violation of not only their constitutional rights but federal telecommunications privacy laws. Their defense was that a superior officer had promised the pager messages themselves would not be audited if the officers reimbursed the city for fees it incurred when they exceeded a monthly character limit.
Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote the majority opinion signed by seven of his fellow justices. It decided the case purely on the reasonableness of the pager audit, explicitly refusing to consider "far-reaching issues" it raised on the grounds that modern communications technology and its role in society was still evolving. He nevertheless discussed those issues at some length in explaining why the Court chose not to rule on them, in addition to responding, for argument's sake, more directly to issues raised by the respondents. John Paul Stevens wrote a separate concurring opinion, as did Antonin Scalia, who would have used a different test he had proposed in an earlier case to reach the same result.
Outside commentators mostly praised the justices for this display of restraint, but Scalia criticized it harshly in his concurrence, calling it vague. He considered his fellow justices in "disregard of duty" for their refusal to address the Fourth Amendment issues. A month after the court handed down its decision, an appellate court in Georgia similarly criticized it for "a marked lack of clarity" as it narrowed an earlier ruling to remove a finding that there was no expectation of privacy in the contents of email.Rehberg v. Paulk, 611 F. 3d 828, at 844,846-847  (11th Cir., 2010). An article in The New York Times later summarized this criticism, and its "faux unanimity", as emblematic of what some judges and lawyers have found an increasingly frustrating trend in Roberts Court opinions.
Underlying dispute
In 2001 the Ontario Police Department (OPD) acquired 20 alphanumeric pagers to distribute to officers in its SWAT unit so they could better coordinate their activities.Ikuta, Sandra Segal;  The contract between the department and Arch Wireless, now USA Mobility, was for usage up to a fixed limit of 25,000 characters per month,Quon v. Arch Wireless Operating Company, 529 F.3d 892 (9th Cir., 2008). above which an overage fee would be charged. Pager use was covered by the OPD's computer and Internet use policy, under which employees agreed that "the city reserves the right to monitor and log all network activity including e-mail and Internet use, with or without notice". The policy did not specifically mention text messages, but employees were told both verbally, at a staff meeting and through a memorandum that they were included and that only "light personal communications" were allowed during work hours. It also stated that "inappropriate, derogatory, obscene, suggestive, defamatory, or harassing language in the e-mail system will not be tolerated".
Several officers, including Sgt. Jeff Quon, a 20-year veteran of the department, exceeded the limit during the first two billing cycles. He was allowed to reimburse the city for the fee. Lt. James Duke, head of the department's Administrative Bureau, told him that his communications would not be monitored if he paid the overage, but that he should stop using the pager so much. When Quon and another officer continued to exceed the limit and reimburse the city, Duke told then-Chief Lloyd Scharf he was "tired of being a bill collector". The OPD began to consider whether the character limit it had contracted for was too low and it was forcing officers to pay for work-related communications, as had sometimes happened in the past.
At Scharf's direction, Duke requested from Arch transcripts of text messages sent by Quon and the other officer. After verifying that the city was the subscriber on the account, an Arch employee sent Duke the transcripts. Many messages were personal and some were sexually explicit, sent by the married Quon to his girlfriend at work. In one month as few as 8% of Quon's texts had been work-related. A transcript from which messages sent when Quon and the other officer were off-duty had been redacted was sent to the OPD's internal affairs sergeant, and after an investigation Quon and the other officer were allegedly disciplined.
Existing law
The case would involve two areas of law, both coming under the Fourth Amendment. The first was the privacy rights Quon and the other officers had over text messages sent on equipment paid for by their employers. The other was their rights as public employees, since their superiors were also agents of the state.
Congress had passed the Electronic Communications Privacy Act in 1986, which addressed issues raised as more and more companies stored records with highly personal data about individual consumers in off-site databases operated by third parties. A key section, known as the Stored Communications Act (SCA), distinguished between electronic communications services which actively transmitted and received data and remote communications services whose only role was to archive and backup transmitted data for at least some period of time. The former could release transmitted data only to its sender or recipient; the latter could also release that information to the subscriber regardless of who had sent or received it.
The following year, 1987, the Supreme Court had first dealt with the Fourth Amendment rights of government employees under administrative investigation in O'Connor v. Ortega, a case arising from the search of a supervising physician's office and records at a California public hospital. By a 5-4 margin the court had ruled that while public employees had Fourth Amendment protections, the search was reasonable and constitutional and that other such warrantless searches of public employees' belongings or workspace, where applicable, were similarly permissible as long as they were reasonably work-related in inception and scope.O'Connor v. Ortega, , O'Connor, J., at 717.
The justices in that majority differed on what standards to use for evaluating the reasonableness of a search of a public employees' personal space and belongings. Sandra Day O'Connor wrote for a four-justice plurality declaring that government employees did not lose their Fourth Amendment rights at work. In the latter instance, since the working environments of public employees can be drastically different, leading to some where no reasonable expectation of privacy could be argued to exist, lower courts should consider the "operational realities" of the work environment when determining if a public employee's rights against unreasonable search and seizure were violated. Following the principle laid out in Connick v. Myers, an earlier decision concerning the constitutional rights of public employees, that "government offices could not function if every employment decision became a constitutional matter",Connick v. Myers , White, J., at 143. the majority distinguished between searches "merely incident to the primary business of the agency," such as the retrieval of a document or tool from a desk or locker and thus not requiring a warrant at all, from those conducted to investigate a possible violation of workplace rules and procedures.O'Connor, at 722.
In a concurring opinion, Antonin Scalia rejected the plurality analysis, saying instead that "government searches to retrieve work-related materials or to investigate violations of workplace rules — searches of the sort that are regarded as reasonable and normal in the private employer context — do not violate the Fourth Amendment".O'Connor, at 732, Scalia, J., concurring.
Since Scalia's opinion had provided the case's deciding vote, either it or the plurality could be used by lower courts until another such case were to come to the court and force a resolution of the question. The court would consider the Fourth Amendment rights of public employees again two years later, in 1989's Treasury Employees v. Von Raab. In that case another divided court upheld the Customs Service's requirement that applicants for positions that involved carrying a firearm and the possibility of drug interdiction undergo drug tests by urinalysis.
Litigation
The case began in federal court. After a district court found in favor of the defendants, a three-judge appellate panel reversed the decision. The circuit court denied a petition for an en banc rehearing; a simultaneous certiorari petition to the Supreme Court was granted.
A major issue at all levels was whether the department's written Internet policy, or Duke's practice of just collecting the overage fee, was the operating reality of the OPD workplace. If it was the former, Quon had no reasonable expectation of privacy for his pager messages. The city and department argued that Duke could not set or amend policy so what he said was irrelevant. And even if it was, it did not matter since the pager messages could be disclosed under the California Public Records Act. The plaintiffs argued that since Duke was the officer in charge of the contract with Arch, and the policy change that covered the pagers was never communicated in any definitive way, his assurance that he would not read Quon's messages if he reimbursed the city was all that mattered.
For Quon's co-plaintiffs, there was what one commentator later called "the really tricky question in the case", their claim that the city violated their privacy in the course of investigating Quon. Two of the other plaintiffs were OPD employees who had not had pager overuse problems, and the third, his estranged wife, had left the OPD's employment and was using her own pager. The city argued that they should have been aware Quon had no expectation of privacy and that thus their exchanges with him would not be protected, either.
200px|right|thumb|Arch Wireless logo|alt=The word "Arch" in large yellow curving letters above "wireless" in smaller blue type
Trial
In 2003 Quon, his ex-wife, girlfriendThe girlfriend, dispatcher April Florio, had been one of several in her position fired by the department following an investigation into the alleged use of their personal cell phones to tip off the boyfriend of one, a member of a local motorcycle gang suspected of drug trafficking.() She contested the dismissal and then successfully sued  the city to recover her share of the hearing officer's costs. and another officer, Steve Trujillo, sued the city, the department, the police chief and Arch in Central California U.S. district court, Eastern Division, in Riverside.In 2004 Quon and Trujillo were among nine Ontario officers who sued the city over a 1996 incident where they had been covertly videotaped undressing in the locker room as part of an investigation into the theft of a flashlight. The videotape had only come to light the previous year, and the San Bernardino County district attorney could not bring charges since the statute of limitations had expired. Quon, Trujillo and the other officers claimed they had been retaliated against due to their criticism of the tactics the department used.() In 2009 the city settled the suit for $2.75 million.(. Quon, per his page at LinkedIn, left the OPD in 2005 and later trained police officers in Afghanistan for DynCorp, his present employer. Judge Stephen G. Larson heard their claims of SCA violation, invasion of privacy and their constitutional protections against unreasonable search and seizure. Arch was granted summary judgment in its favor on the SCA claim since it was found to be a remote computing service, not subject to the statute's provisions.
The court ruled that Quon and his fellow plaintiffs had a reasonable expectation of privacy. It ordered a jury trial to determine whether the purpose of the audit was, as the department maintained, to find out whether it needed higher character limits or, as Quon claimed, to expose the personal nature of the texts. When the jury found in favor of the OPD, judgment was entered in favor of the defendants.
Appeal
On appeal in 2008, a panel of two Ninth Circuit judges, Kim McLane Wardlaw and Harry Pregerson, along with Western Washington district judge Ronald B. Leighton. Wardlaw, writing for all three, noted that "[t]he recently minted standard of electronic communication via e-mails, text messages, and other means opens a new frontier in Fourth Amendment jurisprudence that has been little explored".Quon v. Arch Wireless, p. 10 They agreed with the district court that Quon and his co-appellees had a reasonable expectation of privacy due to the assurances from Duke.
But they reversed since they found the search unreasonable as a matter of law. "The OPD surreptitiously reviewed messages that all parties reasonably believed were free from third-party review", Wardlaw wrote. The OPD could have obtained the information it sought in a number of less intrusive ways without viewing the content of the messages, such as warning Quon ahead of time or asking him to redact personal messages from an unreviewed transcript, she observed.
The ruling was applauded by online privacy advocates. The Electronic Frontier Foundation called it a "tremendous victory...the Fourth Amendment applies to your communications online just as strongly as it does to your letters and packages". Ars Technica said it "provide[d] an extensive space for workspace privacy". George Washington University law professor Orin Kerr, a Fourth Amendment scholar who was cited in the opinion, called it "a noteworthy holding that I think is correct and very important" at the Volokh Conspiracy blawg.
It also overturned the summary judgment granted to Arch on the SCA claim, finding the company to be an electronic communications service and thus subject to stricter privacy requirements. The police chief was granted qualified immunity due to the lack of clearly established law in the area, while the city and department were denied their claim to statutory immunity. The SCA claims were remanded to district court.
200px|thumb|left|Judge Ikuta|alt=A woman with curly dark red hair and glasses smiling against a purple background
The appellees petitioned for an en banc rehearing and were denied early in 2009. Six justicesCarlos Bea, Consuelo Maria Callahan, Sandra Segal Ikuta, Andrew J. Kleinfeld, Diarmuid O'Scannlain, Norman Randy Smith, and Richard C. Tallman. on the circuit dissented. Sandra Segal Ikuta, writing for them, criticized her colleague for two errors. Ikuta insisted the department's policy, and California's Public Records Act, mooted any discretionary interpretation of the policy that Duke may have conveyed to Quon, thus denying him a reasonable expectation of privacy. She also reminded Wardlaw that the Supreme Court had several timesSpecifically, she cited Skinner v. Railway Labor Executives Association (), Vernonia School District 47J v. Acton () and Board of Education v. Earls () rejected the test on which she read Wardlaw's opinion relying on, that governments must use the least intrusive method of obtaining information available in order to protect employees' Fourth Amendment rights, a rule followed by seven other circuits as well.
Judge Wardlaw wrote a rare concurrence with the order, criticizing the dissent for ignoring the facts of the case. "[N]o poet ever interpreted nature as freely as Judge Ikuta interprets the record on this appeal", she said.  As a matter of law, it was the dissenters, not her, who had ignored O'Connor: "By stripping public employees of all rights to privacy regardless of the actual operational realities of each workplace, the dissent would have us create a far broader rule than Supreme Court precedent allows. The majority of our court properly rejected the dissenting judge's efforts to do so."
Certiorari petition
Concurrent with the en banc petition, the appellees filed a certiorari petition to the Supreme Court, requesting it hear the case. They reiterated many of Ikuta's points, particularly her criticism of the panel's apparent adoption of the rejected least-intrusive-means test, and said it would be an "excellent vehicle" for revisiting O'Connor in light of new technology that complicated the workplace privacy issue.;  April 27, 2009. A month later the California State Association of Counties and the League of California Cities filed an amicus curiae brief in support of the petition making the same arguments, but in particular saying the opinion mischaracterized the operational realities of the case., May 29, 2009,
In opposition, Quon and the other respondents argued, as Wardlaw's concurrence had, that Ikuta and petitioners had greatly exaggerated the role that the less-intrusive-means test had played in the panel opinion, and that the facts of the case did not present any constitutional issues., November 4, 2009. In a reply brief, the petitioners noted that other commentators on the case agreedConforti, Justin; , 5 Seton Hall Cir. Rev. 461, 472–91 (Spring 2009). that it had mistakenly applied the less-intrusive-means test., November 13, 2009.
Late that year, the Supreme Court granted certiorari to the city, OPD and Chief Scharf, making the case into Ontario v. Quon.; U.S. Supreme Court. Kerr found this "an odd grant", since he had not expected the Supreme Court to find any issues making the case worth hearing. He suspected the justices were responding to a common issue with cases from the Ninth Circuit, where the minority of judges with politically conservative leanings had reacted vigorously to a perceived excess on the part of the circuit's dominant liberals. Oral arguments were scheduled for April, with a decision expected in June.
Before the Court
The decision to hear Quon attracted attention from several quarters. It would be the first case touching on the workplace privacy rights of public employees since Von Raab, and raised the possibility that the Court would resolve the O'Connor conflict between Scalia's private-workplace standard and the plurality's "operational realities" consideration. It had not been an issue in the case, but Scalia was the only justice from that majority still on the court. New justice Sonia Sotomayor was expected to favor the city's side, since she had ruled for New York State's right to search an employee's computer in a similar case as a judge on the Second Circuit..
Electronic privacy advocates agreed with Wardlaw that the case was a "new frontier" for Fourth Amendment jurisprudence, since personal communications technology had advanced considerably since 1987, intertwining personal and work lives much more closely. It was expected that the court's ruling, though it would only directly affect government workplaces, would affect the private workplace as well.
Kerr told The New York Times that despite the novelty of the issue, he expected the resulting decision to be narrow due to the unusual circumstances from which the case arose. Elsewhere, he said the Court would be better off avoiding the question of whether the department violated the privacy of the people Quon was texting due to the lack of clear precedent for such a ruling with older technologies and the minimal treatment of the issue in the lower-court opinions.
Briefs
The parties' briefs reiterated their earlier arguments. "The City and Department should not be punished because a legitimate workplace search happened to turn up sexually explicit messages that plaintiffs need not and should not have sent on government-issued equipment in the first place", the city stated., February 2010, 47. The respondents urged the Court to use the case to adopt the O'Connor plurality's "operational realities" standard, and set forth a more extensive response to the pettioners' claim that the text messages' status as public records was fatal to any reasonable expectation of privacy by any correspondent., March 2010, 28, 42–45.
Amici briefs were filed by several interested organizations for both sides. The city was joined by the federal government, represented by the Solicitor General's office,, February 2010. the National League of Cities and other organizations representing municipal and county governments, February 12, 2010. and school-governance organizations led by the National School Boards Association.; February 12, 2010. All believed their ability to function effectively as government bodies would be impeded if the Ninth Circuit was upheld. The Los Angeles Times and other media organizations also urged reversal on the grounds that the public interest was served by as broad a definition of public records as possible, particularly where police operations were concerned.
Weighing in on Quon's side was the AFL-CIO, on behalf of those members of its constituent labor unions who were public employees. The New York Intellectual Property Law Association (NYIPLA), whose members litigate privacy claims, called on the Court to refrain from setting down any clear rules as technology, and social expectations of privacy related to it, were still evolving. The Electronic Privacy Information Center's brief, signed by technical experts as well as lawyers, focused on the importance of data minimization to both security and privacy protection.; March 23, 2010. The Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF), American Civil Liberties Union, Center for Democracy and Technology and Public Citizen filed a joint brief. The conservative Rutherford Institute filed a motion requesting leave to file their amicus in favor of respondents since one withheld permission.
Oral argument
Oral arguments were heard on April 19, 2010. Kent Richland, the city's lawyer, who had previously argued before the justices on behalf of Anna Nicole Smith in Marshall v. Marshall, and Deputy Solicitor General Neal Katyal argued for petitioners; Dieter Dammeier, a former police officer himself, argued for Quon and the respondents.U.S. Supreme Court, ; April 17, 2010; retrieved November 28, 2010. [this link is dead as of 1/1/2018]
Commentators, looking for signs as to how the Court would rule, felt the justices' questions suggested a narrow focus on the issue of whether the search was reasonable. Chief Justice John Roberts surprised some with his apparent strong sympathy for Quon's claims. Orin Kerr noted the many questions asked about how the pagers and other technologies work, and how that lack of familiarity reinforced, in his view, the need for caution, quoting from one of his own papers: "Judges who attempt to use the Fourth Amendment to craft broad regulatory rules covering new technologies run an unusually high risk of crafting rules based on incorrect assumptions of context and technological practice".
Petitioners
During Richland's argument, the justices inquired closely about the city's contention that Quon had no reasonable expectation of privacy over his text messages. Justice Sotomayor asked Richland about a hypothetical scenario in which a sergeant knew that various officers engaged in sexually explicit texting with romantic partners and decided to look at the transcripts out of sheer salacity. "Does that officer have any expectation of privacy that his boss won't just listen in out of prurient interest?" Richland answered that the motive of the examiner should not affect a privacy expectation. "[W]hen the filthy-minded police chief listens in, it's a very bad thing, but it's not—it's not offending your right of privacy," concluded Justice Antonin Scalia.Oral Argument, p. 10–11.
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg asked how the OPD could have examined the transcripts lawfully if the SCA forbade their release. Richland replied that the statute was complex and highly technical, and cited the Court's 1980 United States v. PaynerUnited States v. Payner,  to the effect that "a complicated law ... simply cannot be the basis for a reasonable expectation of privacy".Oral Argument, p. 17. He then turned over the rest of his time to Katyal.
During the Deputy Solicitor General's argument, another recent appointee, Justice Samuel Alito talked about the uncertainties of modern communications technology. "There isn't a well-established understanding about what is private and what isn't private. It's a little different from putting garbage out in front of your house,An allusion to the Court's holding in California v. Greenwood () that warrantless searches of garbage left out for pickup were not unreasonable and thus constitutional. which has happened for a long time". After Katyal agreed that these things were "in flux" and thus the Court should avoid making any broadly applicable rules on the first hearing, Chief Justice John Roberts speculated that that principle cut both ways and that perhaps the Court should at least say the Constitution applied in this case and make rules later.Oral Argument, p. 21–22.
Respondents
When Dammeier argued for the respondents, Ginsburg and Breyer pressed him on why it was unreasonable for the department to review the content of the messages if it wanted to find out if it needed a higher character limit. The lawyer reiterated the jury's finding and said "they didn't need to do that". In response to further questioning from Breyer, he restated the other ways Judge Wardlaw had suggested the department could have obtained the information without reviewing the messages themselves. Justice Sotomayor was skeptical. "You're relying on the very person you're auditing to do the audit for you. That doesn't seem either practical or business-wise."Oral Argument, p. 30–36.
Justice John Paul Stevens brought up the issue of public review. His colleague Anthony Kennedy noted that attorneys challenging probable cause for a police raid would probably request the pager messages among other things, which Quon would certainly have been aware of, affecting his expectation of privacy. Dammeier responded that any mail he or anyone else sends would certainly be discoverable in litigation, but that possibility did not materially affect his expectation of privacy over it. He further reminded Scalia that in O'Connor the Court had found a reasonable expectation of privacy over the contents of a public employee's desk. Stevens pointed out that it was more likely that law enforcement communications would be reviewed by third parties than documents in doctors' desks. "I don't think we're taking away the government's ability to do searches under proper circumstances," Dammeier told him.Oral Argument, p. 38–41.
Dammeier addressed the SCA and Richland's argument that it was too complex to bear on the reasonableness of Quon's expectation of privacy. "It certainly may be not the end-all to the question, but it should be a factor in determining whether or not there’s going to be an expectation of privacy". Scalia said he had not been aware of the statute, and asked if it was reasonable to assume that Quon did. "Petitioners make an argument that because there is this California Public Records Act, that that may diminish one's expectation of privacy", Dammeier said. "Certainly, if we're going to have that, then we should also be having the Stored Communications Act."Oral Argument, p. 44–46.
The rest of Dammeier's argument was devoted to the issue of the other respondents' privacy expectations in communicating with Quon, after Sotomayor asked him if they could prevail even if Quon did not. Dammeier likened the department's actions to going to the post office to get letters sent to Quon instead of his house. Scalia pointed out that Quon could have obtained hard copies of the messages and circulated them himself. "[W]hen I get a piece of mail from somebody, I could do that as well", the lawyer replied, "but that doesn't mean that the government gets to go to the post office and get my mail before I get it". Richland replied in his rebuttal argument that "the truth is that all of these plaintiffs admitted that they knew that this was a department-issued pager, and this wasn't a post office".Oral Argument, p. 46–57.
Decision
The Court handed down its decision in June, near the end of its term. Unanimously, the justices ruled for the city that the review of the texts had been a reasonable work-related search, discussing the difficulties raised by the broader issues involved and ultimately declining to rule on them. Kennedy wrote the majority opinion; Scalia and Stevens added concurrences of their own.
Majority
Kennedy began by setting forth the facts of the case, its legal history and the relevant laws and precedent. In the opinion's third section, he cautiously considered the question of Quon's privacy expectation. "The judiciary risks error by elaborating too fully on the Fourth Amendment implications of emerging technology before its role in society has become clear," he observed, referencing the Court's Olmstead v. United States decision in 1928,Olmstead v. United States, . in which it had permitted warrantless wiretapping on the grounds that the wiretaps did not actually enter the property of the bootleggers under investigation, and the Katz v. United States decisionKatz v. United States, . which overruled it four decades later., 560 U.S. ___ (2010), Kennedy, J.
In that latter case, he wrote, the Court had the "knowledge and experience" to conclude that there was a reasonable expectation of privacy in a telephone booth. "It is not so clear that courts at present are on so sure a ground". He elaborated on these uncertainties, referring to the amici briefs filed by the EFF and NYIPLA:
For instance, he noted that the ready availability of cell phones made them potentially "necessary instruments for self-expression, even self-identification", strengthening a privacy claim. But at the same time they were affordable enough that anyone wanting one for such a purpose could buy their own rather than use one provided by an employer
"A broad holding concerning employees' privacy expectations vis-à-vis employer-provided technological equipment might have implications for future cases that cannot be predicted," Kennedy wrote. "It is preferable to dispose of this case on narrower grounds." He accepted, for argument's sake, three points: that Quon had a reasonable expectation of privacy in his pager messages, that the review of them constituted a search and that the same principles governing a physical search of a public employee's workspace applied to electronic privacy.
200px|thumb|right|Justice Kennedy|alt=A balding old man with glasses, wearing a black robe and seated in front of a red curtain
On those grounds, the search had been reasonable under O'Connor. Its inception, to see whether the city needed a higher character limit, was legitimately work-related. Review of the content of the messages was an "efficient and expedient" way of achieving that goal, Kennedy wrote. The OPD's decision to limit the review to just two months' worth of messages, and redact those sent when Quon was off duty further bolstered its case.
While Quon could have had some expectation of privacy, Kennedy continued, it could not have been enough to prevent a review of the messages. Not only had he been told of the possibility of an audit, but as a police officer "he would or should have known that his actions were likely to come under legal scrutiny, and that this might entail an analysis of his on-the-job communications". And, in particular, since the city had purchased pagers for SWAT team members to improve their performance in that capacity, it was reasonable to expect that the city might audit those pagers to assess the performance of both the units and the pagers in SWAT situations.
Citing the same precedent cases that Ikuta had in her dissent from the rehearing denial, Kennedy said the Ninth Circuit erred in suggesting less intrusive means would have yielded the same information. After quoting from those cases to the effect that the text was not required and that letting judges apply it would make effective investigations almost impossible, he concluded that "[e]ven assuming there were ways that OPD could have performed the search that would have been less intrusive, it does not follow that the search as conducted was unreasonable."
He could not find any legal authority or precedent for the respondents' argument that the SCA violation, which was not before the Court, rendered the search per se unconstitutional. To the contrary, he pointed to the Virginia v. Moore caseVirginia v. Moore, . decided the previous term, in which evidence from a search conducted after an illegal arrest was ruled admissible since statutory violations did not inherently constitute Fourth Amendment violations. Nor would an SCA violation have rendered the actions of petitioners unconstitutional since they themselves did not violate it. "The otherwise reasonable search by OPD is not rendered unreasonable by the assumption that Arch Wireless violated the SCA by turning over the transcripts".
Lastly, he ruled that the other respondents beside Quon had not suffered a violation of their privacy. The respondents had, Kennedy wrote, simply argued that a violation of Quon's privacy necessarily violated that of those he exchanged messages with, and did not make a case that they could have suffered a violation even if Quon had not. Since the Court had found that Quon's Fourth Amendment rights were not violated, it therefore had to hold that the others' were not, either.
Concurrences
Stevens' brief concurrence approved of the Court's decision not to resolve the split in standards left by O'Connor. He noted that the facts of the case argued more strongly for the standard proposed by Justice Harry Blackmun in his dissent, which Stevens had joined. Blackmun had said the justices should adopt neither the plurality's  "operational realities" standard nor Scalia's reasonable-in-the-private-sector alternative, but instead consider the circumstances of each particular search. In this case, he reiterated his line of reasoning from oral argument, that Quon's position as a police officer would have seriously limited his expectation of privacy.Quon, Stevens, J., concurring.
Scalia, too, began by addressing O'Connor. The intervening years had not changed his position that the plurality's position in that case was "standardless and unsupported." Nor, a footnote responding to Stevens added, was the approach of that case's dissent relevant unless it was overruled at some point. Applying the test from his concurrence in that case to the instant case, he wrote, "the proper threshold inquiry should be not whether the Fourth Amendment applies to messages on public employees' employer-issued pagers, but whether it applies in general to such messages on employer-issued pagers". But it was unnecessary to answer that question since he agreed with the majority that the search had been reasonable.Quon, Scalia, J., concurring.
Since, he felt, that was all the Court needed to say, the majority's "excursus on the complexity and consequences of answering ... that admittedly irrelevant threshold question" was similarly a waste of effort. "To whom do we owe an additional explanation for declining to decide an issue, once we have explained that it makes no difference?" He then excoriated the majority's "exaggerated" case for restraint:
It was "a heavy-handed hint" to lower courts and future litigants that was likely to encourage even more such suits in the future. "In short, in saying why it is not saying more, the Court says much more than it should."
left|thumb|200px|Justice Scalia|alt=A photographic portrait of the head and upper body of a man with a receding dark hairline, wearing glasses and a black robe
Lastly, he found it ironic that the Court had relied on the plurality standard in O'Connor, since its discussion would make it even harder to assess what the operating realities of the workplace were. "Any rule that requires evaluating whether a given gadget is a 'necessary instrumen[t] for self-expression, even self-identification,' on top of assessing the degree to which 'the law's treatment of [workplace norms has] evolve[d],' ... is (to put it mildly)  unlikely to yield objective answers."
Reaction
Commentary on the decision focused on the broader issues the Court did not decide. An editorial in The New York Times praised the majority's restraint. "Holding off from making broad pronouncements in the midst of a rapidly changing technology environment is a wise display of restraint by the court," agreed The Washington Post three weeks later. The EFF likewise praised the limited scope of the decision and found "hopeful hints" in Kennedy's explanation of the cautious approach suggesting that the Court would "cautiously make such decisions based on society's privacy expectations and its level of reliance on new communications technologies". It called on Congress to pass proposed legislation that addressed these issues.
EPIC president Marc Rotenberg was dismayed by the Court's caution. "[T]he court could have done what it has done in the past and updated constitutional safeguards in light of new technology", as it did in Katz, he said in a letter responding to the Times editorial. That case had influenced privacy law internationally, and "the court's reluctance to assess these privacy issues also means that it will have less influence on other high courts that address similar questions".
Subsequent jurisprudence
Scalia's criticism was echoed by Eleventh Circuit judge Frank M. Hull in a case reheard to take Quon into account. In March 2010, she had written for a panel deciding Rehberg v. Paulk, a case in which a Georgia man had sued the Dougherty County district attorney alleging malicious prosecution for an investigation into harassing faxes sent to a local hospital. Rehberg had also claimed his privacy was violated by his Internet Service Provider's (ISP) release of his emails from its server in response to a subpoena.Rehberg, at 839.
No appeals court had yet been called upon to decide whether users had a reasonable expectation of privacy over the content of email. Hull's opinion extrapolated from older precedents on postal and telephone communications, along with more recent cases from district courts and a Tenth Circuit ruling on email addresses, to assert that there was no reasonable expectation of privacy over email content once it reached a third-party server, since it was transmitted from there to other servers and copied and archived along the way. There was at the time no settled law on the subject, and privacy advocates expressed concern and criticized the decision. After Quon, the panel granted rehearing.
The new decision, handed down a month after Quon, followed it in declining to establish a precedent. "The Supreme Court's more-recent precedent shows a marked lack of clarity in what privacy expectations as to content of electronic communications are reasonable...Given the lack of precedent, we now question whether it would be prudent in this case and on this limited factual record to establish broad precedent as to the reasonable privacy expectation in email content". The panel thus limited its decision to finding for the appellees on qualified immunity grounds.
The criticism from within and without led to an article by New York Times Supreme Court reporter Adam Liptak finding Quon emblematic of two trends observers found increasingly problematic in Roberts Court opinions: vagueness, and apparent unanimity undermined by multiple concurring opinions. It had been among the record 77% of unanimous decisions from the term with at least one concurrence; as for the former issue, he characterized Hull's description of Quon as calling it "almost aggressively unhelpful to lawyers and judges".
Analysis and commentary
A Harvard Law Review article criticized the decision, concurring with Scalia and Hull that it provided "no helpful guidance" to lower courts in resolving similar cases. "[I]ts reluctance to devise an intelligible principle for Fourth Amendment rights regarding technology will have the negative effect of causing lower courts to rely on O'Connor to an even greater extent, [allowing] judges...to reach whatever conclusion they want. The Court should have ruled that public employees do not enjoy a reasonable expectation of privacy when sending text messages from government-issued devices."
The article noted the irony of Kennedy's musings about the difficulty of crafting privacy standards with technology evolving at a rapid pace when applied to a case that turned on text messages sent on "two-way pager devices that were issued to employees a decade ago and that would likely be deemed antiquated by today's teenagers and young professionals", who largely tend to use cell phones for texting. "Presumably, societal norms with respect to pagers are as developed as they will ever be." Nor could it see work-related employer-issued pagers or other devices being used for self-expressive purposes as Kennedy suggested, since they were functionally no different from any other such item a police department might issue to officers, "much like a police officer's patrol cruiser or sidearm".Harvard, 185. It did concede that the conflict between the department's written policy and Lt. Duke's verbal assurances to Quon made the issue more complex in this particular case.Harvard Law Review, 186–88.
The Court's apparent suggestion that "any technology can be seen as emerging", the Review suggested, would not only lead to muddled future jurisprudence, but was in contrast to various lower courts' more successful efforts to do so.Specifically, it cited Biby v. Board of Regents (419 F.3d 845 (8th Cir. 2005), in which a public university's written policy was held to foreclose any expectation of privacy on employee's computers, and United States v. Simons (29 F.Supp. 2d 324 (E.D. Va. 1998), where it was held that actual office policies and procedures may reduce a public employee's privacy expectations over their desks, files and computers. "While it may be true that technological advances and the increased availability of advanced mobile handsets to individual consumers have blurred the line between private life and the workplace", the article concluded, "it does not necessarily follow that a user has a reasonable expectation of privacy on workplace equipment provided by the employer". As Kennedy had also noted, the proliferation of personal communications devices could make workers more respectful of those distinctions. The Review cited as an example the widespread use of email from work computers.
Another commentator took it upon herself to address the issues the Court left unresolved, even before it had heard oral arguments. "Because this holding is so limited, it practically begs for a new case to address the issue more broadly", wrote Amanda Higgins of the Ninth Circuit's opinions, in the Oklahoma Journal of Law and Technology. She agreed with Ikuta's criticism of the panel decision, but argued that the panel should have devoted more attention to the larger issues of Quon's expectation of privacy. "To focus the analysis elsewhere is less than helpful in this already murky area of law".
The jury's finding that the audit was legitimately work-related and not an investigation of misconduct may ultimately have hurt the city, Higgins wrote, since it focused attention on whether it was necessary to read the messages. Had it been found to be investigatory, there would have been more grounds to rule the audit a reasonable search. Other public employers facing similar litigation "will want to get on the court record that their search was for some purpose that will not only pass as reasonable at its inception under the facts of the case...and will also allow the court to find that the actual method was not excessive in relation to the purpose". They would be best served, she concluded, by making clear, explicit policies on personal use of communications devices and rigorously enforcing those policies. Informal policies in partial or complete conflict with formal ones had created problems for employers in other areas of the law, and it was better to prevent such lawsuits from arising altogether.Higgins, 71–72.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 560
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
Notes
References
External links
Electronic Frontier Foundation page on the case.
Electronic Privacy Information Center page on the case.
Orin Kerr's blog posts on the case at The Volokh Conspiracy
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Internet case law
Category:United States public employment case law
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:Privacy of telecommunications
Category:Search and seizure case law
Category:Ontario, California
Category:Pagers
"""

From "Opati v. Republic of Sudan" ==> """
Opati v. Republic of Sudan, 590 U.S. ___ (2020), was a United States Supreme Court case involving the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act with its 2008 amendments, whether plaintiffs in federal lawsuits against foreign countries may seek punitive damages for cause of actions prior to enactment of the amended law, with the specific case dealing with victims and their families from the 1998 United States embassy bombings. The Court ruled unanimously in May 2020 that punitive damages can be sought from foreign nations in such cases for preenactment conduct.
Background
The Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act (FSIA) was first enacted in 1976, generally treating foreign nations as having sovereign immunity from lawsuits within the United States but establishing conditions when a foreign state can be subject to judicial actions within the courts. FSIA has been amended over time to specify such conditions; relevant to this case, the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 and the Flatow Amendment allowed lawsuits to be taken against those countries that enabled acts of state-sponsored terrorism as designated by the State Department.
On August 7, 1998, more than 200 people were killed in simultaneous truck bombings of United States embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, including 12 American citizens, and thousands of others wounded. It was the first major attack of the al-Qaeda terrorist group.
Families and relatives of the killed Americans and those Americans injured in the attack filed a federal civil lawsuit against Sudan, who since 1993 had been listed by the State Department as a state sponsor of terrorism, and had since been linked to supporting al-Qaeda. The case Owens v. Republic of Sudan was filed in 2001 in the United States Circuit Court of the District of Columbia. 
As Owens progressed, legal questions of whether punitive damages could be sought for state-sponsored terrorism acts were raised from other similar cases, with the United States Circuit Court of the District of Columbia having ruled in Cicippio-Puleo v. Islamic Republic of Iran (353 F.3d 1024 (2004)) that even with the 1996 amended FSIA, there was no cause of action that could be brought under FSIA to foreign states, only to individuals of foreign states. Congress sought to rectify the Cicippio-Puleo decision in passing the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008 (NDAA 2008) by including language to modify FSIA's terrorism exceptions. Among its major changes, the terrorism exceptions were moved a new section §1605A to make specific actions related to terrorism more explicit from other general FSIA provisions, defined that foreign states that sponsored terrorism could be taken to court on cause of action, and that these provisions could apply to prior lawsuits that had been "adversely affected" by the lack of these provisions as well as to new actions on related lawsuits.
With the NDAA 2008's passage in January 2008, numerous victims and families of those killed in the embassy bombings joined in the Owens suit or filed similar suits that were joined into the same action; ultimately, over 700 plaintiffs were on the final suit now under Opati v. Republic of Sudan. By 2014, the District Court entered its final judgement, awarding a total of  in total damages for the plaintiffs, among which included  as punitive damages.
During the case's history, Sudan had sent counsel to continue to challenge its position as a state-sponsor of terrorism or its ties to the embassy bombings. It appealed the District Court's ruling on grounds that the revived FSIA rules as changed by the NDAA 2008 did not allow for punitive damages to applied retroactively. The DC Circuit Court, in 2017, agreed with Sudan's position, and while still upholding Sudan's liability, reversed a portion of the District Court's ruling, reducing the total damages to about .
Supreme Court
The plaintiffs in Opati petitioned the Supreme Court to review the case, which the Court accepted in June 2019; Justice Brett Kavanaugh, as a member of the DC Circuit Court at the time the case was heard there before being appointed to the Supreme Court, was recused.
Oral arguments were held on February 24, 2020. Court observers saw the Justices were focused primarily on the contradictions in Sudan's counsel's argument that punitive damages should not apply retroactively while compensatory damages should.
The Court delivered its ruling on May 18, 2020. The unanimous ruling, written by Justice Neil Gorsuch, vacated the DC Circuit's ruling, restoring the  punitive award, and remanded the case back to the lower court. Gorsuch wrote that while the amendments were not explicit, "Congress was as clear as it could have been when it authorized plaintiffs to seek and win punitive damages for past conduct" in the 2008 language.
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:Foreign Sovereign Immunity Act case law
Category:Sudan–United States relations
Category:1998 United States embassy bombings
"""

From "Order of St. Benedict of New Jersey v. Steinhauser" ==> """
Order of St. Benedict of New Jersey v. Steinhauser, 234 U.S. 640 (1914), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that when someone joins an ecclesiastical order, subject to individual state law, their income from copyright may be dedicated to that order's common fund as much as any other income or form of property. This does not violate any part of the Constitution if the member may withdraw from the order at any time..
 References 
External links
Category:1914 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "Oregon Department of Fish & Wildlife v. Klamath Indian Tribe" ==> """
Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife v. Klamath Indian Tribe, 473 U.S. 753 (1985), was a case appealed to the US Supreme Court by the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife. The Supreme Court reversed the previous decisions in the District Court and the Court of Appeals stating that the exclusive right to hunt, fish, and gather roots, berries, and seeds on the lands reserved to the Klamath Tribe by the 1864 Treaty was not intended to survive as a special right to be free of state regulation in the ceded lands that were outside the reservation after the 1901 Agreement..
Background
In a treaty in 1864 the Klamath and Modoc Tribes, along with the Yahooskin Band of Snake Indians, now collectively called the Klamath Indian Tribe, ceded their aboriginal title to approximately  of aboriginal lands to the United States. In return they retained  for a reservation. It was expressly stated in the 1864 Treaty the Tribe would be secured "the exclusive right of taking fish in the streams and lakes, included in said reservation".473 U.S. at 755.
Government surveyors surveyed the reservation boundaries two different times, once in 1871 and again in 1888. Both surveys failed to include large tracts of land which included the meadows of the Sycan and Sprague River valleys which were originally intended for the reservation.
After many years of tribal complaints, The United States Congress authorized a commission from the General Land Office to determine the amount and value of the excluded land. In 1896 the commission concluded that approximately  were excluded, and that land were worth $537,000, or roughly 83.36 cents per acre. This figure was based on soil quality, grazing lands, and timber. The Klamath Tribes' hunting, fishing, and trapping rights were not mentioned in the commission's report.
In 1901, the Bureau of Indian Affairs negotiated an agreement with the Klamath Tribe for cession of the excluded lands. In the Agreement, the United States agreed to pay the Tribe $537,007.20 for the  of reservation land. In Article I, the tribe agreed to "cede, surrender, grant, and convey to the United States all their claim, right, title and interest in and to" that land. The United States Congress ratified the agreement in 1906. Virtually all ceded lands were immediately closed to entry and placed in national forests or parks.
Case
In 1982 the Klamath Tribe filed suit against the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, along with various state officials, in Federal District Court seeking an injunction against the department's interference with tribal members' hunting and fishing activities on the previously ceded lands in the 1901 Agreement. The District Court entered judgement in favor of the Tribe and declared that the 1901 Agreement "did not abrogate" the Tribe's 1864 "Treaty rights....to hunt, fish, trap, and gather, free from regulation by the...State of Oregon" on the lands ceded to the United States.
The Court of Appeals affirmed the District Court's decision. The Court held that the 1864 Treaty had reserved the Tribe's rights to hunt and fish and the cession of lands in the 1901 Agreement did not specifically include the hunting and fishing rights. The Court of Appeals asserted that the tribe had retained all the rights that were not specified in the cession.
The issue in this case is that the Klamath Tribal members were asserting that they had the right to hunt and fish outside the boundaries of the reservation established in the 1901 Agreement including the lands ceded in the agreement. The tribes agreed that they had no rights to hunt and fish on the ceded lands that were currently privately owned. The question the court was considering was whether or not the Tribe reserved a special right to hunt and fish on the ceded lands and were free of state regulation through the 1901 Agreement. The Court pointed out that the language in the 1864 Treaty indicated that the Tribe's right to hunt and fish was restricted to the reservation and not on any of their additional ceded lands. In addition, the language in the 1901 Agreement did not evidence any intent to preserve special off-reservation hunting or fishing rights for the Tribe.
 See also 
Related cases
 United States v. Winans, 198 U.S. 371 (1905).
 Carpenter v. Shaw, 280 U.S. 363 (1930).
 Puyallup Tribe v. Department of Game of Washington, 391 U.S. 392 (1968).
 Washington v. Washington Commercial Passenger Fishing Vessel Assn., 443 U.S. 658 (1979).
 Kimball v. Callahan, 590 F.2d 768 (1979).
 Red Lake Band of Chippewa Indians v. Minnesota, 449 U.S. 905 (1980).
Other
 List of U.S. Supreme Court Cases involving Indian tribes
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:Native American history of Oregon
"""

From "Oregon v. Bradshaw" ==> """
Oregon v. Bradshaw, 462 U.S. 1039 (1983), applied the rule first announced in Edwards v. Arizona (1981) and clarified the manner in which a suspect may waive his right under Miranda v. Arizona (1966) to have counsel present during interrogation by the police.
Facts
In September 1980, the police were investigating the death of Lowell Reynolds in Tillamook County, Oregon. It appeared that Reynolds had been killed in a traffic accident, when the truck in which he was a passenger careened off the road and into a creek. Defendant Bradshaw was taken into custody as the suspected driver at the time of the accident. At the station, Bradshaw was read the Miranda warnings, and then admitted furnishing alcohol to Reynolds for a party at Reynolds's house but denied being involved in the traffic accident. The police then arrested Bradshaw for furnishing liquor to Reynolds, a minor, and then the police officer who was questioning Bradshaw explained his theory of how Reynolds was killed. The officer said that he believed Bradshaw was driving the truck in which Reynolds was killed. Bradshaw again denied involvement in Reynolds's death. Then he said, "I do want an attorney before it goes very much further." The officer ended the questioning.
Bradshaw was then taken from the police station to the county jail. Either before they left the station, or en route to the jail, Bradshaw asked, "Well, what is going to happen to me now?" The officer replied, "You do not have to talk to me. You have requested an attorney and I don't want you talking to me unless you so desire because anything you say—because—since you have requested an attorney, you know, it has to be at your own free will." A conversation then followed in which the officer suggested his theory of how Bradshaw had caused Reynolds' death and then suggested that Bradshaw take a lie detector test to clear things up. Bradshaw agreed and the next day, after he was read his Miranda rights, Bradshaw took the lie detector test. At the end, the polygraph examiner informed Bradshaw that the results of the test indicated that he had not been truthful in his responses, it was at this point that Bradshaw admitted to being the driver of the truck at the time of the accident. Oregon v. Bradshaw, 462 U.S. 1039, 1039 (1983).
Plurality opinion
To decide this case, the Court had to determine whether the Oregon Court of Appeals had correctly applied Edwards v. Arizona, . In Edwards, the Court had held that "an accused, having expressed his desire to deal with the police only through counsel, is not subject to further interrogation by the authorities until counsel has been made available to him, unless the accused himself initiates further communication, exchanges, or conversations with the police." The question presented in this case was the effect of Bradshaw's query, "Well, what is going to happen to me now?"
The Oregon Court of Appeals had concluded that Bradshaw had waived his right to counsel when he asked what would happen to him. This, the Court concluded, was not how the Edwards rule should be applied. Edwards was meant to protect an accused from being badgered by the police. Hence, if the accused himself approaches the police, this suggests that the accused may not be being badgered, so that when the police respond to the accused's queries with questions of their own, a reviewing court can decide, based on the totality of the circumstances, whether the accused had waived his Fifth Amendment rights during interrogation. In other words, an accused does not waive his right to counsel during interrogation merely because, after invoking that right, he approaches the police with questions of his own.
Bradshaw's question here, "Well, what is going to happen to me now?", "initiated" conversation with the police "in the ordinary dictionary sense of the word." It "evinced a willingness and a desire for a generalized discussion about the investigation; it was not merely a necessary inquiry arising out of the incidents of the custodial relationship." Thus, a suspect detained during an investigation may, after invoking his right to have counsel present during an interrogation, may ask for a drink of water or to use the telephone without retreating from his prior request for counsel. He may not, however, ask more generalized and open-ended questions. Accordingly, the Court held that the Edwards rule had not been violated. The police did not otherwise make any threats, promises, or inducements to Bradshaw in order to persuade him to talk; in fact they confirmed that he had the right to counsel before resuming their questioning. Under these circumstances, Bradshaw had voluntarily waived his right to counsel during interrogation.
Concurring opinion
Justice Powell agreed that, in this particular case, Bradshaw had voluntarily waived his right to have counsel present during interrogation because, after Bradshaw had asked what would happen to him, the police confirmed that he understood his Miranda rights before having Bradshaw sign a written waiver form. In these circumstances, Powell concluded that Bradshaw had voluntarily waived his right to counsel.
Powell had expressly not joined the opinion in Edwards because he was "not sure what it meant." Powell felt that what it meant to "initiate" conversation with the police was far from clear, and the fact that two plausible meanings each garnered the votes of four Justices in this case. Powell was uncomfortable with the two-part test the plurality had adopted, under which a reviewing court first asked whether the suspect had initiated conversation with the police before asking whether, under the totality of the circumstances, the suspect had waived his right to counsel. Powell pointed out that only the totality-of-the-circumstances test had historically been the only test the Court had employed in the past, and he saw no reason to depart from it.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Marshall argued that the plurality had misapplied Edwards. "When this Court in Edwards spoke of 'initiat[ing] further communication' with the police and 'reopen[ing] the dialogue with the authorities,' it obviously had in mind communication or dialogue about the subject matter of the criminal investigation." If a suspect is not inviting further questioning about the criminal case at hand, he is not acceding to further "interrogation" as Edwards and Miranda contemplated.  If "interrogation" had any broader meaning, then the protections of Edwards and Miranda would be diluted.
Under the facts of this case, Marshall could not understand how Bradshaw's question was meant to express a desire to speak about the criminal case at hand. "If [Bradshaw's] question had been posed by Jean-Paul Sartre before a class of philosophy students, it might well have evinced a desire for a 'generalized' discussion. But under the circumstances of this case, it is plain that [Bradshaw's] only 'desire' was to find out where the police were going to take him." For Marshall, Bradshaw's question was nothing more than a response to custodial surroundings. "The very essence of custody is the loss of control over one's freedom of movement." If the police could exploit such questions as the one Bradshaw asked to ask further questions of an accused in the face of an express desire to have a lawyer present, the protections of Miranda would dissipate.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 462
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Miranda warning case law
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Oregon v. Elstad" ==> """
Oregon v. Elstad, 470 U.S. 298 (1985), was a landmark Supreme Court of the United States case relating to Miranda warnings.
Background
A house in the town of Salem, Polk County (most of Salem is located in Marion County), Oregon was burglarized. A witness to the burglary contacted the local sheriff's office and implicated an 18 year old neighbor, Michael Elstad. Two officers went to Elstad's home with a warrant for his arrest. When the police entered the house and asked Elstad about the burglary he admitted to the burglary. The officers then escorted Elstad to the sheriff's headquarters. About an hour later, the same officers began interrogating Elstad by reading him his Miranda rights for the first time. During this interrogation, the officers obtained a written admission of Elstad's involvement in the burglary. Subsequently, Elstad was convicted of burglary and sentenced to 5 years and $18,000 in restitution..
 Case 
The issue presented was whether the self-incrimination clause of the 5th Amendment requires suppression of a confession made after Miranda warnings and a waiver, because police obtained an earlier admission without Miranda warnings.
Justice O'Connor, writing for the majority, held that, while the pre-Miranda statements must be suppressed, the statements made after Miranda do not need to be suppressed as long as the statements were made knowingly and voluntarily.
Subsequent Developments
In Missouri v. Seibert the police practice was to obtain a confession from suspects, then Mirandize the suspects and obtain a "valid" confession. Missouri developed this practice as a result of the holding in Oregon v. Elstad. The Supreme Court condemned this practice and suppressed the statements..; 
Further reading
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
"""

From "Oregon v. Guzek" ==> """
Oregon v. Guzek, 546 U.S. 517 (2006), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States, which ruled that the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution does not grant criminal defendants facing the death penalty the right to introduce new evidence of their innocence during sentencing that was not introduced during trial.  Accordingly, states could constitutionally exclude such evidence from the sentencing phase of a capital trial.
Background of the case
First state appeal
Randy Lee Guzek was convicted of murder and sentenced to death.Deschutes County Circuit Court, Judge Thomas M. Mosgrove presiding. Chief Deputy DA Ron Brown prosecuted the case. The Oregon Supreme Court affirmed his conviction but vacated the sentence on appeal.State v. Guzek, 797 P.2d 1031 (Ore. 1990).  The court ruled that the death sentence violated the Eighth AmendmentAs applied to the States by the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution; see Incorporation. because the jury was not presented with a "general mitigation question," which would ensure that it had the opportunity to give effect to any relevant mitigating evidence outside of the statutory factors that were submitted to it. The court remanded the case back to the trial court for a new sentencing trial.
Second state appeal
On remand, Guzek was sentenced to death again.Judge Mosgrove again presided over the sentencing. Chief Deputy DA Joshua Marquis prosecuted the re-trial. Guzek appealed, and the Oregon Supreme Court again vacated the sentence, ruling that "victim impact" evidence that the State had presented during sentencing was irrelevant, so unconstitutionally secured the death sentence.State v. Guzek, 906 P.2d 272 (Ore. 1995).  The case was remanded for a third sentencing trial.
Third state appeal
During the third sentencing trial, prosecuted by special prosecutor Joshua Marquis,  the trial judge failed to instruct the jury about a "true-life" sentencing option— life in prison without the possibility of parole— as an alternative to the death penalty.Judge Pierre Van Rysselberghe presided over the third sentencing.  Guzek was once again sentenced to death. Based on this error, the Oregon Supreme Court vacated Guzek's sentence and remanded for a new sentencing trial.State v. Guzek, 86 P.3d 1106 (Ore. 2004).
Seeking to avoid further errors at his fourth sentencing proceeding, the court also addressed the exclusion of alibi evidence that Guzek had sought to admit, which consisted of  transcripts of testimony by his mother and grandfather stating he was with them at the time of the murder. The Oregon Supreme Court ruled that under state law, and the Eighth Amendment, Guzek had a right to present this evidence during his death penalty sentencing and directed the trial court to admit all alibi evidence he submitted. The State of Oregon then petitioned the Supreme Court for review.
Fourth sentencing trial
As the result of the opinion of SCOTUS the Oregon Supreme Court reviewed the case yet again in 2007 (State of Oregon vs. Randy Lee Guzek, 153 P.3d 101 (Ore. 2007) and determined that in accordance with the SCOTUS decision, that live alibi testimony would not be allowed but that prior transcript alibi testimony of the defendant's mother and grandfather would be admitted.
Although the sole remaining issue for the defendant was his right to have life without parole considered if he waived any ex post facto right, on May 5, 2010 as jury selection was starting Guzek wrote a pro-se 5-page brief demanding that life without parole (LWOP) be removed from consideration and the presiding judge, Judge Jack Billings so ordered.http://www.oregonlive.com/news/oregonian/steve_duin/index.ssf/2010/05/randy_lee_guzek_revels_in_the.html ordered Clatsop County DA Josh Marquis returned for a third time to re-prosecute Guzek.
In May 2010, after several further delays, the case of the State of Oregon vs. Randy Guzek went to trial again in Deschutes County, Oregon. On June 17, 2010, after about 5 hours of deliberation, the 8-woman, 4-man jury unanimously answered all the four questions required for a sentence of death to be rendered under Oregon's capital sentencing scheme "yes," and Guzek was immediately sentenced to death again for the murders of Rod Houser and Lois Houser.
The court's decision
The United States Supreme Court unanimously reversed the Oregon Supreme Court, ruling that the Eighth Amendment's prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment did not create a right to introduce evidence of innocence in a defendant's death penalty sentencing phase if it had not been introduced in the trial phase. The U.S. Constitution permitted states to limit such evidence to that already presented at trial.
Guzek had also argued that this alibi evidence could be used to impeach the testimony of other witnesses. The Court left it open to the Oregon Supreme Court on remand to determine whether this was permissible under Oregon law.
Subsequent developments
On December 13, 2022, Guzek's death sentence (along with everyone else on Oregon's death row) was commuted to life without parole by Governor Kate Brown. Sue Shirley, the daughter of Guzek's victims, reacted to the decision with outrage.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 546
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Capital punishment in Oregon
Notes
References
Full text of the Court's decision from FindLaw.com
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:Capital punishment in Oregon
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:Deschutes County, Oregon
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Oregon v. Ice" ==> """
Oregon v. Ice, 555 U.S. 160 (2009), was a legal case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution  does not inhibit states from assigning to judges, rather than juries, the finding of facts necessary to the imposition of consecutive, rather than concurrent, sentences for multiple offenses.
Ice, a supervisor of an apartment complex, twice entered a residence and, on each occasion, touched the breasts and vagina of an 11-year-old girl.  For each incident, a jury found him guilty of first-degree burglary for entering with the intent to commit sexual assault, as well as two counts of sexual abuse.
The statute under which Ice was sentenced, Oregon Revised Statutes 137.123, generally provided for concurrent sentences. However, it allowed for consecutive sentencing when the offenses did not arise from the same course of conduct. The statute also allowed for such sentencing when the offense was indicative of a willingness to commit more than one offense, or the offense caused or created a risk of greater or qualitatively different harm to the victim.
The trial judge found that Ice's conduct satisfied these criteria and ordered that his sentences for the two burglaries and the two sexual assaults, in which he touched the girl's vagina, to be served consecutively. The judge allowed the two sexual assault sentences for touching the girl's breasts to be served concurrently. Thus, the judge's action nearly quadrupled his sentence from 7.5 years to over 28 years.
Question presented
When a defendant has been tried and convicted of multiple offenses, each involving discrete sentencing prescriptions, does the Sixth Amendment mandate jury determination of any fact declared necessary to the imposition of consecutive, in lieu of concurrent, sentences?
Majority opinion
Justice Ginsburg, joined by Justices Stevens, Kennedy, Breyer, and Alito, held that the Sixth Amendment does not prohibit a judge from determining facts that enter into his decision whether to order that sentences for discrete offenses be served consecutively or concurrently.
In a majority of states, the judge has full discretion as to whether sentences for discrete offenses run consecutively or concurrently. In some states, all sentences are presumed to run consecutively unless the judge chooses to order that they run concurrently. The system at issue in Oregon here is that judges are limited in their discretion because they must find certain facts before ordering sentences to run consecutively. This decision clarified that none of these arrangements are prohibited by the Sixth Amendment.
The Court's decision was based on considerations of historical practice, and respect for state sovereignty. As to the first consideration, at common law, judges retained the discretion as to whether to impose sentences consecutively or concurrently for discrete offenses: that was not a function for the jury. Recent legislative enactments are meant to mitigate the harshness of the historical rule, but that does not mean that a defendant is entitled to his sentences running concurrently. Here, the Court found that the judge had not infringed upon jury's role as the finder of fact or its role "as a bulwark at trial between the State and the accused." Also, the Court sought to respect state sovereignty by not second-guessing the state's administration of its criminal justice system without a compelling reason to do so.
Dissent
Justice Scalia wrote the dissenting opinion, with Chief Justice Roberts, Souter, and Thomas joining the dissent.
Scalia criticized the majority opinion as being contrary to Apprendi v. New Jersey, United States v. Booker, and Blakely v. Washington, in which the court had held that any fact (other than a previous conviction) must be admitted by the defendant or proved beyond a reasonable doubt before a jury. Scalia noted, "The Court's justification of Oregon's scheme is a virtual copy of the dissents in those cases.
"...Instead, the Court attempts to distinguish Oregon's sentencing scheme by reasoning that the rule of Apprendi applies only to the length of a sentence for an individual crime and not to the total sentence for a defendant. I cannot understand why we would make such a strange exception to the treasured right of trial by jury. Neither the reasoning of the Apprendi line of cases, nor any distinctive history of the factfinding necessary to imposition of consecutive sentences, nor (of course) logic supports such an odd rule.
"...Finally, the Court summons up the parade of horribles assembled by the amicus brief of 17 States supporting Oregon. It notes that '[t]rial judges often find facts' in connection with 'a variety of sentencing determinations other than the length of incarceration,' and worries that even their ability to set the length of supervised release, impose community service, or order entry into a drug rehabilitation program, may be called into question. Ante, at 10. But if these courses reduce rather than augment the punishment that the jury verdict imposes, there is no problem."
Significance
The Court here limited the application of a rule laid down in Apprendi v. New Jersey and extended in Blakely v. Washington and Cunningham v. California, requiring juries to find the existence of certain facts before increasing the length of a defendant's prison sentence beyond the statutory maximum.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment sentencing case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Oregon v. Kennedy" ==> """
Oregon v. Kennedy, 456 U.S. 667 (1982), was a United States Supreme Court decision dealing with the appropriate test for determining whether a criminal defendant has been "goaded" by the prosecution's bad actions into motioning for a mistrial. This matters because the answer determines whether a defendant can be retried. Ordinarily, a defendant who requests a mistrial can be forced to stand trial a second time, see United States v. Dinitz. However, if the prosecution's conduct was "intended to provoke the defendant into moving for a mistrial," double jeopardy protects the defendant from retrial. The Court emphasized that only prosecutorial actions where the intent is to provoke a mistrial — and not mere "harassment" or "overreaching" — trigger the double jeopardy protection..
 Background 
Kennedy was charged with stealing an oriental rug. During the first trial, the State of Oregon called as a witness an expert on Middle Eastern rugs who could testify as to the value and the identity of the rug in question. The prosecutor had the following exchange with the witness:
Based on this exchange, Kennedy moved for a mistrial, and the trial judge granted the motion. When the state then attempted to retry Kennedy, he moved to dismiss the charges because of double jeopardy.
The Oregon Court of Appeals found in Kennedy's favor. The Court of Appeals ruled that the prosecution had not meant to force a mistrial, but still sided with Kennedy because it viewed the prosecution as "overreaching."
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court then rejected the standard used by the Court of Appeals, stressing that only "conduct intended to provoke the defendant into moving for a mistrial" would protect a defendant from a second trial following a mistrial.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 456
 References 
External links
Category:1982 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Oregon v. Mitchell" ==> """
Oregon v. Mitchell, 400 U.S. 112 (1970), was a Supreme Court case which held that the United States Congress could set voting age requirements for federal elections but not for local or state elections. The case also upheld Congress's nationwide prohibition on literacy tests and similar "tests or devices" used as voting qualifications as defined in the Voting Rights Act of 1965.
Congress had passed the Voting Rights Act Amendments of 1970 requiring all states to register citizens between the ages of 18 and 21 as voters. The state of Oregon objected to the lower voting age, and filed suit on the grounds that the act was unconstitutional. The respondent was John Mitchell in his role as United States Attorney General.
The Supreme Court ruled by a 5–4 vote that Congress could set requirements for voter qualifications in federal elections, and by a different 5–4 majority that Congress could not set requirements for voter qualifications in local and state elections, but not even a plurality of the court could agree on the reasoning for these holdings. Only half a year later, the court's holding that the federal government could not mandate suffrage for 18-to-21-year-olds to vote in state and local elections was effectively rendered moot by the enactment of the Twenty-sixth Amendment.
Opinion of the Court
The opinion of the Court was written by Hugo Black.  The remaining eight justices were split 4-4 on whether Congress had power to set requirements for voter qualifications in any elections, regardless of whether they were state or federal.  Black's vote was therefore decisive on both questions.  Although it was styled "the opinion of the court", no other justice joined Black's opinion, rendering his reasoning non-precedential.
Congressional elections
The first question to be addressed was the right of Congress to override minimum voting ages set by states for federal Congressional elections.  Article I of the Constitution states that, in elections for the U.S. House of Representatives, "Electors in each State shall have the Qualifications requisite for Electors of the most numerous Branch of the State Legislature". The Seventeenth Amendment extends the same requirement to elections for the U.S. Senate.  Article I furthermore gives states the right prescribe the "Times, Places and Manner of holding Elections for Senators and Representatives", but also states that "Congress may at any time by Law make or alter such Regulations".
Justice Black's opinion stated that, according to a "long line of decisions in this Court", "Congress has ultimate supervisory power over congressional elections".  Black wrote that Congress had the undisputed right (under the "Times, Places and Manner" clause) to regulate the drawing of electoral districts, and went on to argue that "no voter qualification was more important to the Framers than the geographical qualification embodied in the concept of congressional districts", adding that "the power to alter congressional district lines is vastly more significant in its effect than the power to permit 18-year-old citizens to go to the polls and vote in all federal elections".  Black further argued that the phrase "such Regulations" (in the "Times, Places and Manner" clause) must be interpreted to encompass "regulations of the same general character that the legislature of the State is authorized to prescribe with respect to congressional elections".
Black's opinion therefore upheld the right of Congress to override state voting-age restrictions applying to federal Congressional elections.
Presidential elections
Article II of the Constitution states that "[e]ach State shall appoint" its Presidential Electors
"in such Manner as the Legislature, thereof may direct".  Black's opinion held that, despite this language, Congress has the right to override state laws on minimum voting age in Presidential elections.  He reasoned that "[i]t cannot seriously contend that Congress has less power over the conduct of presidential elections than it has over congressional elections."
State and local elections
Black's opinion stated that Congress did not have power to override state minimum voting ages for state elections, because "the Constitution was also intended to preserve to the States the power that even the Colonies had to establish and maintain their own separate and independent governments".
Other opinions
Douglas
Justice Douglas would have held that the Congressional act was valid as applied to all elections (both state and federal), as an exercise of Congress's power to enforce the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Brennan
Justice Brennan, joined by Justices White and Marshall, likewise argued that the Act of Congress was a valid exercise of Congress's power to enforce the Fourteenth Amendment.
Harlan
In a lengthy dissent, Justice Harlan began by attacking the reasoning of Douglas and Brennan opinions, undertaking a detailed historical analysis of the circumstances surrounding the passage of the Fourteenth Amendment.  He concluded that "the suggestion that members of the age group between 18 and 21 are threatened with unconstitutional discrimination, or that any hypothetical discrimination is likely to be affected by lowering the voting age, is little short of fanciful".
Harlan then attacked Black's reasoning that Congress had the power to regulate voting age in federal elections. Focusing on the explicit words of the Constitution, Harlan stated that "[i]t is difficult to see how words could be clearer in stating what Congress can control and what it cannot control".
Stewart
Stewart's opinion, joined by Chief Justice Burger and Justice Blackmun, agreed with Harlan that the Constitution gives states the power to set voting qualifications.  In a footnote, Stewart pointed out that the Fourteenth Amendment itself used a voting age of 21 for the purpose of calculating the basis of states' representation in Congress, and therefore "so long as a State does not set the voting age higher than 21, the reasonableness of its choice is confirmed by the very Fourteenth Amendment upon which the Government relies".
Enforcement
Enforcement of this ruling might have proven to be problematic, since states not lowering the voting age to the age of 18 for state elections would have had to provide special federal-election only ballots to citizens between 18 and 20 voting in federal elections. Such states would have had to maintain two sets of voting registries, one for those between the ages of 18 to 20 and another for those 21 and older.
The question became moot with the prompt ratification of the Twenty-sixth Amendment the next year, which prohibited both the states and the federal government from denying the vote to citizens over the age of 18 on account of age.
Though Oregon v. Mitchell affirmed the federal government's power to set a minimum voting age for federal elections, no case has tested whether the federal government possesses the power to prevent states from lowering their voting age below 18, since the federal government has not tried to prohibit states from doing so.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 400
United States v. Butler, 
Carter v. Carter Coal Co., 
 References 
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court original jurisdiction cases
Category:1970 in United States case law
Category:1970 in Oregon
Category:Abrogated United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:United States elections case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Oregon Waste Systems, Inc. v. Department of Environmental Quality of Oregon" ==> """
Oregon Waste Systems, Inc. v. Department of Environmental Quality of Oregon, 511 U.S. 93 (1994), is a United States Supreme Court decision focused on the aspect of state power and the interpretation of the Commerce Clause as a limitation on states' regulatory power. In this particular case, the Supreme Court considered whether the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality's alleged cost-based surcharge on the disposal of out-of-state waste violated the dormant commerce clause.Stephens, Otis. American Constitutional Law Volume 1. Thomson Wadsworth. USA, 2003
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court voted 7–2 in favor of Oregon Waste Systems, holding that Oregon's surcharge was invalid under the negative commerce clause. This meant that the surcharge favored in-state economic interests over out-of-state counterparts. The surcharge was discriminatory to outside states because it imposed a fee three times greater than that imposed on in-state waste.Supreme Court Collection. Cornell University Law School. Legal Information Institute
In order for such a surcharge to be valid, it would have to be justified as compensatory, in that it makes out-of-state shippers pay their fair share of the disposal costs. This would have to be equivalent to a measurable standard that would be the same for in-state shipping. However, Oregon's surcharge of $2.25 for out-of-state waste compared with a surcharge of $0.85 on in-state waste was determined facially discriminatory. Citing a previous case, the Supreme Court indicated that such surcharges may be acceptable if they were based on increased costs specifically associated with out-of-state waste.
See also
 City of Philadelphia v. New Jersey, 437 U.S. 617 (1978)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 511
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
Category:Legal history of Oregon
Category:Environment of Oregon
Category:1994 in the environment
Category:1994 in United States case law
Category:Waste management in the United States
"""

From "Organization for a Better Austin v. Keefe" ==> """
Organization for a Better Austin v. Keefe, 402 U.S. 415 (1971), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that courts cannot prohibit peaceful distribution of pamphlets, unless a heavy burden is met to justify prior restraint.
 Background 
Keefe, a real estate broker, worked in the Chicago neighborhood of Austin.  Keefe soon garnered a reputation for his business practices, which were considered to be inflammatory and controversial.  Among the asserted practices was that Keefe attempted to generate sales by panicking white homeowners into selling at below-market prices by suggesting that African Americans would soon be living nearby, then selling the houses to African Americans at market value or higher (a practice known as blockbusting).
Some residents of Austin, including the Organization for a Better Austin (OBA), attempted to coerce Keefe to change his tactics by distributing flyers in the town of Westchester, where Keefe resided.   Keefe sued, and obtained an injunction preventing the OBA from distributing flyers in Keefe's neighborhood.  The OBA argued that their pamphlets were merely informational, but Keefe argued that they were invasions of privacy, and were intimidating.
The Illinois Appellate Court upheld the injunction (115 Ill.App.2d 236, 253 N.E.2d 76).
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court, in an 8 to 1 decision, overturned the injunction.  The court ruled that peaceful distribution of pamphlets is an important aspect of the First Amendment freedom of speech, and that prior restraint of such peaceful speech requires a very compelling reason.
Justice Harlan dissented solely on the basis that the injunction did not constitute a "final decision" from which an appeal could be taken, and that the Court thus lacked jurisdiction.
 See also 
 Carroll v. Princess Anne, 
 Bantam Books, Inc. v. Sullivan, 
 References 
 External links 
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:History of Chicago
"""

From "Ornelas v. United States" ==> """
Ornelas v. United States, 517 U.S. 690 (1996), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States that held that appellate courts should review probable cause determinations for warrantless searches de novo.R.J. Allen, J.L. Hoffman, D.A. Livingston & W.J. Stuntz.  Comprehensive Criminal Procedure, Second Edition.  Aspen Publishers, New York.  2005, p. 437
Factual background
In December 1992, Detective Pautz of the Milwaukee Sheriff's Department was conducting drug interdiction when he noticed a 1981 two door Oldsmobile with California plates..  Pautz radioed his dispatcher to check the registration of the car, and he ran the name of the owner, Miguel Ledesma Ornelas, through the Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs Information System (NADDIS).  NADDIS reported that Ornelas was a heroin dealer.  Two more officers arrived on the scene.  An officer asked Ornelas if he had any contraband in the car, and Ornelas responded negatively.  Detective Hurrle requested permission to search the car, and Ornelas consented.  Deputy Luedke searched the car and noticed a loose door panel with a rusty screw.  Deputy Luedke  removed the panel and found two kilograms of cocaine.  Ornelas and his accomplice, Ismael Ornelas-Ledesma, were arrested.Ornelas, 517 U.S. at 692-693.
Ornelas filed a motion to suppress in the District Court.  The court found that the officers had probable cause to remove the door panel and denied the motion.  Ornelas was convicted and appealed to the Seventh Circuit.  The Seventh Circuit reviewed the District Court's determination of probable cause on a deferential clear error standard and affirmed the conviction.  The Supreme Court granted certiorari..
Decision
Majority opinion
Writing for a majority of eight Justices, Chief Justice Rehnquist noted that the Supreme Court itself had never expressly deferred to the probable cause determination of lower courts.  The Court reasoned that deferential appellate review could cause varied and inconsistent results, and that it would hinder the clarification of the law.  De novo review would unify precedent and provide clearer guidance for police.Ornelas, 517 U.S. at 696-699.  The Court held that probable cause determinations for warrantless searches should be reviewed de novo, but also that "an appeals court should give due weight to a trial court's finding that the officer was credible and the inference was reasonable."Ornelas, 517 U.S. at 700.  Ornelas' conviction was vacated and the case was remanded to the Seventh Circuit. 
Scalia's dissent
Justice Scalia dissented, arguing that probable cause determinations are necessarily fact intensive and unsuited to de novo review by an appellate court.  Scalia also noted that true de novo review was inconsistent with giving due weight to police inferences.Ornelas, 517 U.S. at 701-705 (Scalia, J., dissenting).
Subsequent history
On remand in the Seventh Circuit the court reviewed the probable cause determination de novo and affirmed the conviction.
Impact
Ornelas was initially viewed as a victory for criminal defendants because de novo review was thought to be more critical and searching than deference to the District Court.David A. Sklansky, Traffic Stops, Minority Motorists, and the Future of the Fourth Amendment, 1997 Sup. Ct. Rev. 271, 300  David Sklansky, however, suggests that the "due weight" given police inferences is actually more favorable to law enforcement than a clear error standard for reviewing District Court determinations.Sklansky at 301.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 517
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Search and seizure case law
Category:1996 in United States case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
"""

From "Orr v. Orr" ==> """
Orr v. Orr, 440 U.S. 268 (1979), was a United States Supreme Court case that held that a statutory scheme in Alabama that imposed alimony obligations on husbands but not on wives was an unconstitutional equal protection violation.
 Background 
The state of Alabama had adopted a statutory scheme that imposed alimony obligations on husbands but not on wives for the stated purpose of addressing the economic disparity between men and women by providing support for needy women after divorce.
Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Margaret Moses Young filed a brief for the American Civil Liberties Union as amicus curiae urging reversal.
 Opinion of the Court 
Applying intermediate scrutiny, the Court determined that the statute was not substantially related to the stated purpose. The Court observed that a gender neutral statute would still have the effect of providing for needy women, and that the only difference created by the Alabama statute was to also provide support for well off women that did not need support and to exclude needy men from support.Varat, p. 581
 References 
External links
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1979 in United States case law
Category:United States family case law
Category:United States men's rights case law
"""

From "Ortiz v. United States" ==> """
Ortiz v. United States, 585 U.S. ___ (2018), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding the nature of the United States Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces (USCAAF) in relationship to Article III Courts. The Court determined that it had jurisdiction to rule on appeals from the USCAAF, even though that court was created by Congress via Article I of the United States Constitution and is not an Article III court. The case was centered on the United States Constitution's separation of powers doctrine. The Court declared the Appointments Clause does not impose a prohibition on an officer of the United States from serving in two roles simultaneously. Rather, the clause only concerns itself with the method of appointment.
The case is notable for the court's reliance on the 1803 case of Marbury v. Madison.
Facts
Ortiz was an airman convicted by a military tribunal of distributing child pornography, and sentenced to two years in prison followed by a dishonorable discharge. His sentence was affirmed by the Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals (AFCCA), by a panel which included Colonel Martin Mitchell, who had been appointed to that body by the Secretary of Defense, and by the President of the United States, with the advice and consent of the Senate. Ortiz sought review, asserting that Mitchell's presence on the panel violated statute law and the Appointments Clause of the U.S. Constitution.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 585
 Notes and references 
 External links 
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States separation of powers case law
"""

From "Osborn v. Bank of the United States" ==> """
Osborn v. Bank of the United States, 22 U.S. (9 Wheat.) 738 (1824), was a case set in the Banking Crisis of 1819, when many banks, including the Second Bank of the United States, demanded repayment for loans that they had issued on credit that they did not have. This led to an economic downturn and a shortage of money. In 1819, Ohio passed a law that put a tax on the Bank of the United States on the theory that taxing a bank would allow the state government to receive and distribute the scarce money.
On September 17, 1819, Ohio Auditor Ralph Osborn was given permission to seize $100,000 from a branch of the Bank of the United States. However, his agents mistakenly took $120,000 although the extra $20,000 was promptly returned. The bank chose to sue Osborn for the return of the additional $100,000, and a federal court ruled that Osborn violated a court order, prohibiting the taxing of the bank.
Osborn argued that he had never been properly served with the order but still had to return the money. A problem arose when Osborn could pay back only $98,000, as the other $2,000 had been used to pay the salary of Osborn's tax agents.
In 1824, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the Bank of the United States, ordering the return of the disputed $2,000.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 22
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:1824 in United States case law
Category:1824 in Ohio
Category:Legal history of Ohio
"""

From "Osborne v. Ohio" ==> """
Osborne v. Ohio, 495 U.S. 103 (1990), is a U.S. Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the First Amendment to the United States Constitution allows states to outlaw the possession, as distinct from the distribution, of child pornography.. In doing so, the Court extended the holding of  New York v. Ferber,. which had upheld laws banning the distribution of child pornography against a similar First Amendment challenge, and distinguished Stanley v. Georgia,. which had struck down a Georgia law forbidding the possession of pornography by adults in their own homes. The Court also determined that the Ohio law at issue was not overbroad, relying on a narrowing interpretation of the law the Ohio Supreme Court had adopted in prior proceedings in the case; however, because it was unclear whether the state had proved all the elements of the crime, the Court ordered a new trial.
Decision
The Court held that, with respect to child pornography, the government does not act out of a "paternalistic interest" in regulating a citizen's mind. By outlawing the possession of child pornography, the government seeks to eradicate legitimate harms by diminishing the market for child pornography. These harms include the psychological damage to children—both the children depicted in the pornography, for whom the images produced serve as a permanent record of the abuse, and the children whom potential abusers might lure with such images. "Given the importance of the State's interest in protecting the victims of child pornography, we cannot fault Ohio for attempting to stamp out this vice at all levels in the distribution chain."
Even if the First Amendment did not categorically forbid the government to ban the possession of child pornography, Osborne argued that the Ohio statute under which he was convicted was overbroad.  A ban on speech is "overbroad" if it outlaws both prohibited speech as well as a substantial amount of legitimate speech. The statute, as written, banned depictions of nudity, and the Court had previously held that nudity was protected expression. But the Ohio Supreme Court had held that the statute only applied to nudity that "constitutes a lewd exhibition or involves a graphic focus on the genitals, and where the person depicted is neither the child nor the ward of the person charged" with violating it. Furthermore, the Ohio Supreme Court had required that the defendant had to know that the images depicted children before being convicted of possession of child pornography. By narrowing the scope of the statute in these ways, the Ohio Supreme Court had sufficiently tailored the law only to those images most harmful to children.
However, the Court reversed Osborne's conviction because, after reviewing the record of the trial, it observed that the State did not present evidence that the images were "lewd" within the meaning of the statute. Because lewdness was an essential element of the crime, the State had not satisfied its obligation to prove all the elements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt.
The dissenting opinion, written by Justice Brennan and joined by Justices Marshall and Stevens, argued, "When speech is eloquent and the ideas expressed lofty, it is easy to find restrictions on them invalid. But were the First Amendment limited to such discourse, our freedom would be sterile indeed. Mr. Osborne's pictures may be distasteful, but the Constitution guarantees both his right to possess them privately and his right to avoid punishment under an overbroad law."Osborne, 495 U.S. at 148 (Brennan, J., dissenting).
See also
State law (United States)
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Child pornography law
Category:1990 in United States case law
Category:United States pornography law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Oswald v. New York" ==> """
Oswald v. New York, 2 U.S. (2 Dall.) 401 (1792), was a United States Supreme Court case in which an individual sued a state.
No appearance was entered for the defendant state and default judgment was rendered against the state. This remains the only case decided by the U.S. Supreme Court in which a citizen of a different state brought suit against a state where the state paid damages and court costs after a jury trial.Shortell, Christopher. Rights, Remedies, and the Impact of the Sovereign State. Albany, NY: University of New York Press, 2008. p. 35.
Background
The origins of the case begin with John Holt, editor and writer whose printing presses were seized by the British for violating the Stamp Act.Paltsits, Victor Hugo. John Holt, Printer and Postmaster: Some Facts and Documents Related to His Career. New York: New York Public Library, 1920. p. 6-7. Following the seizure of his servants and presses, Holt received the assistance of George Clinton and Philip Schuyler and opened the New-York Journal. In 1777 Holt was then hired by the State of New York through the Committee of Safety chaired by John Jay. The Committee authorized the payment of £200 for one year. Despite no other resolution being passed, Holt continued to serve as the state printer for laws and resolutions until his death in 1784.
In this case the primary question was of payment for work performed. As late as 1783, Holt complained to the New York Senate about not being paid his annual salary. While no annual salary had been authorized and some work had been paid for by the State of New York, Holt argued that he was due funds that were not paid and he was forced to cease publication of his newspaper. Upon Holt’s death, his widow Elizabeth Holt filed a claim with the New York State Auditor in the amount of £5,293 for salary and expenses as state printer. Upon review of the claim, the auditor paid £2,000 for expenses but denied the claim for salary noting that the work performed after the first year was performed in lieu of salary. Mrs. Holt pressed her claim to the legislature which also denied the claim. Following this, she sold the newspaper and moved to Philadelphia with her daughter and son-in-law Eleazer Oswald.
When Elizabeth Holt died in 1788, her son-in-law, Eleazer Oswald then renewed the claim against the State of New York. Again presenting the case to Assembly, no relief was provided despite an attempt by the legislature to review the issue. With no relief from the legislature, Oswald filed suit in the U.S. Supreme Court in February 1791 seeking $31,458.35 in salary and damages.
Proceedings
Following the filing of the case, summons were dispatched to Governor George Clinton and New York Attorney General Aaron Burr. Governor Clinton referred the summons to the New York Assembly which failed to act or respond. A second summons was issued by the court in February 1792. In February 1793 when New York again failed to respond, Oswald's attorney requested a default be entered at the August session if the state again failed to appear.Shortell, Christopher. Rights, Remedies, and the Impact of the Sovereign State. Albany, NY: University of New York Press, 2008. p. 36.
During the Fall Term of the court, attorney Jared Ingersoll appeared on behalf of the State of New York and filed a protest that the Court did not have jurisdiction over the case. Before the motion was heard by the court, Oswald's attorney requested a postponement of the case. Before the resumption of the case at the next session, politics intervened. The New York General Assembly came under control of the Federalists who were in an ongoing battle with Governor Clinton and the Anti-Federalists.
Opinion of the Court
Dallas records the case as follows:
Oswald, Administrator
v.
the State of New York
February Term, 1792
Summons. In this case the Marshall had returned the writ served; and now Sergeant moved for a distringas, to compel an appearance on the part of the State.
While, however, the court held the motion under advisement, it was voluntarily withdrawn, and the suit discontinued.. 
References
External links
Category:1792 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Jay Court
"""

From "Otter Tail Power Co. v. United States" ==> """
Otter Tail Power Co. v. United States, 410 U.S. 366 (1973), is a United States Supreme Court decision often cited as the first case in which the Court held violative of the antitrust laws a single firm's refusal to deal with other firms that denied them access to a facility essential to engaging in business (a so-called essential facility).The Court had held illegal a combination of firms' denial of access to an essential facility (the only railroad bridge across the Mississippi River at St. Louis) in .
Background
Facts
Otter Tail Power Company (Otter Tail) is an investor-owned electric power utility with headquarters at Fergus Falls, Minnesota. It buys its electric power largely from the United States at the Government Bureau of Reclamation's Red Wing Dam power generation facility and other Bureau sites; transmits ("wheels") the power over high-voltage power transmission lines that Otter Tail owns, extending across the northern half of Minnesota; and sells the power to customers in small towns in northwestern Minnesota and eastern North and South Dakota.
The case involved two principal types of conduct, both of which resulted from Otter Tail's desire to prevent small towns in which it sold power to customers from establishing municipal power systems of their own instead of the residents continuing to be retail customers of Otter Tail. One type of conduct was bringing allegedly frivolous and vexatious suits to prevent the towns from being able to sell municipal bonds to finance the establishment of their municipal power systems. The more important conduct, leading to the essential facilities legal precedent, was Otter Tail's refusal to wheel and sell power to the proposed new local power systems that would replace Otter Tail as power supplier in their towns.331 F. Supp. at 57–58.
The United States sued Otter Tail for monopolizing the retail distribution and sale of power to towns in its operating area.
District court opinion
The district court (Devitt, J.) ruled for the Government. It acknowledged:
It is not contended that defendant acted illegally or improperly in achieving this claimed monopoly position but rather in its actions seeking to preserve this position. Specifically, it is urged that Otter Tail's refusal to sell or wheel power to towns desiring to establish municipal systems, and its actions participating in local municipal power political campaigns, and sponsoring, encouraging, and financially supporting court litigation are all intended to impede and frustrate attempts to establish independent municipal electric systems.
Otter Tail does not deny its refusal to sell or wheel power to municipalities which it formerly served at retail but argues that to supply power to these municipalities would aid in its own demise. It admits its participation in local municipal political campaigns and in litigation surrounding attempts to establish municipal systems but contends this is proper and legal conduct. Such actions were taken, defendant argues, to preserve the electric power free enterprise system for the benefit of its customers, shareholders and employees.331 F. Supp. at 58.
The court found that Otter Tail had a monopoly in the sale of electric power at retail in the area in which it operated—more than 75% of the relevant market. Many towns cannot obtain power from the Bureau because Otter Tail owns the only transmission lines and refuses to deal with them. It is not economically feasible or practical for a municipality to construct its own transmission lines.331 F. Supp. at 59–60.
The court concluded "that Otter Tail has a strategic dominance in the transmission of power in most of its service area.331 F. Supp. at 60. The court found that Otter Tail used its refusal to deal and its dominance to prevent towns such as Elbow Lake, Minnesota, from obtaining power to supply the town's municipal power system.
The court ruled that this and similar conduct toward other towns was monopolization in violation of section 2 of the Sherman Act:
Here the defendant does not dispute that its purpose in refusing to deal with municipalities desiring to establish municipally owned systems is to protect itself in the position it now enjoys in the area. Such is a monopoly position, and the law prohibits conduct such as this when such is intended to preserve the monopoly.
. . . Here Otter Tail refuses to sell power to municipalities which would thereby take retail power business from defendant and refuses to wheel power for others willing to sell to these municipalities. Because of its dominant position Otter Tail is able to deprive towns of the benefits of competition which would result from municipally owned facilities.
Pertinent to an examination of the law is a reference to cases expressive of the "bottleneck theory" of antitrust law. This theory reflects in essence that it is an illegal restraint of trade for a party to foreclose others from the use of a scarce facility.331 F. Supp. at 61.
The court then turned to Otter Tail's litigation, finding "Otter Tail either instituted or sponsored and financially supported court litigation which had the effect of frustrating the sale of revenue bonds to finance the municipal systems." The effect was "halting, or appreciably slowing, efforts for municipal ownership" and "the large financial burden imposed on the towns' limited treasury dampened local enthusiasm for public ownership."331 F. Supp. at 62. The court analogized this to litigation under spurious patents and concluded that it was part of a monopolistic scheme. 
The court therefore enjoined Otter Tail's monopolistic conduct. Its judgment prohibited Otter Tail from: refusing to sell electric power at wholesale to existing or proposed municipal electric power systems in the areas serviced by Otter Tail, refusing to wheel electric power over the lines from the electric power suppliers to existing or proposed municipal systems in the area, entering into or enforcing any contract which prohibits use of Otter Tail's lines to wheel electric power to municipal electric power systems, or from entering into or enforcing any contract which limits the customers to whom and areas in which Otter Tail or any other electric power company may sell electric power. The district court also enjoined Otter Tail from instituting, supporting, or engaging in litigation, directly or indirectly, against municipalities and their officials who have voted to establish municipal electric power systems for the purpose of delaying, preventing, or interfering with the establishment of a municipal electric power system.See 410 U.S. at 368–69.
Supreme Court ruling
The Supreme Court affirmed (4-3) the essential facility part of the case but remanded for additional findings on the litigation part. Justice William O. Douglas delivered the opinion of the Court, in which Justices William J. Brennan, Byron White, and Thurgood Marshall joined. Justice Potter Stewart filed an opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part, in which Chief Justice Warren Burger and Justice William Rehnquist joined.
Majority opinion
thumb|right|200px|Justice Douglas authored the opinion of the Court
The Court explained that proposed municipal systems face "great obstacles." They must purchase the electric power at wholesale. To do so, they must have access to existing transmission lines. The only ones available belong to Otter Tail. While the Bureau of Reclamation has high-voltage bulk-power supply lines in the area, it does not operate a network for local power delivery, but relies on wheeling contracts with Otter Tail and other utilities to deliver power to its wholesale customers.410 U.S. at 370.
When Otter Tail's franchise in several towns expired, the citizens voted to establish their own municipal distribution systems. Otter Tail refused to sell the new systems energy at wholesale and refused to agree to wheel power from other suppliers of wholesale energy to these towns.410 U.S. at 371.
The Court said: "The record makes abundantly clear that Otter Tail used its monopoly power in the towns in its service area to foreclose competition or gain a competitive advantage, or to destroy a competitor, all in violation of the antitrust laws." Otter Tail used its "dominance to foreclose potential entrants into the retail area from obtaining electric power from outside sources of supply."410 U.S. at 377.
Otter Tail argued that, "without the weapons which it used, more and more municipalities will turn to public power and Otter Tail will go downhill." The Court responded that Otter Tail should "protect itself against loss by operating with superior service, lower costs, and improved efficiency."410 U.S. at 380.
While the Court affirmed the part of the judgment enjoining the monopolistic practices relating to denial of access to electric power, it did not affirm the injunction against litigation. After the district court's judgment was entered, the Supreme Court decided California Motor Transport Co. v. Trucking Unlimited,. in which it held that "the right to petition extends to all departments of the Government [and] [t]he right of access to the courts is indeed but one aspect of the right of petition" that the First Amendment protects. The Court also held in that case, however, that "where the purpose to suppress competition is evidenced by repetitive lawsuits carrying the hallmark of insubstantial claims," the conduct "is within the 'mere sham' exception" to that protection and is thus subject to antitrust prohibitions. The Court therefore vacated this part of the judgment "and remand[ed] for consideration in light of our intervening decision in California Motor Transport Co."
Dissent/concurrence
The dissent agreed with the part of the Court's opinion that vacated and remanded for consideration of Otter Tail's litigation activities in light of the Court's decision in California Motor Transport Co, but disagreed with the remainder dealing with monopolistic denial of access to electric power.
In the dissenting justices' view, "As a retailer of power, Otter Tail asserted a legitimate business interest in keeping its lines free for its own power sales and in refusing to lend a hand in its own demise by wheeling cheaper power from the Bureau of Reclamation to municipal consumers which might otherwise purchase power at retail from Otter Tail itself."410 U.S. at 388. Furthermore, "Otter Tail's refusal to wheel or wholesale power was conduct exempt from the antitrust laws and . . . the District Court's decree improperly preempted the jurisdiction of the Federal Power Commission."410 U.S. at 395.
Subsequent developments
Remand
In accordance with the Supreme Court's order for a remand as to the litigation prong of the case, in United States v. Otter Tail Power Co., the district court (Devitt, J.) reconsidered that aspect of the case. After hearing arguments but without taking additional evidence, the court found:
[T]he repetitive use of litigation by Otter Tail was timed and designed principally to prevent the establishment of municipal electric systems and thereby to preserve defendant's monopoly. I find the litigation comes within the sham exception to the Noerr doctrine as defined by the Supreme Court in California Transport, and reaffirm the Findings and Conclusions previously entered.360 F. Supp. at 451-52.
Otter Tail appealed this ruling, but the Supreme Court affirmed it without opinion..
Aspen case
In Aspen Skiing Co. v. Aspen Highlands Skiing Corp.,. the defendant controlled three of the four ski mountains in Aspen, Colorado. The defendant and plaintiff (owner of the fourth ski mountain) had long engaged in a popular joint-venture arrangement for ski lift tickets. The defendant suddenly terminated the joint venture without a credible business justification. The Supreme Court affirmed a judgment for the plaintiff without addressing the essential facilities doctrine. Instead, the Court spoke of the defendant's termination of a successful program that was beneficial to consumers, failure to establish a plausible business justification, and willingness to sacrifice short-term profits in order to injure competition down the road.
Hecht case
In Hecht v. Pro-Football, Inc.570 F.2d 982 (D.C. Cir. 1977). a group of sports promoters (Hecht) were refused an American Football League (AFL) franchise in Washington, D.C. They sued Pro-Football (PF), owner of the Washington Redskins, a National Football League team operating in D.C., and the D.C. Armory Board, which operated the only stadium in D.C. The Redskins had a 30–year contract with the Armory Board prohibiting it from leasing to any other professional football team. The AFL would not consider the Hecht franchise application until Hecht had a stadium lease. PF would not negotiate a waiver of its exclusive stadium rights until Hecht had a franchise. The D.C. Circuit held that the district court should have instructed the jury concerning the essential facility doctrine, citing Otter Tail as having reaffirmed its announcement in Terminal Railroad.570 F.2d at 992–93. 
The court held that PF could not defend by showing that its restrictive contract was reasonable, because:
The garden-variety restrictive covenant does not violate section 1 unless it unreasonably restrains trade; when the restrictive covenant covers an essential facility, however, all possible competition is by definition excluded and the restraint is thus unreasonable per se—provided, of course, that the facility can be shared practically.570 F.2d at 993.
MCI case
In MCI Communications Corp. v. AT&T Co.,708 F.2d 1081, 1132-33 (7th Cir. 1983). the Seventh Circuit stated a four–part test that has since been widely cited as authoritative for the essential facilities doctrine:
 the accused monopolist controls access to an essential facility,
 the facility cannot reasonably be duplicated by the competitor,
 the accused monopolist denies access to the competitor, and
 it was feasible for the accused monopolist to grant access to the competitor.708 F.2d at 1132.
Some courts have stated a fifth factor perhaps implicit in MCI: that the defendant monopolist lacked a valid business justification for its refusal to deal.See, e.g., Morris Communic'ns Corp. v. PGA Tour, Inc., 364 F.3d 1288 (11th Cir. 2004).
Trinko
In Verizon Communications Inc. v. Law Offices of Curtis V. Trinko, LLP,. the Supreme Court in dicta spoke harshly against the essential facilities doctrine. In Trinko, a customer of a telephone company monopolist brought a treble-damage class action challenging discrimination against a competitor that allegedly caused the class to suffer overpriced and inadequate phone service. The Court held that the only remedies were under the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and dismissed the antitrust claims. It then added that it would not have ruled differently even if it accepted the essential facilities doctrine:
This conclusion would be unchanged even if we considered to be established law the "essential facilities" doctrine crafted by some lower courts, under which the Court of Appeals
concluded [Trinko] 's allegations might state a claim. We have never recognized such a doctrine, and we find no need either to recognize it or to repudiate it here. It suffices for present purposes to note that the indispensable requirement for invoking the doctrine is the unavailability of access to the "essential facilities"; where access exists, the doctrine serves no purpose. . . . To the extent respondent's "essential facilities" argument is distinct from its general § 2 argument, we reject it.540 U.S. at 410-11.
Commentary
Alon Kapen addresses two lines of cases in which court have ordered monopolists to stop refusing to deal with competitors. "First, firms  may not refuse to deal where they seek to create or maintain a monopoly. Second, a business or group of businesses controlling an  "essential facility" has a duty to provide reasonable access to competitors."Alon Y. Kapen, Duty to Cooperate Under Section 2 of the Sherman Act: Aspen Skiing's Slippery Slope, 72  1047, 1054 (1987). He sees the Otter Tail case as using both theories, the first based on intent and the second based on effects.Id. at 1056,
Michael Boudin in contrast sees Otter Tail as emphasizing the defendant's "intent to destroy competition" and "malign intent."Michael Boudin, Antitrust Doctrine and the Sway of Metaphor, 75  L.J. 395, 400 & n.43 (1986).
Daniel Troy states that Otter Tail "is commonly cited to justify a per se rule in essential facility cases," but a "close examination" belies that claim. While its fact pattern may fit the essential facilities doctrine, "the Court's reasoning makes clear that it did not treat Otter Tail differently from any other monopolist using its monopoly power to suppress competition in a downstream market." Rather, he insists, "the Court employed a traditional section 2 intent-focused monopolization analysis."Daniel E. Troy, 
Unclogging the Bottleneck: A New Essential Facility Doctrine, 83  441, 450–51 (1983).
Phillip Areeda criticized the essential facilities doctrine harshly in a much cited article initially delivered as an address at a 1989 program of the ABA Antitrust Section—"The Cutting Edge of Antitrust: Exclusionary Practices."Phillip Areeda,  Essential Facilities: An Epithet in Need of Limiting Principles, 58  L.J. 841 (1990). He summarized his arguments with six points:
 There is no general duty to share.
 A single firm's facility, as distinct from that of a combination, is "essential" only when it is both critical to the plaintiff's competitive vitality and the plaintiff is essential for competition in the marketplace.
 No one should be forced to deal unless doing so is likely substantially to improve competition in the marketplace by reducing price or by increasing output or innovation.
 Even when all these conditions are satisfied, denial of access is never per se unlawful; legitimate business purpose always saves the defendant.
 The defendant's intention is seldom illuminating, because every firm that denies its facilities to rivals does so to limit competition with itself and increase its profits.
 No court should impose a duty to deal that it cannot explain or adequately and reasonably supervise.Id. at 852–53.
James Ratner recognizes that there are substantial problems in administering the essential facilities doctrine, but he argues that addressing denials of access to essential facilities is socially necessary:
 If a facility is essential, the market in which it produces has become  like a dead mouse on the kitchen floor. No one wants to pick up the  mouse, and doing so may be repulsive to some, but it is probably best  not to leave it there. Finding a facility to be essential means that the  competitive process is an unreliable mechanism for correcting significant short-run welfare losses. The market requires some form of intervention, or those losses will persist.James R. Ratner, Should There Be an Essential Facility Doctrine?, 21  327, 380 (1988).
Ratner concedes that vertical behavior such as refusals to allow access to essential facilities "fall under criticism that the behavior does not create new power and may be efficient." Critics then argue that the real economic problem is caused by the monopoly, not by the behavior. That criticism, Ratner argues, does not adequately  address the problem of whether to prohibit the activities because they  are socially harmful even without increasing market power. If nothing else, "the market power possessed by essential facilities suggests that denial of access frequently will create economically harmful output reduction without increasing or maintaining market power." Therefore, the essential facilities doctrine provides "the only meaningful remedy for these harmful denials" and unfortunately that "requires someone, usually a poorly equipped federal court," to impose judicial regulation. "While such judicial regulation has unavoidable drawbacks," nonetheless, "ignoring  the essential facility problem is to ignore one of the basic harms [that the antitrust]  laws seek to correct."Id. at 382.
Glen Robinson argues that "the essential facilities doctrine provides the proper framework for analyzing both regulatory and antitrust requirements for forced dealing or sharing among rivals."Glen O. Robinson, On Refusing to Deal with Rivals, 87  1177, 1184 (2002). In deciding what is an essential facility, Robinson deprecates the distinction between tangible assets (such as the transmission lines in Otter Tail) and intellectual property, based on the claim that it "is critical for encouraging
owners to invest in innovation." He points out:
An incentives problem is created any time one firm is permitted to free-ride on a competitor's investments, whether those investments are represented by tangible assets or intellectual property. Forced sharing of an unpatented or uncopyrighted gizmo undermines investment incentives to the same degree as forced sharing of a patented or copyrighted widget. In the former case, the owner's common law property right in the unpatented widget is entitled to the same legal protection as the property right in the patented gizmo for basically the same reason-to protect settled expectations and the incentive to create wealth. Innovation is merely one form of investment in wealth-creating activity. Regardless of the form of the investment, the ultimate task is to accommodate both the general laws of property and the special laws of antitrust.Id. at 1210.
Instead, he argues, the proper basis for any distinction is "to examine the underlying interest at stake." Thus, "courts should be skeptical about ordering a firm to share new technologies promising only uncertain returns to the investing firm" because a "firm's investment incentives are especially sensitive to the firm's ability to capture all of the upside return, particularly if it cannot share the downside loss." In such circumstances, "a court should force sharing of essential information only if there is no alternative method of accomplishing the purpose of establishing workable competition."Id. at 1210–11.
Robinson disagrees with Judge Posner's view that "forced sharing of facilities deemed to be naturally monopolistic can [never] serve a legitimate competitive purpose." Robinson argues that "in some cases the essential facilities doctrine is properly invoked to prevent a monopolist from leveraging its power from one market into another by withholding access to an input that is needed in the second market." Also, "forced sharing might be the only vehicle for testing [false claims that] a market is naturally monopolistic," as in the case of the long distance telecommunications market.Id. at 1213–14. Robinson concludes that a well-defined essential facilities doctrine is preferable to "the amorphous and untheorized 'it-all-depends' principle followed in Aspen Skiing."Id. at 1231.
See also
 Essential facilities doctrine
References
External links
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1973 in United States case law
"""

From "Our Lady of Guadalupe School v. Morrissey-Berru" ==> """
Our Lady of Guadalupe School v. Morrissey-Berru, 591 U.S. ___ (2020), was a United States Supreme Court case involving the ministerial exception of federal employment discrimination laws. The case extends from the Supreme Court's prior decision in Hosanna-Tabor Evangelical Lutheran Church & School v. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission which created the ministerial exception based on the Establishment and Free Exercise Clauses of the United States Constitution, asserting that federal discrimination laws cannot be applied to leaders of religious organizations. The case, along with the consolidated St. James School v. Biel (Docket 19-348), both arose from rulings in the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit that found that federal discrimination laws do apply to others within a religious organization that serve an important religious function but lack the title or training to be considered a religious leader under Hosanna-Tabor. The religious organization challenged that ruling on the basis of Hosanna-Tabor. The Supreme Court ruled in a 7–2 decision on July 8, 2020 that reversed the Ninth Circuit's ruling, affirming that the principles of Hosanna-Tabor, that a person can be serving an important religious function even if not holding the title or training of a religious leader, satisfied the ministerial exception in employment discrimination.
Background
In the 2012 case Hosanna-Tabor Evangelical Lutheran Church & School v. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, the Supreme Court unanimously decided that, in employing leaders, a religious organization need not adhere to federal employment discrimination laws, creating the ministerial exception. Chief Justice John Roberts had written in the opinion that "the Establishment Clause prevents the Government from appointing ministers, and the Free Exercise Clause prevents it from interfering with the freedom of religious groups to select their own". The case had centered on Cheryl Perich, a teacher at the school in question and who was terminated after being diagnosed with narcolepsy. In arriving at defining Perich's role in the school as ministerial, and thus not covered by discrimination laws, Roberts wrote four considerations that they had made for "the formal title given Perich by the Church, the substance reflected in that title, her own use of that title, and the important religious functions she performed for the Church", but Roberts further cautioned that "We are reluctant, however, to adopt a rigid formula for deciding when an employee qualifies as a minister."
For St. James School v. Biel, Kristen Biel was hired as a teacher at St. James School, a Catholic school, in Torrance, California in the 2013 school year. In May 2014, Biel learned she had breast cancer and informed the administration of the need to stop teaching to undergo therapy. She was kept on contract through the rest of the school year, but the school did not renew her contract for the 2014 school year based on "classroom managements". Biel filed notice with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), believing her termination violated the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and the EEOC gave her authorization to sue the school in the United States District Court for the Central District of California. The District Court issued summary judgement for St. James on the basis that Biel's position fell into that covered by Hosanna-Tabor as ministerial and thus immune from discrimination laws. Biel appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, which reversed the District Court's ruling. The Ninth compared Biel's situation to that from Hosanna-Tabor and found that while there were similar religious duties involved in both cases, Biel's position was more akin to teaching from a book than ministerial using the four considerations Roberts listed in Hosanna-Tabor, and thus Biel's position was covered by federal discrimination laws. An en banc request by St. James to the full Ninth Circuit was denied. Biel since died from her cancer, but her case continued to be handled her husband representing her estate.
In the case background of Our Lady of Guadalupe School v. Morrissey-Berru, Agnes Morrissey-Berru was a teacher at Our Lady of Guadalupe School in Hermosa Beach, California, a Catholic school. Due to dwindling enrollment and funds, more pressure had been put on the teaching staff starting in the 2012 school year, expecting them to become certified in catechist teaching and adapting certain programs in classes to maintain their Catholic teaching approach, which Morrissey-Berru failed to do as she was not a practicing Catholic. After transitioning her to a part-time position in the 2014 school year to try to amend the situation, the school opted to not renew her contract in 2015 on the basis of her teaching performance. Morrissey-Berru engaged with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) to file a complaint against the school, asserting that she had been terminated unfairly on the basis of her age, under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA). The Central District of California Court issued a summary judgement in favor of the school, asserting that Morrissey-Berru's position was that of a ministry and thus falling within the bounds of Hosanna-Tabor and preventing the school from being liable for discrimination. The EEOC appealed to the Ninth Circuit, which reversed the District Court's decision based on the prior decision in Biel following the same reasoning, that Morrissey-Berru's position had similar duties but was not fully ministerial based on Roberts' four considerations, particularly as a non-Catholic. Thus, she was covered by discrimination laws. An en banc request was also denied.
Supreme Court
Both cases petitioned to the Supreme Court to challenge the decision of the Ninth Circuit in light of Hosanna-Tabor. The Supreme Court certified both cases in December 2019, consolidating them under Our Lady of Guadalupe.
Oral arguments were heard via teleconference on May 11, 2020, part of the block of cases held in this manner due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Justices asked questions of how to define a ministerial position as to trigger the ministerial exception to the discrimination rules without too much disruption, as well as when termination is made for reasons that have nothing to do with religious function.
The Court issued its decision on July 8, 2020, reversing the Ninth Circuit's ruling in both consolidated cases and remanding them for review. In the 7–2 majority opinion written by Justice Samuel Alito and joined by all but Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Sonia Sotomayor, the Court ruled that the Ninth had erred in applying the four Hosanna-Tabor conditions that must all be met to evoke the ministerial exception, and instead should be based primarily on the religious function that the position serves within the organization. Alito wrote: "The religious education and formation of students is the very reason for the existence of most private religious schools, and therefore the selection and supervision of the teachers upon whom the schools rely to do this work lie at the core of their mission. Judicial review of the way in which religious schools discharge those responsibilities would undermine the independence of religious institutions in a way that the First Amendment does not tolerate."
Sotomayor wrote a dissent that was joined by Ginsburg, arguing that the decision gave religious organizations a wide berth of power to dismiss employees unrelated to the religious purpose of the organization. Sotomayor wrote "This sweeping result is profoundly unfair. Recently, this Court has lamented a perceived 'discrimination against religion.' Yet here it swings the pendulum in the extreme opposite direction, permitting religious entities to discriminate widely and with impunity for reasons wholly divorced from religious beliefs. The inherent injustice in the Court's conclusion will be impossible to ignore for long, particularly in a pluralistic society like ours."
References
External links
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:Ministerial exception case law
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:United States employment discrimination case law
Category:2020 in religion
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
Category:United States disability case law
Category:Hermosa Beach, California
Category:Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Los Angeles
Category:Breast cancer
Category:Education in Los Angeles County, California
"""

From "Owasso Independent School District v. Falvo" ==> """
Owasso Independent School District v. Falvo, 534 U.S. 426 (2002), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held in favor of Owasso Independent School District that students scoring each other's tests and calling out the grades do not violate the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 (FERPA). Justice Kennedy wrote the opinion of the court. Justice Scalia wrote a concurring opinion in which he agreed with the ruling but took issue with parts of Kennedy's opinion. The case originated in the District Court of and for Tulsa County, Oklahoma, where the court ruled in Owasso's favor. Falvo appealed to the United States District Court for the Northern District of Oklahoma, where they overturned the district judge's decision and ruled in favor of Falvo. It was then appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit, where they partially reversed the lower court's judgment and partially affirmed it. They affirmed in regards to the 14th Amendment complaint, but reversed on the FERPA claim, stating that the peer grading act did violate the terms of FERPA. The school board then appealed this to the Supreme Court of the United States, where it was heard on November 27, 2001, and decided on February 19, 2002.
External links
Category:United States education case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2002 in United States case law
Category:2002 in education
"""

From "Owen Equipment & Erection Co. v. Kroger" ==> """
Owen Equipment & Erection Co. v. Kroger, 437 U.S. 365 (1978), is a case that was decided by the United States Supreme Court regarding the civil procedure subject of ancillary jurisdiction..
 Facts 
Respondent Kroger, a citizen of Iowa, filed suit against the Omaha Public Power District (OPPD), a Nebraska utility company.  Her suit was to recover damages for the wrongful death of her husband, who was electrocuted while walking next to a crane whose boom came too close to a power line.  OPPD, which owned the power line, filed a third-party complaint against Owen Equipment & Erection Co., which owned and operated the crane.  Kroger then amended her complaint to name Owen as an additional defendant.  While Owen initially stated that it was a Nebraska corporation, it was later found that Owen's principal place of business was in fact in Iowa, thus destroying the diversity of citizenship required for jurisdiction under .
 Procedure 
When confronted with a motion to dismiss for lack of complete diversity, the United States District Court for the District of Nebraska reserved ruling until the end of the trial. Following a jury verdict in favor of the plaintiff, the federal district court in an unreported decision denied the motion to dismiss on diversity grounds. The Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit affirmed the lower court's decision, and the Supreme Court granted certiorari.
 Issue 
Whether a court can hear a plaintiff's claim against a third-party defendant when there is no independent basis for federal jurisdiction over that claim in an action in which federal jurisdiction is based on diversity of citizenship, a circumstance called ancillary jurisdiction.
 Holding 
Whereas the Eighth Circuit relied on United Mine Workers of America v. Gibbs, , the Supreme Court in its 7 to 2 majority decision written by Justice Potter Stewart limited Gibbs to pendent jurisdiction, bringing state claims in addition to a federal claim.  The Court set forth two limits on ancillary jurisdiction beyond the "common nucleus of operative fact" of Gibbs.  First, the non-federal claim must be "ancillary and dependent" on the original claim rather than "new and independent", and second, courts can be more lenient to defendants than to plaintiffs because plaintiffs choose where the claims will be brought.  In this instance, Kroger was a plaintiff who had chosen federal court and the claim against Owen was "entirely separate" from her original claim against OPPD "since [Owen's] liability to her depended not at all upon whether or not OPPD was also liable."  Thus, the court generally upheld the complete diversity requirement of (a)(1) but allowed certain limited exceptions for ancillary jurisdiction.  Kroger, however, did not meet those exceptions.
 Dissent 
Justice White dissented, stating that the majority overlooked such factors as convenience, judicial economy, and considerations of fairness in order to rigidly uphold legislation.
 Subsequent History 
The majority's holding on ancillary jurisdiction was subsequently codified by Congress in (b) as part of its supplemental jurisdiction statute.
 Carter Lake 
The Court noted that geography had caused the issue. Owen was based in Carter Lake, Iowa, which is west of the Missouri River. Although the Missouri River generally is the boundary between Iowa and Nebraska, the river in 1877 had avulsed one of its bends, cutting off the land that later became the city of Carter Lake on the western side. The Supreme Court six years earlier had mentioned the circumstances of Carter Lake when it ruled on a boundary dispute between the two states in Nebraska v. Iowa, 406 U.S. 117 (1972).
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 437
References
External links
Category:United States ancillary jurisdiction case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1978 in United States case law
"""

From "Owen v. City of Independence" ==> """
Owen v. City of Independence, 445 U.S. 622 (1980), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court, in which the court held that a municipality has no immunity from liability under Section 1983 flowing from its constitutional violations and may not assert the good faith of its officers as a defense to such liability.
 Background 
The city council voted to fire the city's chief of police and in doing so, violated his procedural due process rights to a pre-termination hearing.  Plaintiff named the city and city council in the suit.
 Opinion of the Court 
In an opinion written by Justice Brennan, the Court held that a municipality has no immunity from liability under Section 1983 flowing from its constitutional violations and may not assert the good faith of its officers as a defense to such liability.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Second Enforcement Act of 1871 case law
Category:1980 in United States case law
Category:Independence, Missouri
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Oyama v. California" ==> """
Oyama v. State of California, 332 U.S. 633 (1948) was a United States Supreme Court decision that ruled that specific provisions of the 1913 and 1920 California Alien Land Laws abridged the rights and privileges guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment to Fred Oyama, a U.S. citizen in whose name his father, a Japanese citizen, had purchased land. In doing so, however, the court did not overturn the California Alien Land Laws as unconstitutional.
Background
California Alien Land Laws
The case of Oyama v. California developed from the 1913 and 1920 Alien Land Laws passed in California. In accordance with those laws, persons ineligible to become citizens of the United States were prohibited from owning land. Land control laws were used in the United States in the 19th century and can, in fact, be traced back to English common law.
The California Alien Land Law of 1913 did not employ any specific language targeting Japanese residents in America, but they were the primary target. This was in part to appease the nervous California farmers, who feared that the Japanese immigrants' agricultural techniques, which developed out of the necessity to make as much use of small plots of land as possible, would render them unable to compete economically. The implicit intent of the law was not lost on the Japanese; many Japanese-American residents and even the Japanese government voiced their opposition.
Japanese residents living in America sought various ways to circumvent the alien land laws. A commonly used way to get around it was to purchase land in the name of their US-born children (who, by birth, were automatically granted American citizenship) and then to become the guardian of the property. That enabled Japanese parents to become de facto, if not de jure, managers and owners of land.
In response to those tactics, the 1920 version of the California Alien Land Law included more stringent rules designed to end such circumvention. Among other changes, it introduced a provision that would prove to be crucial in the Oyama case by stating that if a person purchased land in another person's name, it would be presumed that to have been done with the intent to bypass the Alien Land Law. That was a significant shift in the rules regarding burden of proof in state escheat cases involving land. The state used to be required to prove its case, the defendant now had to prove that the purchased land was a bona fide gift, rather than an attempt at getting around the land ownership restrictions.
Another, even more stringent, provision introduced in the 1920 law prohibited assigning persons ineligible for naturalization as guardians of an estate. The California Supreme Court, however, invalidated that prohibition in the 1922 Yano case (Estate of Tetsubmi Yano, 188 Cal. 645).
Oyama's land purchase and internment
World War II tensions contributed significantly to the development of those issues, as anti-Japanese sentiments grew more heated and the internment of Japanese persons took place. California tightened its Alien Land Laws even further and actively began pursuing escheat procedures. Kajiro Oyama, a Japanese citizen, was one of the individuals thus targeted.
In the case of Oyama, Kajiro Oyama, a Japanese citizen ineligible for naturalization, purchased six acres (24,000 m2) of land in 1934 in Chula Vista, California, in the old Rancho de la Nación land grant. He paid $4,000 for the land (), and the seller executed a deed to Fred Oyama, Kajiro's son (who was six years old at this time). Six months later, Kajiro petitioned the Superior Court of San Diego County to be appointed Fred's guardian, stating that Fred owned the six acres (24,000 m2). The court permitted that. The land parcel was expanded by an adjoining two acres (8,000 m2) in 1937.
Despite a requirement pursuant to Alien Land Law for all guardians of agricultural land belonging to minor children of ineligible aliens, Kajiro Oyama did not do so until the date of the trial.
In 1942, Fred and his family were displaced along with all other Japanese persons in the area. In 1944, the State of California filed a petition to declare an escheat of the eight acres (32,000 m2) of land on the ground that the purchases made in 1934 and 1937 had been made with intent to violate and evade the Alien Land Law.
State court proceedings
The trial court found that Kajiro Oyama, the father, had enjoyed the beneficial use of the land and that the 1934 and 1937 land transfers had been subterfuges done with intent to avoid the escheat procedure. The court ruled in favor of the state, stating that pursuant to the Alien Land Law, the parcels had vested in the state as of the date of illicit transfers in 1934 and 1937.
The Supreme Court of California upheld the trial court's finding as justified by the evidence. It further ruled that California was permitted to exclude ineligible aliens from purchasing, transferring, and owning agricultural land and that Fred Oyama was deprived of no constitutional guarantees.
Decision
After the case was decided in a trial court and was appealed to and upheld by the California Supreme Court, it went to the U.S. Supreme Court via a writ of certiorari. Dean Acheson, the Secretary of State under U.S. President Harry Truman, presented the case for petitioners.
The petitioners of the case listed three grievances of the Alien Land Law, as it was applied in this case:
 Firstly, it deprived Fred Oyama of the equal protection of the laws and of his privileges as an American citizen.
 Secondly, that it denied Kajiro Oyama equal protection of the laws.
 Thirdly, it contravened the due process clause by sanctioning a taking of property after expiration of the appropriate limitations period.
The Court agreed 8–1 with the petitioner's first contention: the Alien Land Law, as applied in this case, indeed deprived Fred Oyama of the equal protection of California's laws and of his privileges as an American citizen. Because that decision alone was grounds for reversal of the California Supreme Court decision, the Court saw no need to address the second and the third contentions, which consequently left the laws in effect. 
Vinson's majority opinion
Oyama is notable for the significant differences in rendered concurrent opinions. Chief Justice Vinson, delivering the opinion of the Court, wrote strictly on the facts of the case, without giving much note to its broader implications. While freely admitting that it is apparent that the enforcement of the Alien Land Laws in that case resulted in abridgement of equal protection afforded to Fred Oyama by his status as an American citizen, the Supreme Court's opinion rendered by Vinson did not go so far as to rule on or, in fact, even address the constitutionality of the statute.
Firstly, Chief Justice Vinson was fairly conservative in issues of race. As the famous story goes, Associate Justice Frankfurter remarked that Chief Justice Vinson's death in 1953 (that is, in the middle of the Brown v. Board of Education case) was perhaps the only evidence of the existence of God he has ever witnessed. While there are of course no certainties in law, the general consensus remains that if Vinson had not been replaced by Chief Justice Earl Warren in 1953, the landmark Brown v. Board of Education case would have been decided differently.
Secondly, in the 1920s, the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality and validity of several land laws. Invalidating the California Alien Land Law would have required overturning the precedents of those decisions, something that the Court is typically loath to do, especially so shortly after the earlier cases. In this case, the Court was able to address the unfairness of the application of the law by focusing on the petitioners first contention and effectively ignore the broader implications.
Black's concurrence
Associate Justice Hugo Black wrote a brief yet notable opinion, with Justice William Douglas joining, in which he noted that while he concurred with the Court's judgment and opinion, he would prefer to reverse the previous judgment on broader grounds. In his view, the "basic provisions of the California Alien Land Law violate the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and conflict with federal laws and treaties governing the immigration of aliens and their rights after arrival in this country."
He noted further that though the statute did not specifically refer to Japanese residents and though its terms also apply to a small number of aliens from other countries, the effect of the law was to discriminate against Japanese. He stated that if there is only one purpose of the Fourteenth Amendment of which there can be no doubt, it is that it was designed to prevent states from denying some groups because of their race or color any right, privileges, and opportunities that are enjoyed by other groups. Disagreeing with Chief Justice Vinson, Justice Black wrote specifically that he "would now overrule the previous decisions of this Court that sustained state land laws which discriminate against people of Japanese origin residing in this country."
Murphy's concurrence
Associate Justice Frank Murphy, with whom Justice Rutledge concurred, delivered the most impassioned opinion. He opens by asking whether the California Alien Land Law was consistent with the U.S. Constitution, whether a state can prohibit aliens from acquiring land, and whether such prohibition is permitted by the Fourteenth Amendment. Justice Murphy answers that the "negative answer to those queries is dictated by the uncompromising opposition of the Constitution to racism, whatever cloak or disguise it may assume." He called the California Alien Land Law "nothing more than an outright racial discrimination" that "deserves constitutional condemnation."
In addition to applying the Equal Protection analysis of the majority, Justice Murphy also invoked the U.S. ratification of the United Nations Charter as an alternative basis for the statutes' unconstitutionality:Moreover, this nation has recently pledged itself, through the United Nations Charter, to promote respect for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language and religion. The Alien Law stands as a barrier to the fulfillment of that national pledge. Its inconsistency with the Charter, which has been duly ratified and adopted by the United States, is but one more reason why the statute must be condemned.332 U.S. 673 (1948)
Reed's dissent
Associate Justice Reed, joined by Associate Justice Burton, dissented from the Court's decision. Justice Reed stated that he disagreed with the Court's opinion that the Alien Land Laws of California discriminated against Fred Oyama, an American citizen.
Jackson's dissent
Associate Justice Jackson wrote in his dissenting opinion that since the Court upheld the Alien Land Law, it could not logically set aside the judgment that resulted from its valid enforcement. He noted further that since California was accepted to be allowed to forbid certain aliens from owning land, the state should also be accepted to be empowered to modify its laws to preclude individuals from circumventing the relevant statutes.
Subsequent jurisprudence
Although the Oyama case did not strike down the 1913 and 1920 California Alien Land Laws, it nonetheless proved to be an important precedent. In part relying on the Oyama decision, the California Supreme Court found the Alien Land Laws unconstitutional in Sei Fujii v. California, 38 Cal.2d 718, 242 P.2d 617 (1952), and California finally repealed them in 1956.
See also 
 Equal Protection Clause 
 Privileges or Immunities Clause 
 Korematsu v. United States
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 332
Notes
 See, for example, Laurence H. Tribe, God Save This Honorable Court: How the Choice of Supreme Court Justices Shapes our History (1985), pp. 37–38: "...most observers believe that Chief Justice Fred Vinson was ambivalent about the constitutionality of school segregation, and uncertain about what position he would take after hearing arguments in a series of cases in 1953."
 The "federal laws and treaties" that Associate Justice Hugo Black cites in his opinion refer primarily to the Japanese-American Treaty of 1911, which authorized Japanese in this country to lease and occupy land for residential and commercial purposes. However, because the treaty made no mention of agricultural land, the California Alien Land Law - which regulated only agricultural land - did not ostensibly present an obvious conflict.
 There have been several cases before the Supreme Court in which a seemingly non-discriminatory statute was alleged to have been enforced in a discriminatory manner. One of the earliest, and more famous examples of such a case is Yick Wo v. Hopkins (1886). In its decision, the Court ruled unanimously that the regulation in question was used primarily to target Chinese laundry owners while excluding non-Chinese laundry operators, and as such, was wholly inconsistent with the protections afforded to all residents by the Fourteenth Amendment.
External links
 “On California’s 1920 Alien Land Law: The Psychology and Economics of Racial Discrimination”
 Rose Cuison Villazor, Rediscovering Oyama v. California: At the Intersection of Property, Race and Citizenship, 87 Washington University Law Review 979 (2010).
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:1948 in United States case law
Category:1948 in California
Category:History of racism in California
Category:Japanese-American history
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:Legal history of California
Category:Chula Vista, California
Category:History of San Diego County, California
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Oyler v. Boles" ==> """
Oyler v. Boles, 368 U.S. 448 (1962), was a case heard by the Supreme Court of the United States.
Syllabus
A West Virginia habitual criminal statute provided for a mandatory life sentence upon the third conviction "of a crime punishable by confinement in a penitentiary." The increased penalty is to be invoked by an information filed by the prosecuting attorney "immediately upon conviction and before sentence." In such proceedings, in which they were represented by counsel and did not request continuances or raise any matters in defense, but did concede the applicability of the statute to the circumstances of their cases, petitioners were sentenced to life imprisonment. Subsequently they petitioned the state supreme court (the Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia) for writs of habeas corpus, alleging that the Act had been applied without advance notice and to only a minority of those subject to its provisions, in violation of the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment. Their petitions were denied by the court.
The Supreme Court held that:
 Due process does not require advance notice that the trial on the substantive offense will be followed by a habitual criminal accusation. It does require a reasonable opportunity to defend against such an accusation, but the records show that petitioners were not denied such an opportunity (pp. 368 U.S. 451-454).
 The failure to proceed against other offenders because of a lack of knowledge of prior offenses or because of the exercise of reasonable selectivity in enforcement does not deny equal protection to persons who are prosecuted, and petitioners did not allege that the failure to prosecute others was due to any other reason (pp. 368 U.S. 454-456).
The Supreme Court affirmed, 5-4. Associate Justice Tom C. Clark wrote the opinion of the court, and was joined by Justices Felix Frankfurter, Charles Evans Whittaker, Potter Stewart, and John Marshall Harlan II. Harlan wrote a separate concurring opinion. Justice William O. Douglas wrote the dissenting opinion, joined by Chief Justice Earl Warren and Justices William J. Brennan, Jr. and Hugo Black.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:1962 in United States case law
"""

From "Ozawa v. United States" ==> """
Takao Ozawa v. United States, 260 U.S. 178 (1922), was a US legal proceeding. The United States Supreme Court found Takao Ozawa, a Japanese American who was born in Japan but had lived in the United States for 20 years, ineligible for naturalization.. In 1914, Ozawa filed for US citizenship under the Naturalization Act of 1906. This act allowed only "free white persons" and "persons of African nativity or persons of African descent" to naturalize. Ozawa did not challenge the constitutionality of the racial restrictions. Instead, he claimed that Japanese people should be properly classified as "free white persons".
 Background 
Takao Ozawa was born on June 15, 1875 in Kanagawa, Japan. In 1894, he moved to San Francisco, California, where he attended school. After he graduated from Berkeley High School, Ozawa attended the University of California. In 1906, after graduating, he moved to Honolulu, Hawaii. After settling down in Honolulu, Ozawa learned English fluently, practiced Christianity, and obtained a job at an American company. While in Hawaii, he married a Japanese woman with whom he had two children. Ozawa's wife studied in the United States. His family spoke fluent English and focused on American culture more than they did on Japanese culture.
On October 16, 1914, Takao Ozawa decided to apply for citizenship since he had lived in America for 20 years. Despite his US education, Ozawa did not get his citizenship easily. Ozawa tried to petition under the naturalization law, but he was ineligible as he was classified as Japanese.
The courts' reaction
Writing for a unanimous Court, Justice George Sutherland approved a line that lower court cases held, stating that "the words 'white person was only to indicate a person of what is popularly known as the Caucasian race." The courts stated that the Japanese were not considered as "free white persons" within the meaning of the law. Justice Sutherland wrote that the lower courts' conclusion that the Japanese were not "free white persons" for purposes of naturalization had “become so well established by judicial and executive concurrence and legislative acquiescence that we should not at this late day feel at liberty to disturb it, in the absence of reasons far more cogent than any that have been suggested." The Court declined to review the ethnological authorities relied on by the lower courts to support their conclusion or those advanced by the parties.
Effects
On the same day, the Supreme Court released its ruling in Yamashita v. Hinkle, which upheld Washington state's alien land law..
Within three months, Justice Sutherland authored a ruling in a Supreme Court case concerning the petition for naturalization of a Sikh immigrant from the Punjab region in British India, who identified himself as "a high caste Hindu of full Indian blood" in his petition, United States v. Bhagat Singh Thind. The upshot of this ruling was that, as with the Japanese, "high-caste Hindus, of full Indian blood" were not "free white persons" and were racially ineligible for naturalized citizenship. To support this conclusion, Justice Sutherland reiterated Ozawa's holding that the words "white person" in the naturalization act were "synonymous with the word 'Caucasian' only as that word is popularly understood".
Reaction
Writing in Foreign Affairs in 1923, Leslie Buell, author, editor, and policy researcher said, "The Japanese are now confronted with the unpalatable fact, laid down in unmistakable terms by the highest court in the land, that we consider them unfit to become Americans."
Ozawa's case did not depend on "any suggestion of individual unworthiness or racial inferiority". The argument was that if Ozawa was denied citizenship based on his race, did the law consider the Japanese people an inferior race and Caucasians a superior race? Ozawa argued that his skin was the same color, if not whiter than other Caucasians. The case allowed for anti-Japanese proponents to justify the passing of the Immigration Act of 1924, which prohibited the immigration of people from Asia to the United States. Some West Coast newspapers expressed satisfaction with the Ozawa decision, though the Sacramento Bee called for a constitutional amendment “which would confine citizenship by right of birth in this country to those whose parents were themselves eligible to citizenship.”
Japan is a strict jus sanguinis state as opposed to jus soli state, meaning that it attributes citizenship by blood and not by location of birth. In practice, it can be by parentage and not by descent.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 260
References
External links
 "Ozawa v. the United States," Densho Encyclopedia article
Category:Japanese-American history
Category:Asian-American issues
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States civil rights case law
Category:History of immigration to the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:1922 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:Race-related case law in the United States
"""

From "Pace v. Alabama" ==> """
Pace v. Alabama, 106 U.S. 583 (1883), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court affirmed that Alabama's anti-miscegenation statute was constitutional..  This ruling was rejected by the Supreme Court in 1964 in McLaughlin v. Florida and in 1967 in Loving v. Virginia. Pace v. Alabama is one of the oldest court cases in America pertaining to interracial sex.
 Summary 
The plaintiff, Tony Pace, an African-American man, and Mary Cox, a white woman, were residents of the state of Alabama, who had been arrested in 1881 because their sexual relationship violated the state's anti-miscegenation statute. They were charged with  living together "in a state of adultery or fornication" and both sentenced to two years imprisonment in the state penitentiary in 1882.
Because "miscegenation", that is marriage, cohabitation and sexual relations between people of different racial backgrounds, was prohibited by Alabama's anti-miscegenation statute (Ala. code 4189), it would have been illegal for the couple to marry in Alabama. However, Tony Pace and Mary Cox were not married, for this reason, and they did not live together. They spent time together near their homes in Clarke County, north of Mobile. They could not marry each other under Alabama law. Interracial marital sex was deemed a felony, whereas extramarital sex ("adultery or fornication") was only a misdemeanor.
Because of the criminalization of interracial relationships, they were penalized more severely for their extramarital relationship than if they had been of the same race. The Alabama code stated:
 Appeals 
 Procedural error in Cox indictment  
Cox argued to the state Supreme Court that her indictment should be quashed on the basis that she had been charged and indicted under the name "Mary Ann Cox," but her name was in fact, "Mary Jane Cox". The Alabama Supreme Court rejected this argument and upheld the indictment, stating, "The law knows but one Christian name, and the insertion or omission of a defendant's middle name in an indictment is entirely immaterial; and a mistake in the middle name will not support a plea of misnomer."
 Fourteenth Amendment 
On appeal to the Supreme Court of the state, the judgment was affirmed. Pace brought the case there, insisting that the act which he was indicted and convicted under conflicted with the final clause of the first section of the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution, which declares that no state shall deny to any person the equal protection of the laws.
 Final decision 
The Alabama Supreme Court upheld the convictions. Each defendant's punishment was the same. The punishment for interracial cohabitation was focused not "against the person of any particular color or race, but against the offense, the nature of which is determined by the opposite color of the cohabiting parties.” The “evil tendency” was greater in that kind of relationship than if both defendants were of the same race, since it could lead to “a mongrel population and a degraded civilization.” The true severity of their offense did not really stem from the interracial relationship, but instead that the fornication could end in an amalgamation, or, simply, a mixed-race child.
On further appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States, the court ruled that the criminalization of interracial sex did not violate the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment because whites and non-whites were punished in equal measure for the offense of engaging in interracial sex. The Court did not need to affirm the constitutionality of the ban on interracial marriage that was also part of Alabama's anti-miscegenation law, since the plaintiff had chosen not to appeal that section of the law.
 Later cases 
The decision was understood, from that time to the 1960s, as reflecting a validation of state anti-miscegenation laws. However, the Supreme Court had not confronted the question of whether, given that Pace and Cox could not become husband and wife, they would inevitably be liable to prosecution for "adultery or fornication" if they lived as such. Only by implication had the ban against interracial marriage been addressed. Moreover, only by indirection did the Court address the question of whether, since it was a first offense, the sentence should have been for no more than six months. However, the later case Plessy v. Ferguson (joined by all Supreme Court Justices other than John Marshall Harlan), the Supreme Court in dicta stated that "Laws forbidding the intermarriage of the two races may be said in a technical sense to interfere with the freedom of contract, and yet have been universally recognized as within the police power of the State."
In any event, the Court had upheld the Alabama laws, and no southern state, for the next 80 years, displayed any inclination to repeal such laws. The Supreme Court's decision in Pace v. Alabama would prove to have an even more durable career in the American law of interracial sex and, by extension, marriage than Plessy v. Ferguson would have on segregated transportation and, by extension, education.
After Pace v. Alabama, the constitutionality of anti-miscegenation laws banning marriage and sex between whites and non-whites remained unchallenged until the 1940s. In 1967, these laws were ruled unconstitutional by the Supreme Court in Loving v. Virginia (1967).
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:Multiracial affairs in the United States
Category:1883 in United States case law
Category:Interracial marriage in the United States
Category:1883 in Alabama
Category:Legal history of Alabama
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:Criminal cases in the Waite Court
Category:Clarke County, Alabama
Category:Marriage law in the United States
"""

From "Pacific Bell Telephone Co. v. linkLine Communications, Inc." ==> """
Pacific Bell Telephone Co. v. linkLine Communications, Inc., 555 U.S. 438 (2009), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court unanimously held that Pacific Bell d/b/a AT&T did not violate the Sherman Antitrust Act when it charged other Internet providers a high fee to buy space on its phone lines to deliver an Internet connection.  The court ruled that where there is no duty to deal at the wholesale level and no predatory pricing at the retail level, a firm is not required to price both of these services in a manner that preserves its rivals’ profit margins.
This case was initiated by Internet service providers (ISP), alleging that incumbent telephone companies that owned infrastructure and facilities needed to provide digital subscriber line (DSL) service monopolized and attempted to monopolize regional DSL market. The ISP's claimed that the telephone companies accomplished this by squeezing the providers' profits by charging them high wholesale price for DSL transport and charging consumers low retail price for DSL Internet service. Ultimately, the court concluded that the case was not moot, as it was not clear whether the providers had unequivocally abandoned their price-squeeze claims; prudential concerns favored answering the question presented.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:AT&T litigation
"""

From "Pacific Employers Ins. Co. v. Industrial Accident Comm'n" ==> """
Pacific Employers Insurance Co. v. Industrial Accident Commission, 306 U.S. 493 (1939), was a conflict of laws case decided by the United States Supreme Court, in which the court held that principles of federalism overcome the Full Faith and Credit Clause where a state is enforcing its own laws on events occurring within the state.
Facts
The plaintiff, a Massachusetts resident, was employed as a chemical engineer and research chemist by Dewey & Almy Chemical Company, a Massachusetts company. The employee traveled to California to visit a branch factory, where he was injured. The employee filed a lawsuit in California seeking compensation for his injuries. The employer tried to assert as a defense that under Massachusetts law, a person covered under Massachusetts workman's compensation waived the right to sue employer for damages. The California courts found the Massachusetts law inapplicable to an injury occurring in California, and the employee received an award under California employee compensation law. The insurance companies responsible for paying the award and subrogating the payment appealed.
Issue
The Supreme Court considered whether California's application of its own law to these circumstances violated the Full Faith and Credit Clause of the United States Constitution, which requires states to honor the laws of other states.
Result
The court unanimously held that the principle of federalism overcomes the Full Faith and Credit Clause – each state must be able to exercise its own laws within its own boundaries. In this case, there was no Full Faith and Credit Clause violation because California was merely applying its own law to events occurring in California.
External links
Category:1939 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
"""

From "Pacific Gas & Electric Co. v. State Energy Resources Conservation & Development Commission" ==> """
In Pacific Gas & Electric Co. v. State Energy Resources Conservation & Development Commission, 461 U.S. 190 (1983), the United States Supreme Court held that a state statute regulating economic aspects of nuclear generating plants was not preempted by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954..  The case provides a framework that has guided other cases involving preemption of federal authority.
Background
The issue of nuclear waste:  The radioactive waste fuel in a nuclear reactor must be periodically removed. Because nuclear power plant operators originally assumed that the fuel would be reprocessed, storage pools made to hold it were relatively limited in capacity and design. Over time, however, it became clear that the fuel would not be reprocessed. This resulted in large stores of radioactive waste.  As a result, as Justice White noted, that "problems of how and whereto store nuclear wastes [have] engendered considerable scientific, political, and public debate."
California statute:  Responding to these concerns, California in 1974 enacted the Warren-Alquist State Energy Resources Conservation and Development Act, Cal. Pub. Res. Code §§ 25000 et seq.  Under the act, which was amended in 1976 to add new regulations, operators of nuclear and certain other power plants had to apply for certification by the new State Energy Resources Conservation and Development Commission, or "Energy Commission" for short. Two sections in particular became the subject of dispute:
Section 25524.1(b) provided that the Energy Commission had the authority to determine, prior to the building of a new nuclear power plant, that there would be adequate storage space for the spent fuel rods "at the time such nuclear facility requires such storage."
Section 25524.2 addressed long-term concerns arising from nuclear wastes by placing a moratorium, or stoppage, on the certification of new plants until the Energy Commission "finds that there has been developed and that the United States through its authorized agency has approved and there exists a demonstrated technology or means for the disposal of high-level nuclear waste."
Dispute: Two California public utilities, Pacific Gas and Electric and San Diego Gas & Electric Companies, filed an action in federal district court seeking a declaratory judgment that these two provisions of the Warren-Alquist act (as well as various others) were invalid under the Supremacy Clause of the United States Constitution because they were preempted by (conflicted with) the Atomic Energy Act.  The federal district court agreed.
Appeal:  The Ninth Circuit held:
Petitioners had standing to challenge the statute (upholding the district court),
25524.1(b), regarding spent fuel storage, was not ripe for review (overturning the district court).  The reason given for this was that "we cannot know whether the Energy Commission will ever find a nuclear plant's storage capacity to be inadequate."
25524.2, creating the moratorium, was not preempted (overturning the district court), because sections 271 and 274(k) of the Atomic Energy Act authorized the states to regulate nuclear power plants "for purposes other than protection against radiation hazards," and that is what this section did:  it dealt with economic aspects of the nuclear fuel cycle, and was not designed to provide protection against radiation hazards.
Explanation of case's title:  The Supreme Court granted certiorari to this case.  The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit had also consolidated another federal district court case, Pacific Legal Foundation v. State Energy Resources Conservation and Development Commission, which challenged other portions of the California statute into the Pacific Gas case. Although this second district court case gave the appellate court decision its name, the Supreme Court denied certiorari on that case's portion of the appellate decision.
Decision
The Court affirmed in a unanimous decision.
Ripeness
First, Justice White affirmed the appellate court's reasoning that Section 25524.1(b) (California's provision regarding spent fuel storage) was not ripe for review, while Section 25524.2 was ripe.
We agree that the challenge to 25524.2 is ripe for judicial review, but that the questions concerning 25524.1(b) are not. The basic rationale of the ripeness doctrine "is to prevent the courts, through avoidance of premature adjudication, from entangling themselves in abstract disagreements over administrative policies, and also to protect the agencies from judicial interference until an administrative decision has been formalized and its effects felt in a concrete way by the challenging parties." Abbott Laboratories v. Gardner,  [461  U.S. 190, 201] 387  U.S. 136, 148 -149 (1967). In Abbott Laboratories, which remains our leading discussion of the doctrine, we indicated that the question of ripeness turns on "the fitness of the issues for judicial decision" and "the hardship to the parties of withholding court consideration." Id., at 149.
Both of these factors counsel in favor of finding the challenge to the waste disposal regulations in 25524.2 ripe for adjudication. The question of pre-emption is predominantly legal, and although it would be useful to have the benefit of California's interpretation of what constitutes a demonstrated technology or means for the disposal of high-level nuclear waste, resolution of the pre-emption issue need not await that development. Moreover, postponement of decision would likely work substantial hardship on the utilities. As the Court of Appeals cogently reasoned, for the utilities to proceed in hopes that, when the time for certification came, either the required findings would be made or the law would be struck down, requires the expenditures of millions of dollars over a number of years, without any certainty of recovery if certification were denied. 13  The construction of new nuclear facilities requires considerable advance planning - on the order of 12 to 14 years. 14  Thus, as in the Rail Reorganization Act Cases, 419  U.S. 102, 144 (1974), "decisions to be made now or in the short future may be affected" by whether we act. "`One does not have to await the consummation of threatened injury to obtain preventive relief. If the injury is certainly impending that is enough.'" Id., at 143, quoting Pennsylvania v. West Virginia, 262  U.S. 553, 593  (1923). To require the industry to proceed without knowing whether the moratorium is valid would impose a palpable [461  U.S. 190, 202] and considerable hardship on the utilities, and may ultimately work harm on the citizens of California. Moreover, if petitioners are correct that 25524.2 is void because it hinders the commercial development of atomic energy, "delayed resolution would frustrate one of the key purposes of the [Atomic Energy] Act." Duke Power Co. v. Carolina Environmental Study Group, Inc., 438  U.S. 59, 82 (1978). For these reasons, the issue of whether 25524.2 is pre-empted by federal law should be decided now. 15 [461  U.S. 190, 203]
Questions concerning the constitutionality of the interim storage provision, 25524.1(b), however, are not ripe for review. While the waste disposal statute operates on a statewide basis, the Energy Commission is directed to make determinations under 25524.1(b) on a case-by-case basis. As the Court of Appeals explained, because "we cannot know whether the Energy Commission will ever find a nuclear plant's storage capacity to be inadequate," judicial consideration of this provision should await further developments. 16  Furthermore, because we hold today that 25524.2 is not pre-empted by federal law, there is little likelihood that industry behavior would be uniquely affected by whatever uncertainty surrounds the interim storage provisions. In these circumstances, a court should not stretch to reach an early, and perhaps premature, decision respecting 25524.1(b).
Regarding Section  25524.1(b), White wrote that "a court should not stretch to reach an early, and perhaps a premature, decision regarding [it]." Section 25524.2 was ripe, for if power plants went ahead with their operations without knowing whether the moratorium imposed by the statute was valid, this "would impose a palpable and considerable hardship on the utilities, and may ultimately work harm on the citizens of California."
Preemption
The court briefly set out the legal framework for preemption.
It is well established that within constitutional limits Congress may pre-empt state authority by so stating in express terms. Jones v. Rath Packing Co., 430  U.S. 519, 525  (1977). Absent explicit pre-emptive language, Congress' intent [461  U.S. 190, 204] to supersede state law altogether may be found from a "`scheme of federal regulation . . . so pervasive as to make reasonable the inference that Congress left no room for the States to supplement it,' because `the Act of Congress may touch a field in which the federal interest is so dominant that the federal system will be assumed to preclude enforcement of state laws on the same subject,' or because `the object sought to be obtained by the federal law and the character of obligations imposed by it may reveal the same purpose.'" Fidelity Federal Savings & Loan Assn. v. De la Cuesta, 458  U.S. 141, 153  (1982), quoting Rice v. Santa Fe Elevator Corp.,  331  U.S. 218, 230 (1947). Even where Congress has not entirely displaced state regulation in a specific area, state law is pre-empted to the extent that it actually conflicts with federal law. Such a conflict arises when "compliance with both federal and state regulations is a physical impossibility," Florida Lime & Avocado Growers, Inc. v. Paul, 373  U.S. 132, 142 -143 (1963), or where state law "stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives of Congress." Hines v. Davidowitz, 312  U.S. 52, 67 (1941). 
The court then concluded that 25524.2 was not preempted by the Atomic Energy Act.
The court responded to each of petitioner's three arguments.
Even a brief perusal of the Atomic Energy Act reveals that, despite its comprehensiveness, it does not at any point expressly require the States to construct or authorize nuclear powerplants or prohibit the States from deciding, as an absolute or conditional matter, not to permit the construction of any further reactors. Instead, petitioners argue that the Act is intended to preserve the Federal Government as the sole regulator of all matters nuclear, and that 25524.2 falls within the scope of this impliedly pre-empted field. But as we view the issue, Congress, in passing the 1954 Act and in subsequently amending it, intended that the Federal Government should regulate the radiological safety aspects involved in the construction and operation of a nuclear plant, but that the States retain their traditional responsibility in the field of regulating electrical utilities for determining questions of need, reliability, cost, and other related state concerns.
Need for new power facilities, their economic feasibility, and rates and services, are areas that have been characteristically governed by the States. Justice Brandeis once observed that the "franchise to operate a public utility . . . is a special privilege which . . . may be granted or withheld at the pleasure of the State." Frost v. Corporation Comm'n, 278  U.S. 515, 534 (1929) (dissenting opinion). "The nature of government regulation of private utilities is such that a utility may frequently be required by the state regulatory scheme to obtain approval for practices a business regulated in less detail would be free to institute without any approval from a regulatory body." Jackson v. Metropolitan Edison Co., 419  U.S. 345, 357 (1974). See Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Comm'n of New York, 447  U.S. 557, 569 (1980) ("The State's concern that rates be fair and efficient represents a clear and substantial governmental interest"). With the exception of the broad authority of the  [461  U.S. 190, 206] Federal Power Commission, now the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, over the need for and pricing of electrical power transmitted in interstate commerce, see Federal Power Act, 16 U.S.C. 824 (1976 ed. and Supp. V), these economic aspects of electrical generation have been regulated for many years and in great detail by the States. 17  As we noted in Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Corp. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 435  U.S. 519, 550 (1978): "There is little doubt that under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, state public utility commissions or similar bodies are empowered to make the initial decision regarding the need for power." Thus, "Congress legislated here in a field which the States have traditionally occupied. . . . So we start with the assumption that the historic police powers of the States were not to be superseded by the Federal Act unless that was the clear and manifest purpose of Congress." Rice v. Santa Fe Elevator Corp., supra, at 230.
The Atomic Energy Act must be read, however, against another background. Enrico Fermi demonstrated the first nuclear reactor in 1942, and Congress authorized civilian application of atomic power in 1946, Atomic Energy Act of 1946, see Act of Aug. 1, 1946, 60 Stat. 755, at which time the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) was created. Until 1954, however, the use, control, and ownership of nuclear technology remained a federal monopoly. The Atomic Energy Act of 1954, Act of Aug. 30, 1954, 68 Stat. 919, as [461  U.S. 190, 207]  amended, 42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq. (1976 ed. and Supp. V), grew out of Congress' determination that the national interest would be best served if the Government encouraged the private sector to become involved in the development of atomic energy for peaceful purposes under a program of federal regulation and licensing. See H. R. Rep. No. 2181, 83d Cong., 2d Sess., 1-11 (1954). The Act implemented this policy decision by providing for licensing of private construction, ownership, and operation of commercial nuclear power reactors. Duke Power Co. v. Carolina Environmental Study Group, Inc., 438  U.S., at 63 . The AEC, however, was given exclusive jurisdiction to license the transfer, delivery, receipt, acquisition, possession, and use of nuclear materials. 42 U.S.C. 2014(e), (z), (aa), 2061-2064, 2071-2078, 2091-2099, 2111–2114 (1976 ed. and Supp. V). Upon these subjects, no role was left for the States.
The Commission, however, was not given authority over the generation of electricity itself, or over the economic question whether a particular plant should be built. We observed in Vermont Yankee, supra, at 550, that "[t]he Commission's prime area of concern in the licensing context, . . . is national security, public health, and safety." See also Power Reactor Development Co. v. Electrical Workers, 367  U.S. 396, 415  (1961) (utility's investment not to be considered by Commission in its licensing decisions). The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), which now exercises the AEC's regulatory authority, does not purport to exercise its authority based on economic considerations, 10 CFR 8.4 (1982), and has recently repealed its regulations concerning the financial qualifications and capabilities of a utility proposing to construct and operate a nuclear powerplant. 47 Fed. Reg. 13751 (1982). In its notice of rule repeal, the NRC stated that utility financial qualifications are only of concern to the NRC if related to the public health and safety. 18 It is [461  U.S. 190, 208] almost inconceivable that Congress would have left a regulatory vacuum; the only reasonable inference is that Congress intended the States to continue to make these judgments. Any doubt that ratemaking and plant-need questions were to remain in state hands was removed by 271, 42 U.S.C. 2018, which provided:
"Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect the authority or regulations of any Federal, State or local agency with respect to the generation, sale, or transmission of electric power produced through the use of nuclear facilities licensed by the Commission . . . ."
The legislative Reports accompanying this provision do little more than restate the statutory language, S. Rep. No. 1699, 83d Cong., 2d Sess., 31 (1954); H. R. Rep. No. 2181, supra, at 31, but statements on the floor of Congress confirm that while the safety of nuclear technology was the exclusive business of the Federal Government, state power over the production of electricity was not otherwise displaced. 19
The 1959 amendments reinforced this fundamental division of authority. In 1959, Congress amended the Atomic Energy Act in order to "clarify the respective responsibilities  [461  U.S. 190, 209] . . . of the States and the Commission with respect to the regulation of byproduct, source, and special nuclear materials." 42 U.S.C. 2021(a)(1). See S. Rep. No. 870, 86th Cong., 1st Sess., 8, 10-12 (1959). The authority of the States over the planning for new powerplants and ratemaking were not at issue. Indeed, the point of the 1959 Amendments was to heighten the States' role. Section 274(b), 42 U.S.C. 2021(b), authorized the NRC, by agreements with state governors to discontinue its regulatory authority over certain nuclear materials under limited conditions. 20  State programs permitted under the amendment were required to be "coordinated and compatible" with that of the NRC. 2021(g); S. Rep. No. 870, supra, at 11. The subject matters of those agreements were also limited by 274(c), 42 U.S.C. 2021(c), which states:
"[T]he Commission shall retain authority and responsibility with respect to regulation of -
"(1) the construction and operation of any production or utilization facility;
.  .   .   .  .
"(4) the disposal of such . . . byproduct, source, or special nuclear material as the Commission determines . . . should, because of the hazards or potential hazards thereof, not be so disposed of without a license from the Commission."
Although the authority reserved by 274(c) was exclusively for the Commission to exercise, see S. Rep. No. 870, supra, at 8, 9; H.R. Rep. No. 1125, 86th Cong., 1st Sess., 8, 9 (1959), Congress made clear that the section was not intended to cut back on pre-existing state authority outside the [461 U.S. 190, 210] NRC's jurisdiction. 21 Section 274(k), 42 U.S.C. 2021(k), states:
"Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authority of any State or local agency to regulate activities for purposes other than protection against radiation hazards."
Section 274(k), by itself, limits only the pre-emptive effect of "this section," that is, 274, and does not represent an affirmative grant of power to the States. But Congress, by permitting regulation "for purposes other than protection against radiation hazards" underscored the distinction drawn in 1954 between the spheres of activity left respectively to the Federal Government and the States.
This regulatory structure has remained unchanged, for our purposes, until 1965, when the following proviso was added to 271:
"Provided, that this section shall not be deemed to confer upon any Federal, State or local agency any authority to regulate, control, or restrict any activities of the Commission."
The accompanying Report by the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy makes clear that the amendment was not intended to detract from state authority over energy facilities. 22  Instead, [461  U.S. 190, 211] the proviso was added to overrule a Court of Appeals opinion which interpreted 271 to allow a municipality to prohibit transmission lines necessary for the AEC's own activities. Maun v. United States, 347 F.2d 970 (CA9 1965). There is no indication that Congress intended any broader limitation of state regulatory power over utility companies. Indeed, Reports and debates accompanying the 1965 amendment indicate that 271's purpose "was to make it absolutely clear that the Atomic Energy Act's special provisions on licensing of reactors did not disturb the status quo with respect to the then existing authority of Federal, State, and local bodies to regulate generation, sale, or transmission of electric power." 111 Cong. Rec. 19822 (1965) (statement of Sen. Hickenlooper). 23
This account indicates that from the passage of the Atomic Energy Act in 1954, through several revisions, and to the present day, Congress has preserved the dual regulation of [461  U.S. 190, 212] nuclear-powered electricity generation: the Federal Government maintains complete control of the safety and "nuclear" aspects of energy generation; the States exercise their traditional authority over the need for additional generating capacity, the type of generating facilities to be licensed, land use, ratemaking, and the like. 24
The above is not particularly controversial. But deciding how 25524.2 is to be construed and classified is a more difficult proposition. At the outset, we emphasize that the statute does not seek to regulate the construction or operation of a nuclear powerplant. It would clearly be impermissible for California to attempt to do so, for such regulation, even if enacted out of nonsafety concerns, would nevertheless directly conflict with the NRC's exclusive authority over plant construction and operation. Respondents appear to concede as much. Respondents do broadly argue, however, that although safety regulation of nuclear plants by States is forbidden, a State may completely prohibit new construction until its safety concerns are satisfied by the Federal Government. We reject this line of reasoning. State safety regulation is not pre-empted only when it conflicts with federal law. Rather, the Federal Government has occupied the entire field of nuclear safety concerns, except the limited powers expressly ceded to the States. 25  When the Federal Government [461  U.S. 190, 213] completely occupies a given field or an identifiable portion of it, as it has done here, the test of pre-emption is whether "the matter on which the State asserts the right to act is in any way regulated by the Federal Act." Rice v. Santa Fe Elevator Corp. 331  U.S. at 236. A state moratorium on nuclear construction grounded in safety concerns falls squarely within the prohibited field. Moreover, a state judgment that nuclear power is not safe enough to be further developed would conflict directly with the countervailing judgment of the NRC, see, infra, at 218-219, that nuclear construction may proceed notwithstanding extant uncertainties as to waste disposal. A state prohibition on nuclear construction for safety reasons would also be in the teeth of the Atomic Energy Act's objective to insure that nuclear technology be safe enough for widespread development and use - and would be pre-empted for that reason. Infra, at 221-222.
That being the case, it is necessary to determine whether there is a nonsafety rationale for 25524.2. California has maintained, and the Court of Appeals agreed, that 25524.2 was aimed at economic problems, not radiation hazards. The California Assembly Committee on Resources, Land Use, and Energy, which proposed a package of bills including 25524.2, reported that the waste disposal problem was "largely economic or the result of poor planning, not safety related." Reassessment of Nuclear Energy in California: A Policy Analysis of Proposition 15 and its Alternatives, p. 18 (1976) (Reassessment Report) (emphasis in original). The Committee explained that the lack of a federally approved method of waste disposal created a "clog" in the nuclear fuel cycle. Storage space was limited while more nuclear wastes were continuously produced. Without a permanent means of disposal, the nuclear waste problem could become critical,  [461  U.S. 190, 214] leading to unpredictably high costs to contain the problem or, worse, shutdowns in reactors. "Waste disposal safety," the Reassessment Report notes, "is not directly addressed by the bills, which ask only that a method [of waste disposal] be chosen and accepted by the federal government." Id., at 156 (emphasis in original).
The Court of Appeals adopted this reading of 25524.2. Relying on the Reassessment Report, the court concluded:
"[S]ection 25524.2 is directed towards purposes other than protection against radiation hazards. While Proposition 15 would have required California to judge the safety of a proposed method of waste disposal, section 25524.2 leaves that judgment to the federal government. California is concerned not with the adequacy of the method, but rather with its existence." 659 F.2d, at 925.
Our general practice is to place considerable confidence in the interpretations of state law reached by the federal courts of appeals. Cf. Mills v. Rogers, 457  U.S. 291, 306 (1982); Bishop v. Wood, 426  U.S. 341, 346 (1976). Petitioners and amici nevertheless attempt to upset this interpretation in a number of ways. First, they maintain that 25524.2 evinces no concern with the economics of nuclear power. The statute states that the "development" and "existence" of a permanent disposal technology approved by federal authorities will lift the moratorium; the statute does not provide for considering the economic costs of the technology selected. This view of the statute is overly myopic. Once a technology is selected and demonstrated, the utilities and the California Public Utilities Commission would be able to estimate costs; such cost estimates cannot be made until the Federal Government has settled upon the method of long-term waste disposal. Moreover, once a satisfactory disposal technology is found and demonstrated, fears of having to close down operating reactors should largely evaporate. [461  U.S. 190, 215]
Second, it is suggested that California, if concerned with economics, would have banned California utilities from building plants outside the State. This objection carries little force. There is no indication that California utilities are contemplating such construction; the state legislature is not obligated to address purely hypothetical facets of a problem.
Third, petitioners note that there already is a body, the California Public Utilities Commission, which is authorized to determine on economic grounds whether a nuclear powerplant should be constructed. 26  While California is certainly free to make these decisions on a case-by-case basis, a State is not foreclosed from reaching the same decision through a legislative judgment, applicable to all cases. The economic uncertainties engendered by the nuclear waste disposal problems are not factors that vary from facility to facility; the issue readily lends itself to more generalized decisionmaking and California cannot be faulted for pursuing that course.
Fourth, petitioners note that Proposition 15, the initiative out of which 25524.2 arose, and companion provisions in California's so-called nuclear laws, are more clearly written with safety purposes in mind. 27  It is suggested that 25524.2 shares a common heritage with these laws and should be presumed to have been enacted for the same purposes. [461  U.S. 190, 216] The short answer here is that these other state laws are not before the Court, and indeed, Proposition 15 was not passed; these provisions and their pedigree do not taint other parts of the Warren-Alquist Act.
Although these specific indicia of California's intent in enacting 25524.2 are subject to varying interpretation, there are two further reasons why we should not become embroiled in attempting to ascertain California's true motive. First, inquiry into legislative motive is often an unsatisfactory venture. United States v. O'Brien, 391  U.S. 367, 383 (1968). What motivates one legislator to vote for a statute is not necessarily what motivates scores of others to enact it. Second, it would be particularly pointless for us to engage in such inquiry here when it is clear that the States have been allowed to retain authority over the need for electrical generating facilities easily sufficient to permit a State so inclined to halt the construction of new nuclear plants by refusing on economic grounds to issue certificates of public convenience in individual proceedings. In these circumstances, it should be up to Congress to determine whether a State has misused the authority left in its hands.
Therefore, we accept California's avowed economic purpose as the rationale for enacting 25524.2. Accordingly, the statute lies outside the occupied field of nuclear safety regulation. 28 [461  U.S. 190, 217] 
Response to first argument. From the time the federal act was passed in 1954 until the present, White explained, Congress had maintained a system of dual regulation over nuclear plants: the federal government held control over safety issues, whereas the states exercised "their traditional authority over economic questions such as the need for additional generating capacity, the type of generating facilities to be licensed, land use, and ratemaking." The Court held that 25524.2 was directed toward economics, rather than safety, in its purpose and thus was fully within California's authority.
Response to second argument. 
Nor did 25524.2 in any way conflict with national policy, even with a decision by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) to allow continued licensing of reactors despite concerns regarding waste disposal. Again, the NRC's authority, as that of a federal nuclear regulatory agency, was in the realm of safety, leaving states to make economic determinations regarding nuclear power. White wrote, :And as there is no attempt on California's part to enter the field of developing and licensing nuclear waste disposal technology, a field occupied by the Federal Government, 25524.2 is not preempted any more by the NRC's obligations in the waste disposal field than by its licensing power over the plants themselves. Furthermore, the Nuclear Waste Policy Act, enacted into law by Congress in 1982, did not appear to have been passed with the intention of superseding states' decision-making power with regard to waste disposal and the opening of new plants.
Response to third argument Finally, section 25524.2 did not in any way operate at cross-purposes to the aim embodied in the Atomic Energy Act of developing commercial uses for nuclear power. As the court of appeals had observed, Justice White wrote, "Promotion of nuclear power is not to be accomplished `at all costs.'" Instead, Congress had given the states authority to decide whether to build a nuclear plant or one using traditional fuel sources. "California's decision to exercise that authority does not, in itself, constitute a basis for preemption."
Concurrence in part
Justice Blackmun concurred in part and in the judgment. He took issue, however, with the idea implicit in the Court's argument that a state motivated solely by safety concerns, rather than economic ones, lacked the authority to prohibit the construction of nuclear plants. He then addressed the three reasons why the Court held that a safety-motivated decision to prohibit construction would be preempted:
1. "the Federal Government has occupied the entire field of nuclear safety";
Justice Blackmun argued that Congress had not attempted to control the wide field of "nuclear safety concerns," only the smaller realm of safe plant construction and operation. Thus if the federal government attempted to preempt the states, given the fact that its area of authority was not large enough to cover all contingencies, this would create a "regulatory vacuum."
2. a state judgment on safety would place a state in conflict with the NRC;
Blackmun argued that while the NRC had authority to determine whether it was safe for construction of a plant to proceed, it was not in a position to order that such construction take place.
3. a state moratorium on further plant construction would obstruct the Atomic Energy Act's objective "to insure that nuclear technology be safe enough for widespread development and use."
Blackmun maintained that the federal government's policy of encouraging nuclear development should not be interpreted as an attempt to prevent states from developing alternative sources of energy.
Subsequent Developments
In 1972 the Supreme Court affirmed a decision of the Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit, Northern States Power Co. v. Minnesota,Northern States Power Co. v. Minnesota, 447 F.2d 1143 (8th Cir. 1971), aff'd mem., . which held that attempts by states to regulate radiation hazards were preempted by the Atomic Energy Act. However, this affirmation was by a memorandum without a written opinion. As such, Pacific Gas is often cited for holding that states are preempted from regulating the safety aspects and radiological hazards of nuclear power plants.
Later, more consequential Supreme Court cases related to the politics of nuclear power include Metropolitan Edison Co. v. People Against Nuclear Energy (1983), decided the same year, and Silkwood v. Kerr-McGee Corp. (1984).
Critical response
The majority opinion did not question California's assertion that the moratorium was justified because the lack of a permanent disposal method for high level waste made nuclear generation uneconomic. It has been noted that existing plants and plants constructed after the Supreme Court decision have continued to economically operate by expanding current waste storage facilities. In addition, by simply citing examples of the costs of cancelled nuclear construction projects such as WNP-3 and WNP-5 or Marble Hill, or of cost over-runs at plants such as Braidwood, a state could justify a statutory moratorium on all new nuclear generating plants on the basis that these plants are inherently uneconomic.
In the case of Silkwood v. Kerr-McGee Corp., 464 U.S. 238 (1984), which was decided the same year as Pacific Gas, the Supreme Court ruled that the Atomic Energy Act did not preempt the award of punitive damages for state tort claims involving radioactive contamination. One criticism is that Silkwood is inconsistent with Pacific Gas as the purpose of the punitive damages awarded was to punish and to alter conduct involving the safety of radiological controls, giving the state regulation over these activities through tort law.
See also
Pacific Gas & Electric v. Public Utilities Commission
Travelers Casualty & Surety Co. of America v. Pacific Gas & Elec. Co.
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 461
References
Further reading
"Constitutional Law--The Supremacy Clause--The California Nuclear Moratorium--Pacific Gas & Electric Co. v. Energy Resources Commission." New York Law School Law Review, Vol. 30, 1985.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States federal preemption law
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:United States energy case law
Category:United States ripeness case law
Category:Pacific Gas and Electric Company
"""

From "Pacific Gas & Electric Co. v. Public Utilities Commission" ==> """
Pacific Gas & Electric v. Public Utilities Commission, 475 U.S. 1 (1986), was a United States Supreme Court case involving the requirement that San Francisco-based public utility Pacific Gas and Electric Company carry a message supplied by a public interest group in rebuttal to the messages the utility supplied in its newsletter which it placed in its billing envelope.
The rationale used by the regulatory agency was that the space in the billing envelope which could have material added that did not increase postage belonged to the ratepayers rather than the utility; thus the commission could order the utility to allow other groups to use that space subject to restrictions.
The U.S. Supreme Court found the order of the California Public Utilities Commission to be unconstitutional, as the right to speak includes the right not to carry messages one disagrees with. As the court stated, "the choice to speak includes within it the choice of what not to say."
This is one of the cases which has essentially granted, with very limited exceptions, the absolute right of a publisher to choose not to carry messages it does not agree with.
See also
 Pacific Gas & Electric Co. v. State Energy Resources Conservation and Development Commission (1983)
 Travelers Casualty & Surety Co. of America v. Pacific Gas & Elec. Co. (2007)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 475
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States energy case law
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Pacific States Box & Basket Co. v. White" ==> """
Pacific States Box & Basket Co. v. White, 296 U.S. 176 (1935), was a case heard by the United States Supreme Court..
 Background 
The Oregon Division of Plant Industries, having been granted the power to prevent fraud or deception and to promote, protect, further or develop the horticultural interests of the state, prescribed the type, size and shape of containers for the sale of strawberries and raspberries.
A California manufacturer of fruit and vegetable containers challenged the rule as arbitrary and capricious in violation of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
 Opinion of the Court 
In an opinion delivered by Associate Justice Louis Brandeis, the Court ruled that "where the regulation is within the scope of authority legally delegated, the presumption of the existence of facts justifying its specific exercise attaches alike to statutes, to municipal ordinances, and to orders of administrative bodies."
The regulation had been promulgated through notice and public hearing. 
The court explained that when such a regulation was challenged, "if any state of facts reasonably can be conceived that would sustain it, there is a presumption of the existence of that state of facts, and one who assails the classification must carry the burden of showing by a resort to common knowledge or other matters which may be judicially noticed, or to other legitimate proof, that the action is arbitrary."
The case served as a precursor to Administrative Procedure Act rationality review.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:1935 in United States case law
"""

From "Pacific States Telephone & Telegraph Co. v. Oregon" ==> """
Pacific States Telephone & Telegraph Co. v. Oregon, , was a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States involving the constitutionality of the citizens' initiative and the enforceability of the Guarantee Clause of the Constitution. In an opinion authored by Chief Justice Edward Douglass White, a unanimous Court rejected a corporation's argument that the Guarantee Clause forbade Oregon's initiative process, citing Luther v. Borden to conclude that such claims presented political questions and thus were non-justiciable.
 Background 
Article IV, Section 4 of the U.S. Constitution states that "[t]he United States shall guarantee to every State in this Union a Republican Form of Government...". The precise meaning of this clause remains uncertain because the Supreme Court has chosen not to apply it directly. In Luther v. Borden (1849), the Court was asked to decide which of two political factions in Rhode Island was the legitimate government of that state. The justices held that they lacked jurisdiction, ruling that the question of whether a state had a republican form of government was a political question that only Congress had the power to decide. At the time of the Pacific States decision, a line of precedent stemming from Luther had held that disputes about the Guarantee Clause were outside the scope of the Court's authority.
During the early part of the twentieth century, the political movement known as Progressivism swept the nation. Reformers strove against poverty, poor working conditions, and what they viewed as an excess of corporate power over the political system. They supported efforts that would give power directly to the electorate: the initiative, by which voters could propose and enact legislation directly, and the referendum, by which citizens could vote to reject laws already passed by the legislature. According to Progressives, such reforms would institute a modicum of direct democracy, allowing voters to sidestep a corrupt political process. By contrast, corporations, which often were the target of laws passed by initiative, opposed such reforms.
A 1902 constitutional amendment in Oregon adopted both the initiative and the referendum in that state. By a nearly ten-to-one margin in 1906, voters imposed via initiative a two-percent tax on telephone and telegraph companies' revenues. The Pacific States Telephone and Telegraph Company refused to pay it, and the state sued to collect the tax. In court, the corporation argued, among other things, that because the initiative constituted direct democracy, it was contrary to the representative system that was integral to the republican form of government required by the Constitution. After Oregon's state courts ruled the tax valid, the company appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, making the sole argument that the initiative violated the Guarantee Clause.
 Decision 
thumb|These headlines from the Oregon Daily Journal, dated February 20, 1912, announce the Supreme Court's decision in Pacific States.
The justices rendered their decision on February 19, 1912. Chief Justice Edward Douglass White delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court, ruling that the case presented a political question that fell outside of the Court's jurisdiction. White expressed fear that a ruling in the company's favor would encroach upon states' rights, writing that such a decision would require the "inconceivable expansion of the judicial power and the ruinous destruction of legislative authority in matters purely political". He quoted repeatedly from the Court's decision in Luther and determined it to be "absolutely controlling". White ruled that only Congress had the authority to enforce the Guarantee Clause. He found it obvious that the dispute presented a political question because the state government had been "called to the bar of this court, not for the purpose of testing judicially some exercise of power...but to demand of the State that it establish its right to exist as a State, republican in form". White commented that the company might have had a better chance of succeeding if it had challenged the tax itself rather than the process by which it was enacted. But since the Guarantee Clause arguments had an "essentially political character", the Court dismissed the case for lack of jurisdiction.
 Legacy 
Pacific States had the practical effect of giving the Court's imprimatur to initiatives and referendums at the state and local levels. By reaffirming Luther, it also sent a strong signal that the Court had no interest in deciding cases involving the Guarantee Clause. In a 1999 book about the White Court, the legal historian Walter F. Pratt wrote that the decision in Pacific States "implied that the Court was willing to permit experiments with different procedures in state governments". The legal scholar William M. Wiecek argued in 1972 that, while the outcome of the case "was defensible", the Chief Justice's "loose and extravagant language" supported "a constitutional doctrine of judicial abstention" that went well beyond what was necessary to decide the case. The decision in Pacific States served as an influential precedent: in the years after the case was decided, the courts relied heavily on it to dispose of challenges to various state laws. The decision has been understood to bar all suits that claim that a given law is at odds with a republican form of government.
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:1912 in United States case law
Category:Guarantee Clause case law
Category:United States political question doctrine case law
Category:Legal history of Oregon
Category:Initiatives in the United States
"""

From "Packingham v. North Carolina" ==> """
Packingham v. North Carolina, 582 U.S. ___ (2017), is a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a North Carolina statute that prohibited registered sex offenders from using social media websites is unconstitutional because it violates the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which protects the freedom of speech.
In 2010, Lester Gerard Packingham, a registered sex offender, posted on Facebook under a pseudonym to comment favorably on a recent traffic court experience. Packingham was then identified by police and charged with violating North Carolina's law. Packingham moved to dismiss the charges, arguing that the state's law violated the First Amendment. The trial court dismissed this motion and ultimately convicted Packingham. An appellate court initially reversed the trial court, holding that the law did violate the First Amendment, but the North Carolina Supreme Court, the state's highest court, disagreed and reinstated the conviction.
In June 2017, the U.S. Supreme Court unanimously reversed the North Carolina Supreme Court's judgment. In a majority opinion authored by Justice Anthony Kennedy, the Court held that social media—defined broadly enough to include Facebook, Amazon.com, The Washington Post, and WebMD—is considered a "protected space" under the First Amendment for lawful speech. The Court offered that North Carolina could protect children through less restrictive means, such as prohibiting "conduct that often presages a sexual crime, like contacting a minor or using a website to gather information about a minor".Packingham v. North Carolina, slip op. at 7.
Background
 North Carolina statute 
In 2008, the state of North Carolina passed a law that made it a felony for a registered sex offender "'to access a commercial social networking Web site where the sex offender knows that the site permits minor children to become members or to create or maintain personal Web pages'".Packingham, 582 U.S. ___, slip op. at 1 (quoting N. C. Gen. Stat. Ann. §§14–202.5(a), (e) (2015)). The law defined a "commercial social networking Web site" using four criteria. Specifically, the website must:
 be "operated by a person who derives revenue from membership fees, advertising, or other sources related to the operation of the Web site".Packingham, 582 U.S. ___, slip op. at 1–2 (quoting N. C. Gen. Stat. Ann. §14–202.5(b)) (internal quotation marks omitted).
 facilitate "the social introduction between two or more persons for the purposes of friendship, meeting other persons, or information exchanges".
 allow "users to create Web pages or personal profiles that contain information such as the name or nickname of the user, photographs placed on the personal Web page by the user, other personal information about the user, and links to other personal Web pages on the commercial social networking Web site of friends or associates of the user that may be accessed by other users or visitors to the Web site".
 provide "users or visitors... mechanisms to communicate with other users, such as a message board, chat room, electronic mail, or instant messenger".
The law exempted websites that "'Provid[e] only one of the following discrete services: photo-sharing, electronic mail, instant messenger, or chat room or message board platform", as well as websites that "have as their 'primary purpose the facilitation of commercial transactions involving goods or services between [their] members or visitors'".Packingham, 582 U.S. ___, slip op. at 2 (quoting N. C. Gen. Stat. Ann. §14–202.5(c)).
 Facts of the case 
In 2002, Lester Gerard Packingham was convicted of taking "indecent liberties with a child", a felony that required him to register as a sex offender.Packingham, 582 U.S. ___, slip op. at 2. A North Carolina court sentenced him to 10-12 months in prison with 24 months of supervised release. He was given no other special instructions on his behavior outside of prison other than "remain away from" the minor. In 2010, after a state court dismissed a traffic ticket against Packingham, he made a post on Facebook under the name "J. R. Gerrard", stating: "Man God is Good! How about I got so much favor they dismissed the ticket before court even started? No fine, no court cost, no nothing spent. . . . . .Praise be to GOD, WOW! Thanks JESUS!"Packingham, 582 U.S. ___, slip op. at 3. The Durham Police Department identified Packingham as the author of the post after cross-checking the time of the post with recently dismissed traffic tickets, and a grand jury indicted him for violating the North Carolina statute.
 Lower court proceedings 
Initially, Packingham moved to dismiss his indictment, arguing that it violated the First Amendment.Packingham, 582 U.S. ___ (2017), slip op. at 3. A North Carolina Superior Court judge denied this motion, and he was convicted of violating the North Carolina social media law. Packingham appealed his conviction to the North Carolina Court of Appeals, which reversed the trial court's decision in 2013. Applying intermediate scrutiny, the court of appeals determined that North Carolina's law violated the First Amendment because it was too broad, applying to all registered sex offenders regardless of whether the offender had committed a crime involving a minor or whether the offender was a continuing threat of harm to minors. The court of appeals also stated that the law had been defined broadly enough to prohibit a registered sex offender from conducting a wide array of Internet activity, such as "conducting a 'Google' search, purchasing items on Amazon.com, or accessing a plethora of Web sites unrelated to online communication with minors".
In 2015, the North Carolina Supreme Court, the state's highest court, reversed the court of appeals, holding that the law was "constitutional in all respects".Packingham, 582 U.S. ___ (2017), slip op. at 4 (quoting 386 N.C., at 381, 777 S.E. 2d, at 741). The North Carolina Supreme Court found that the statute was a "limitation on conduct" and did not impede any free speech. The state had a vested interest in “forestalling the illicit lurking and contact of minors” by registered sex offenders and potential future victims, and sustained Packingham's conviction.
 Supreme Court ruling 
Packingham filed a petition for a writ of certiorari with the Supreme Court of the United States. The federal government also filed a brief recommending that the Supreme Court grant certiorari, arguing that the North Carolina Supreme Court incorrectly decided the case in favor of the state. The Supreme Court granted certiorari in October 2016. Amicus briefs in support of Packingham were filed by the libertarian Cato Institute and the American Civil Liberties Union. The North Carolina Supreme Court filed a brief supporting its prior decision, urging the importance of protecting minors in the Internet age from being stalked online.
 Oral argument 
The oral argument took place in February 2017. Packingham’s lawyer, David T. Goldberg, argued that the law banned “vast swaths of First Amendment activity”, went too far in restricting which Internet sites could be accessed, and forbade use of the Internet in general. The law targeted speech on some of the platforms that Americans use most often, Goldberg noted, and that under the law Packingham could not even use Twitter to read the myriad messages discussing his own case. He further noted that the law imposes punishment without regard to whether the offender actually did anything wrong. 
North Carolina’s senior deputy Attorney General, Robert C. Montgomery, argued for the state, and claimed that communication through social media sites is a “crucial channel”. Justice Sonia Sotomayor asked Montgomery to provide evidence as to the claim that by giving Packingham Internet privileges, he would commit another crime. Justice Stephen Breyer added that “It seems to be well-settled law that the state can’t (bar usage) unless there is a 'clear and present danger.' "
 Opinion of the Court 
thumb|Justice Anthony Kennedy authored the majority opinion in Packingham v. North Carolina.
In June 2017 the Supreme Court delivered a judgment in favor of Packingham, unanimously voting to reverse the state court.The Supreme Court, 2016 Term — Leading Cases, 131 Harv. L. Rev. 233 (2017).David T. Goldberg and Emily R. Zhang, Our Fellow American, the Registered Sex Offender, 2016–2017 Cato Sup. Ct. Rev. 59 (2017). Justice Anthony Kennedy explained the decision: "A fundamental principle of the First Amendment is that all persons have access to places where they can speak and listen, and then, after reflection, speak and listen once more." He continued that "By prohibiting sex offenders from using those websites, North Carolina with one broad stroke bars access to what for many are the principal sources for knowing current events, checking ads for employment, speaking and listening in the modern public square, and otherwise exploring the vast realms of human thought and knowledge." Citing Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition, Kennedy also wrote: "It is well established that, as a general rule, the Government 'may not suppress lawful speech as the means to suppress unlawful speech'."
 Concurring opinion 
Justice Alito wrote a concurring opinion, joined by Roberts and Thomas. While Alito agreed with Kennedy's opinion, he noted that there are reasonable scenarios where legal bans for sex offenders can be placed, such as for sites targeted for teenagers.
 Impact 
Packingham v. North Carolina was one of the first U.S. Supreme Court cases to analyze the role of the First Amendment with respect to social media use. According to Ashutosh Bhagwat, a law professor at the UC Davis School of Law, as of 2018 Packingham is one of only two cases heard by the Roberts Court that directly address new technologies, the other being Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association (2011) with respect to video games. Bhagwat speculated that this might change in the future, as "recent calls to regulate 'fake news' and otherwise impose filtering obligations on search engine and social media companies will inevitably raise important and difficult First Amendment issues".
 Effect on First Amendment case law 
In an article published in the North Dakota Law Review, Katie Miller wrote that the Packingham decision may be used to challenge laws and restrictions in other states similar to the one in North Carolina. For example, in a case called United States v. Rock (2017), a defendant who pleaded guilty to distributing child pornography cited Packingham in an appeal of one of the conditions of his supervised release, which prevented him from possessing or using a computer. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit rejected that argument on the basis that the defendant's release condition was not a "post-custodial restriction" as it was in Packingham, stating that "'a court granting probation may impose reasonable conditions that deprive the offender of some freedoms enjoyed by law-abiding citizens'".
Madeleine Burnette-McGrath, in an article published in the Ohio Northern University Law Review, wrote that "Packingham adopts a new avenue for government regulation, allowing the government to interfere with individual social media entities and their ability to regulate speech that occurs on their websites" Specifically, Packingham delineates an intermediate scrutiny test for governmental regulation of Internet speech, under which a government agent "need only put into effect a law that is both narrowly tailored to and includes a substantial government interest". Burnette-McGrath described this as a "low standard" that may inspire states to "implement new laws under the guise of substantial government interest or of being narrowly tailored" at the detriment of free speech on the Internet.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 582
 New York v. Ferber, 458 U.S. 747
 Ward v. Rock Against Racism, 491 U.S. 781
 References 
 Citations
 Sources
External links
 Case file at SCOTUSblog
Category:2017 in United States case law
Category:United States First Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
*
"""

From "Padilla v. Kentucky" ==> """
Padilla v. Commonwealth of Kentucky, 559 U.S. 356 (2010), is a case in which the United States Supreme Court decided that criminal defense attorneys must advise noncitizen clients about the deportation risks of a guilty plea. The case extended the Supreme Court's prior decisions on criminal defendants' Sixth Amendment right to counsel to immigration consequences.
The duties of Counsel recognized in Padilla are broad. After Padilla, if the law is unambiguous, attorneys must advise their criminal clients that deportation will result from a conviction. Also, if the immigration consequences of a conviction are unclear or uncertain, attorneys must advise that deportation "may" result. Finally, attorneys must give their clients some advice about deportation: counsel cannot remain silent about immigration.
After Padilla, there has been significant litigation in the lower courts about whether attorneys are required to advise their criminal clients about other consequences of convictions.
Background
José Padilla was born in Honduras in 1950. He later emigrated to the United States and became a lawful permanent resident.Petitioner's brief to the US Supreme Court: http://www.abanet.org/publiced/preview/briefs/pdfs/07-08/08-651_Petitioner.pdf Padilla served in the US military during the Vietnam War and received an honorable discharge. As of 2010, Padilla had been a lawful resident in the United States for more than 40 years.
In 2001, Padilla was working as a commercial truck driver when he was arrested in Kentucky for transporting marijuana. His defense attorney told him that he "did not have to worry" about the conviction affecting his immigration status, so he pleaded guilty pursuant to a plea bargain.Padilla v. Kentucky, 130 S.Ct. 1473, 1478 (2010). However, this advice was incorrect, as Padilla's deportation was virtually automatic.Padilla, 130 S.Ct. at 1478. In 2004, Padilla filed a pro se motion for post-conviction relief, alleging that he had been given bad advice by his attorney.
The Sixth Amendment, as interpreted by the Court in Gideon v. Wainwright, guarantees criminal defendants legal counsel. Strickland v. Washington, a subsequent decision, further requires that defendants receive effective counsel. If defendants receive ineffective assistance of counsel, they may be able to get their convictions overturned.
Traditionally, defense attorneys were required to advise their clients only of the direct consequences of convictions: the sentence likely to result from a plea bargain, the maximum sentence one might face at trial, and the risk of conviction at trial. The Sixth Amendment does not require attorneys to tell their clients about any collateral consequences: civil penalties such as loss of professional licenses, loss of government benefits, and loss of voting rights. Before Padilla, deportation was considered a collateral consequence, and thus not a consequence about which attorneys had to provide legal advice.
Padilla argued that the bad advice he had been given was ineffective assistance and therefore his conviction breached the Sixth Amendment. Padilla won his case in the Kentucky Appellate Court, but the Commonwealth requested the Kentucky Supreme Court hear the case on discretionary review. That court applied a harsh version of the collateral consequences rule, reasoning that whether Padilla’s attorney failed to advise him or affirmatively misadvised him before his plea made no difference.Commonwealth. v. Padilla, 253 S.W.3d 482, 484-85 (Ky. 2008). The court held that even affirmative misadvice about deportation provided no grounds for relief under Strickland.Padilla, 253 S.W.3d at 485.
As the Supreme Court agreed to hear it, the case posed two questions: (1) whether the mandatory deportation that results from a guilty plea to trafficking in marijuana is a "collateral consequence" and counsel is thereby relieved of an affirmative duty to advise his client about it in accordance with the guarantees of the Sixth Amendment; and, (2) assuming deportation is a "collateral consequence", whether counsel's gross misadvice about deportation constitutes a ground for setting aside a guilty plea that is induced by that advice. Ultimately, the Court re-framed the case in a way that made the collateral consequences doctrine irrelevant.
Decision
The Supreme Court reversed the Kentucky Supreme Court's decision. The Supreme Court held that criminal defense attorneys are duty-bound to inform clients of the risk of deportation under three circumstances. Firstly, if the law is unambiguous, attorneys must advise their criminal clients that deportation will result from a conviction. Secondly, if the immigration consequences of a conviction are unclear or uncertain, attorneys must advise that deportation may result. Thirdly, attorneys must give their clients some advice about deportation; counsel cannot remain silent about immigration consequences.Padilla v. Kentucky, 130 S.Ct. 1473, 1483-84 (2010).
Majority opinion
Writing for the Court, Justice John Paul Stevens began his analysis by tracing the history of federal immigration law and its close historical connection between a criminal conviction and deportation: ninety years ago, deportation occurred only for a narrow class of crimes and even then was discretionary. Over time, that discretion has been limited, and the class of deportable offenses has expanded. Now, a conviction for drug trafficking means removal is "practically inevitable."Padilla, 130 S.Ct. at 1480.
As a threshold matter, the Court declined to apply the direct/collateral consequences distinction that had developed in the lower courts, a distinction that the Supreme Court itself had never recognized.Padilla, 130 S.Ct. at 1481. The Court instead emphasized that deportation is a unique and "particularly severe penalty."Padilla, 130 S.Ct. at 1481 (internal quotation and citation omitted). In addition, although deportation is civil rather than criminal, it has been closely connected to the criminal process for nearly a century. Given the connection, it was difficult for the Court to classify deportation as a direct or collateral consequence.Padilla, 130 S.Ct. at 1482. Regardless of whether the collateral consequences rule is an appropriate way of analyzing ineffectiveness cases, a question that the Court did not decide, the Court found it “ill-suited” to evaluating Padilla’s deportation-related claim.Padilla, 130 S.Ct. at 1481-82.
The court thus concluded that advice about deportation is not categorically removed from analysis under the Court's decision in Strickland v. Washington and so applied Strickland'''s two-pronged test to Padilla's claim.
The bulk of the Court's analysis focused on the attorney's performance under Strickland. In analyzing the performance prong, the Court first examined professional norms and practices. It determined that the weight of current professional norms indicates that attorneys must advise their clients of the risk of deportation. Specifically, professional standards promulgated by the American Bar Association, the National Legal Aid and Defender Association, the Justice Department, and legal scholars all indicate that an attorney must advise his or her client of the risk.Padilla, 130 S.Ct. at 1482. The Court's opinion also quotes from an amicus brief indicating that authoritative treatises, state and city bar publications, and public defender organizations "universally" have the same requirement. See Brief for Legal Ethics, Criminal Procedure, and Criminal Law Professors as Amici Curiae, pp. 12-14. Moreover, avoiding deportation may be more important to the client than even averting the maximum sentence of incarceration.Padilla, 130 S.Ct. at 1483. Given the gravity of deportation, the Court's expectation was that counsel would consult available practice guides and advise his or her client accordingly.
Moving beyond the facts of Jose Padilla's situation, the Court decided two further issues. The Court decided counsel may not remain silent but must provide some advice about immigration consequences.Padilla, 130 S.Ct. at 1484. The Court reasoned that a contrary holding would invite attorneys to offer no advice about circumstances that might lead to their clients’ exile.
Given this seriousness and the minimal duty imposed, offering clients no advice would be unconscionable and a violation of the Sixth Amendment guarantee. The Court mitigated this newly imposed duty somewhat by holding that when the immigration consequences are not certain and clear, a criminal defense attorney must simply advise the client that a conviction may affect the client's immigration status.
The Court reasoned that immigration law is a separate legal field that is complex and may be unfamiliar to criminal defense attorneys. The Court acknowledged Justice Alito’s point that the deportation consequences of a criminal conviction are often unclear but reasoned that this complexity affected the scope and nature of counsel’s advice, rather than obviating the duty to give advice.Padilla, 130 S.Ct. at 1483, n. 10.
Concurrence
Concurring in the judgment, Justice Alito largely agreed with the Court's result but took issue with the breadth of its holding.Padilla, 130 S.Ct. at 1487 (Alito, J., concurring in the judgment). Alito agreed with the Court that affirmative misadvice gives rise to a valid claim under Strickland, reasoning that requiring attorneys to know the limits of their own expertise is not too high a standard.Padilla, 130 S.Ct. at 1492-94. Alito also concurred that the Sixth Amendment requires counsel to say when a conviction may trigger deportation but would apply that same, limited requirement regardless of the clarity of the law.Padilla, 130 S.Ct. at 1494.
Alito parted company with the majority’s attempt to distinguish between immigration consequences that are "succinct, clear, and explicit" and those that are "not... straightforward".Padilla, 130 S.Ct. at 1490 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). He pointed out with numerous examples that determining the correct advice about immigration consequences is often complex.Padilla, 130 S.Ct. at 1488-90.
Conversely, to an attorney unversed in immigration law, a single statute read in isolation may seem to resolve an issue, but a careful attorney would need to know how the statute had been interpreted by courts.Padilla, 130 S.Ct. at 1490. Also, immigration practice guides indicate that it is not easy to tell whether a conviction will trigger removal.Padilla, 130 S.Ct. at 1490-91. In sum, Alito thought that immigration law was too complex to be easily reduced to the majority’s clear/unclear dichotomy.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Scalia wrote a dissenting opinion. Scalia agreed with Justice Alito’s reasoning about the complexity of immigration law, but concluded that the Sixth Amendment’s text and the Court’s decisions limit the amount of advice counsel is under a duty to provide.Padilla, 130 S.Ct. at 1494-95. Scalia also saw no logical stopping point to a holding that requires counsel to give advice about collateral consequences of a conviction.Padilla, 130 S.Ct. at 1496. Scalia quoted Alito’s list of collateral consequences that might be included in an expansive duty to inform, including civil commitment, government benefits, and professional licenses.Padilla, 130 S.Ct. at 1496 (quoting Alito’s concurrence at p. 1488). Finally, Scalia objected to constitutionalizing an issue that might be better handled through legislation.Padilla, 130 S.Ct. at 1494, 1496-97.
Impact
 Immigration consequences 
The biggest direct impact of the Padilla decision is that criminal defense attorneys must advise their non-citizen clients about the immigration consequences of a guilty plea. In cases for which the law is unclear, lawyers do not have to do significant legal research, but may simply say that a conviction may lead to the client's deportation. The Supreme Court noted that even as the Supreme Court of Kentucky denied Padilla's claim based on the collateral consequence of deportation, the Commonwealth amended its plea bargain agreement forms to include deportation as a possible outcome.
The case along with the 2015 United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit Case No. 13-1994 Castaneda v. Souza with its companion cases Castaneda v. Souza and Gordon v Johnson, which allowed bail for immigrants previously held in mandatory detention, greatly expanded the rights of immigrants caught within the deportation and removal system.
 Other collateral consequences Padilla may have effects on ineffectiveness claims regarding other collateral consequences. In his concurring opinion, Justice Alito lists "civil commitment, civil forfeiture, the loss of the right to vote, disqualification from public benefits, ineligibility to possess firearms, dishonorable discharge from the Armed Forces, and loss of business or professional licenses" as areas where the Court's holding in Padilla'' may be extended.Padilla, 130 S.Ct. at 1488 (Alito, J., concurring in the judgment).
Sources
External links
 Padilla v. Kentucky coverage by SCOTUSblog
 Gabriel J. Chin & Margaret Colgate Love, Status as Punishment: A Critical Guide to Padilla v. Kentucky, Criminal Justice, Vol. 25, No. 3, p. 21.
 Margaret Colgate Love & Gabriel J. Chin, Padilla v. Kentucky: The Right to Counsel and the Collateral Consequences of Conviction, The Champion, May 2010.
Casey Scott McKay, Constitutional Law-the Plea-Bargaining Process-Mr. Counsel, Please Bargain Effectively for Your Client's Sixth Amendment Rights, Otherwise the Trial Court Will Be Forced to Reoffer the Plea Deal and Then Exercise Discretion in Resentencing, 82 Miss. L.J. 731 (2013) .
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment ineffective assistance of counsel case law
Category:United States plea bargaining case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Paige v. Banks" ==> """
Paige v. Banks, 80 U.S. (13 Wall.) 608 (1872), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held an agreement that transfers a copyright from the original author to a second party for perpetuity does not end with the statutory limit of copyright at the time the parties made the deal. If a later act of Congress extends copyright and the extension is available to the work, the second party still controls the copyright or perpetual license to that copyright.
This is a notable departure from the Statute of Anne, a 1709 law from Great Britain that was influential in the United States's copyright history. That statute, from which the United States borrowed for the Copyright Act of 1790, provided for a maximum of two fourteen year terms of the author controlling a work's copyright monopoly before it entered the public domain. Under that British scheme, an author could sign away their copyright during the first term and it would automatically return to them at the beginning of the second term.
Notes
References
External links
Category:1872 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
Category:United States copyright case law
"""

From "Palazzolo v. Rhode Island" ==> """
Palazzolo v. Rhode Island, 533 U.S. 606 (2001), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a claimant does not waive his right to challenge a regulation as an uncompensated regulatory taking by purchasing property after the enactment of the regulation challenged..
 Background 
 Parties 
 Plaintiff/Petitioner  Anthony Palazzolo, owner of a waterfront parcel of land in the town of Westerly, Rhode Island, almost all of which is designated coastal wetlands under Rhode Island law.
 Defendant/Respondent  Rhode Island Coastal Resources Management Council.
 State of law 
Prior to 1971, owners of coastal land required a permit from the Rhode Island Division of Harbors and Rivers (DHR) in order to erect structures on coastal lands.  In 1971, Rhode Island enacted legislation creating the Coastal Resources Management Council, charged with protecting the state's coastal properties.  Regulations promulgated by the council protected coastal salt marshes as "coastal wetlands,'" on which construction was severely limited.
Facts of case
In 1959, Petitioner Palazzolo and business associates, operating under the name Shore Gardens, Inc. (SGI) purchased three undeveloped parcels on the Rhode Island coast.  Petitioner Palazzolo eventually became sole shareholder of SGI, and began efforts to develop the land by submitting parcelling plans to the town.  As the land required significant filling, Petitioner Palazzolo submitted applications for permits from the Division of Harbors and Rivers, which were denied.  In 1978, SGI was dissolved and Palazzolo acquired all of SGI's properties in his individual capacity.  In 1983, Petitioner Palazzolo again attempted to develop the land, submitting several permits, all of which were rejected.  He also challenged the Council's determinations as contrary to the principles of state administrative law, but the courts affirmed the Council's actions.
Prior history
Petitioner Palazzolo sued in Rhode Island courts for inverse condemnation.  Eventually, the Rhode Island Supreme Court rejected his claims.
Procedural posture
After the Rhode Island Supreme Court rejected his claims, Palazzolo, represented by Pacific Legal Foundation,  sought review from the United States Supreme Court, which granted certiorari. Rhode Island was represented by U.S. Senator Sheldon Whitehouse, who was the state attorney general at the time. 
Legal analysis
Issue
The Court addressed whether the Rhode Island Supreme Court erred in holding that Petitioner did not have standing to claim a regulatory taking because he acquired the property after the enactment of regulations, and that Petitioner did not endure a total taking because some of the parcel remains economically usable.
Arguments/theories
 Petitioner  Petitioner Palazzolo argued that the denial of a permit for filling by the Respondent Council effects a taking without compensation under the total takings analysis of Lucas v. South Carolina Coastal Council because the denial deprives him of "all economically beneficial use" of the land.   
 Rhode Island Supreme court   The Rhode Island Supreme Court held that (1) Petitioner Palazzolo had no right to challenge the permit denial as a total taking because he acquired the property after the enactment of the regulation under which the permit was denied, and therefore had sufficient notice of such regulation; (2) the upland portions of the land were available for development, and therefore Palazzolo was not deprived of all economically beneficial use (as required under Lucas); and (3) Palazzolo cannot claim a taking under the more general balancing test of Penn Central Transportation Co. v. New York City.
Rule of law
The Court ruled that a claimant does not waive his right to challenge a regulation as an uncompensated taking by purchasing property after the enactment of the regulation challenged.
Holding
The Court held that the Rhode Island Supreme Court erred in holding that Petitioner did not have standing to sue because he acquired the property after the enactment of regulations.
However, the Court also held that Palazzolo could not assert a takings claim based on the denial of all economic use of his property in light of undisputed evidence that the upland portion of the property was economically viable.
Finally, the Court did not address the issue of whether reasonable "investment backed expectations" were affected by a regulation that pre-dated Palazzolo's ownership of the land, which were not addressed earlier.  Therefore, the Court remanded the case back to the Rhode Island Supreme Court to re-examine under the Penn Central analysis.
Reasoning
The majority argued, regarding the first holding, as follows:  The argument that a claimant who acquires property after the enactment of a regulation waives the right to challenge such regulation as an unconstitutional regulatory taking fails because (1) such a principle would make the constitutionality of a regulation a matter of the passage of time, thereby creating a "[statute of limitations]" on a constitutional right; (2) such a principle also prejudices owners at the time of regulation, whose ability to transfer the land has become seriously impaired; and (3) such a principle would create different and unequal rights between different classes of owners (old owners and new owners).
Result
Judgment/disposition
Rhode Island Supreme Court judgment reversed in part and remanded.
Subsequent history
Case thrown out at a lower court.
 References 
 External links 
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:United States land use case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2001 in the environment
Category:2001 in United States case law
"""

From "Palko v. Connecticut" ==> """
Palko v. Connecticut, 302 U.S. 319 (1937), was a United States Supreme Court case concerning the incorporation of the Fifth Amendment protection against double jeopardy..
Justice Benjamin Cardozo, writing for the majority, explained that some Constitutional protections that would apply against the federal government would not be incorporated to apply against the states unless the guarantee was  "implicit in the concept of ordered liberty"."immunities that are valid as against the federal government by force of the specific pledges of particular amendments have been found to be implicit in the concept of ordered liberty, and thus, through the Fourteenth Amendment, become valid as against the states".  Incorporation of the Bill of Rights was selective, not a general rule, and in this case the Court declined to incorporate the protection from double jeopardy against the states, even though the protection would most certainly have been upheld against the federal government.Konvitz Milton R. 2001. Fundamental Rights : History of a Constitutional Doctrine. New Brunswick N.J: Transaction Publishers/Rutgers University. 
Background
In 1935, Frank Palko, a Connecticut resident, broke into a local music store and stole a phonograph, proceeded to flee on foot, and, when cornered by law enforcement, shot and killed two police officers and made his escape. He was captured a month later."Double Jeopardy – Two Bites of the Apple or Only One?" by Charles A. Riccio Jr., July 1997.
Palko had been charged with first-degree murder but was instead convicted of the lesser offense of second-degree murder and was given a sentence of life imprisonment.  Prosecutors appealed per Connecticut law and won a new trial in which Palko was found guilty of first-degree murder and sentenced to death. Palko then appealed, arguing that the Fifth Amendment protection against double jeopardy applied to state governments through the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The Court had previously held, in the Slaughterhouse cases, that the protections of the Bill of Rights should not be applied to the states under the Privileges or Immunities clause, but Palko held that since the infringed right fell under a due process protection, Connecticut still acted in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Decision
In an opinion by Justice Benjamin Cardozo, the Court held that the Due Process Clause protected only those rights that were "of the very essence of a scheme of ordered liberty" and that the court should therefore incorporate the Bill of Rights onto the states gradually, as justiciable violations arose, based on whether the infringed right met that test.
Applying the subjective case-by-case approach (known as selective incorporation), the Court upheld Palko's conviction on the basis that the double jeopardy appeal was not "essential to a fundamental scheme of ordered liberty." The case was decided by an 8–1 vote. Justice Pierce Butler was the lone dissenter, but he did not author a dissenting opinion.
Palko was executed in Connecticut's electric chair on April 12, 1938.
Later developments
The Court eventually reversed course and overruled Palko by incorporating the protection against double jeopardy with its ruling in Benton v. Maryland..
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 302
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
Category:Incorporation case law
Category:1937 in United States case law
Category:1937 in Connecticut
Category:Legal history of Connecticut
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
"""

From "Palmer v. Massachusetts" ==> """
REDIRECT 88 stations case
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1939 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
"""

From "Palmer v. Thompson" ==> """
Palmer v. Thompson, 403 U.S. 217 (1971), is a United States Supreme Court civil rights case which concerned the interpretation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.. 
Background
The city of Jackson, Mississippi, closed all of its public swimming pools, as opposed to integrating them. Originally there were five public pools, but the city closed four of them, and surrendered its lease to the fifth pool to the lessor, the YMCA, which continued to operate the pool privately and on a segregated basis. Hazel Palmer, mother of a freedom rider who was arrested at the bus station, and other black citizens filed suit against the city under the Fourteenth Amendment's guarantee of equal protection and under the Thirteenth Amendment, on the grounds that the city's actions created a "badge or incident" of slavery. The lower courts found no constitutional violation.
On appeal to the Supreme Court, the case was argued by Paul A. Rosen and William Kunstler for the petitioners. With them on the briefs were Ernest Goodman and Arthur Kinoy. The case was argued for the respondents by William F. Goodman, Jr.
Holding
The Supreme Court held in its syllabus, "The closing of the pools to all persons did not constitute a denial of equal protection of the laws under the Fourteenth Amendment to the Negroes." The court stated "there was no evidence that the city conspired with the YMCA that its pool be segregated." The court further rejected the equal protection argument that the city's action "was motivated by a desire to avoid integration of the races" because "no case in this Court has held that a legislative act may violate equal protection solely because of the motivations of the men who voted for it."Palmer, 403 U.S. at 224.
Legacy
The case was cited by the United States Department of Justice in defending President Donald Trump's travel bans.
References
Further reading
Paul Brest, "Palmer v. Thompson: An Approach to the Problem of Unconstitutional Legislative Motive," Supreme Court Review
External links
Category:1971 in case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fourteenth Amendment case law
"""

From "Panama Refining Co. v. Ryan" ==> """
Panama Refining Co. v. Ryan, 293 U.S. 388 (1935), also known as the Hot Oil case, was a case, in which the United States Supreme Court ruled that the Franklin Roosevelt administration's prohibition of interstate and foreign trade in petroleum goods produced in excess of state quotas, the "hot oil" orders adopted under the 1933 National Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA), was unconstitutional.
The ruling was the first of several that overturned key elements of the administration's New Deal legislative program. The relevant section 9(c) of the NIRA was found to be an unconstitutional delegation of legislative power, as it permitted presidential interdiction of trade without defining criteria for the application of the proposed restriction.
The finding thus differed from later rulings that argued that federal government action affecting intrastate production breached the Commerce Clause of the Constitution; in Panama v. Ryan, the Court found that Congress had violated the nondelegation doctrine by vesting the President with legislative powers without clear guidelines and giving the President enormous and unchecked powers. The omission of congressional guidance on state petroleum production ceilings occasioned the adverse ruling because it allowed the executive to assume the role of the legislature. Justice Cardozo dissented and claimed that the guidelines had been sufficient.
See also
Connally Hot Oil Act of 1935
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States energy case law
Category:1935 in United States case law
Category:United States nondelegation doctrine case law
Category:History of the petroleum industry in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Constitutional challenges to the New Deal
"""

From "Panetti v. Quarterman" ==> """
Panetti v. Quarterman, 551 U.S. 930 (2007), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States, ruling that criminal defendants sentenced to death may not be executed if they do not understand the reason for their imminent execution, and that once the state has set an execution date death-row inmates may litigate their competency to be executed in habeas corpus proceedings..  This decision reaffirmed the Court's prior holdings in Ford v. Wainwright,. and Stewart v. Martinez-Villareal..
Background
In 1992, Scott Panetti killed his mother-in-law and his father-in-law, the parents of his second wife, Sonja Alvarado. He then held his wife and daughter hostage for the night, and surrendered to police the next morning. Three years later, Panetti was tried in a Texas state court for capital murder. Panetti sought to represent himself, and so the trial court ordered a competency hearing. Panetti was found to be suffering from a "fragmented personality, delusions, and hallucinations" for which he had been hospitalized over 12 times and for which he had been prescribed high doses of powerful psychiatric drugs for schizophrenia.  Panetti's ex-wife testified at the competency hearing and described one of Panetti's psychotic episodes in 1986. During that episode, Panetti had "become convinced the devil had possessed their home and, in an effort to cleanse their surroundings, Panetti had buried a number of valuables next to the house and engaged in other rituals." Even with this testimony, Panetti was found competent to be tried and to waive his right to counsel.
A veteran of the US Navy, Panetti's defense at trial was that he was not guilty by reason of insanity. Standby counsel related that Panetti's behavior was "scary", "bizarre", and "trance-like." It was evident to standby counsel, based on Panetti's behavior both in private and before the jury, that Panetti was not competent, and that his behavior made a farce and mockery of the judicial process. Panetti had also allegedly stopped taking his medication a few months before the trial. Indeed, two months after the end of the trial, the trial court found Panetti incompetent to waive his right to state habeas counsel. Nevertheless, Panetti was convicted of capital murder and sentenced to death.
Panetti sought appellate review in the Texas courts, as well as state habeas relief. All these efforts were fruitless. The U.S. Supreme Court twice declined to review Panetti's case. Panetti then filed a federal habeas petition, which was denied, and that denial was affirmed by the Fifth Circuit. The U.S. Supreme Court again declined to review the case.
Once these federal habeas proceedings had ended, the state trial judge, Steven Ables, set an execution date of February 5, 2004. At this point, Panetti claimed that he was incompetent to be executed. The Texas Court of Criminal Appeals denied Panetti's appeal, and Panetti filed another federal habeas petition.  On February 4, 2004, the federal district court stayed Panetti's execution in order to allow the state courts to adjudicate Panetti's claim of mental incompetence. The state trial court, in turn, appointed two mental health experts to evaluate Panetti. Lawyers defending Panetti were given a one-week notice to also acquire mental health experts to also evaluate Panetti. Both of the experts for the state concluded that Panetti was malingering in order to avoid execution. Panetti responded by arguing that the trial court's procedures did not comply with the procedures set forth in Ford v. Wainwright. The state trial court responded by closing the case, ruling that Panetti did not show he was incompetent to be executed.  He did not appeal to either the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals or the U.S. Supreme Court.
Instead, he returned to federal court, where another hearing was held. After the hearing the district court concluded that the state courts had not complied with the procedural requirements of Ford. Nevertheless, it denied relief because, under Fifth Circuit precedent, it was enough that Panetti know simply that he was about to be executed and the "factual predicate" for the execution. The Fifth Circuit affirmed the denial of Panetti's habeas petition, and on January 4, 2007, the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to review the case.  The case was argued before the Supreme Court on April 17, 2007, with Texas Solicitor General Ted Cruz appearing for the state.https://www.oyez.org/cases/2006/06-6407 
Opinion of the Court
On June 28, 2007, the last day of the term, the Supreme Court reversed and remanded by a vote of 5-4, with Justice Anthony Kennedy writing for the majority.
Jurisdiction
The Court began its opinion by considering its jurisdiction. Panetti had not raised his claim that he was not competent to be executed – what lawyers call a Ford claim – in his first federal habeas petition. The Court therefore lacked jurisdiction to entertain it unless he could overcome the bar on "second or successive" habeas petitions imposed by the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act (AEDPA). The term "second or successive" is a term of art; not every subsequent habeas petition is subject to AEDPA's bar on second or successive habeas petitions. The Court ruled that Panetti's petition was not barred as "second or successive" because his Ford claim did not become ripe until his execution was imminent. It rejected the State's contrary argument because of the perverse results it would have generated – inmates could be forced to litigate their competency to be executed before any signs of mental illness had set in. "An empty formality requiring prisoners to file unripe Ford claims neither respects the limited legal resources available to the States nor encourages the exhaustion of state remedies."  Accordingly, Panetti's Ford claim was not barred by the second-or-successive rule, and the Court had jurisdiction to entertain Panetti's appeal.
Procedures for determining a Death Row inmate's competence to be executed
Under Ford, once a prisoner seeking a stay of execution makes a "substantial threshold showing of insanity", he must be afforded a fair hearing at which the question of his competence to be executed can be resolved. This means he must have an "opportunity to be heard" by an impartial decisionmaker. In other words, the legal determination of his competence to be executed cannot rest solely on the determination of experts, because doing so would prevent the inmate from offering evidence to rebut any expert's opinion that he was competent to be executed.
The Texas courts did not comply with these minimal procedures in Panetti's case. Panetti was entitled to the procedural protections of Ford because he had made the required threshold showing; indeed, if he had not done so, why had the state trial court appointed the mental health experts to evaluate him? The state courts refused to transcribe the proceedings, failed to keep Panetti's counsel apprised of the progress of Panetti's claim of incompetence, and arguably failed to hold the competency hearing required by Texas law. Most importantly, however, the Texas courts did not afford Panetti an opportunity to refute the opinions of the court-appointed experts.  Although counsel had asked the trial court to give him money to hire experts of his own, the trial court ended the case without ruling on that request. These deficiencies in the procedures the Texas courts used to determine that Panetti was competent to be executed led the Court to conclude that Panetti did not receive the minimal process due him under Ford.
Under AEDPA's standard for granting relief on a federal constitutional claim, the state court's resolution of that claim must be contrary to, or involve an unreasonable application of, clearly established federal law, as determined by the Supreme Court. Ford supplied the clearly established law by which to evaluate the Texas courts' treatment of Panetti's claim.  And even though the Ford standard is stated in general terms, it was clear to the Court that the procedures the Texas courts employed did not fit the bill. Because the Texas courts had unreasonably applied Ford when they adjudicated Panetti's claim of incompetence, the Court was free to determine what the proper procedure should have been, and whether Panetti was, in fact, not competent to be executed.
Substantive competency determinations under Ford
At an evidentiary hearing in the federal district court, four experts testified on Panetti's behalf. One expert opined that Panetti suffered from schizo-affective disorder, resulting in a genuine delusion regarding the reason for his execution. The expert stated that Panetti believed that his execution was part of "spiritual warfare" between the "demons and the forces of the darkness and God and the angels and the forces of light." Panetti understands that the State claims it is executing him for the murders, but believes that the State's reason is a sham and the real reason is that the State wants to stop Panetti from preaching. Panetti's other experts testified to similar conclusions.
The State's witnesses conceded that Panetti was mentally ill, although they resisted the conclusion that Panetti was not competent to be executed. They pointed to the fact that at times Panetti was "clear and lucid", and could understand "certain concepts". Panetti's experts reminded the court that schizophrenia does not diminish a person's cognitive abilities, such that during short interactions the patient may appear lucid. Over time, however, the patient's mental illness would become apparent.  Based on this testimony, the Fifth Circuit had held that Panetti's delusions did not render him incompetent. But the Court held that the Fifth Circuit's interpretation of Ford had been "flawed".
For the Fifth Circuit, three of the district conclusions were sufficient to sustain the ruling that Panetti was competent. First, Panetti knew that he had committed the murders. Second, Panetti knew that he was about to be executed.  And third, Panetti knew that the State's given reason for executing him was the fact that he had committed the murders. These three facts allowed the Fifth Circuit to ignore the delusions that prevented Panetti from understanding that the reason for his execution was the fact that he had committed the murders. In the Fifth Circuit's view, Ford required mere awareness of the State's reason rather than a rational understanding of it.
The Eighth Amendment forbids executing the insane because doing so offends human decency in that it serves neither the goal of retribution or deterrence. "The potential for a prisoner's recognition of the severity of the offense and the objective of community vindication are called into question, however, if the prisoner's mental state is so distorted by a mental illness that his awareness of the crime and punishment has little or no relation to the understanding of those concepts shared by the community as a whole." This is what the Court in Ford was referring to when it held that an inmate who lacks a rational understanding of the reason for his execution. A death-row inmate who is "so callous as to be unrepentant, so self-centered and devoid of compassion as to lack all sense of guilt, so adept at transferring blame to others as to be considered, at least in the colloquial sense, to be out of touch with reality" may still have a "rational understanding" of the reason for his execution. Panetti's claim was that, by virtue of his mental illness, his psychotic disorder, he lacked such a "rational understanding". Both the Texas courts' procedural missteps and the Fifth Circuit's substantive definition of incompetence precluded consideration of this contention.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Clarence Thomas dissented from all three of the Court's legal conclusions – that Panetti's Ford claim was not second or successive, that the Texas courts did not afford Panetti the procedural protections required by Ford, and that the Fifth Circuit did not apply the correct substantive standard under Ford.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 551
 List of criminal competencies
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
 [  Question presented]
 [  Supplemental briefing order]
 [  Transcript of oral argument]
 Counsel for Panetti - Texas Defender Service
  On the Docket, Medill School of Journalism, Northwestern University
  Merits brief of petitioner
  Amicus brief of the American Bar Association
  Brief of the State of Texas as respondent
  Amicus brief of the Criminal Justice Legal Foundation
 "Victims Await Final Verdict" by Ingrid Norton Background on lead-up to Supreme Court case. Originally published 4/17/07 in The Daily Texan
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Capital punishment in Texas
Category:Ted Cruz
"""

From "Papachristou v. City of Jacksonville" ==> """
Papachristou v. Jacksonville, 405 U.S. 156 (1972), was a United States Supreme Court case resulting in a Jacksonville vagrancy ordinance being declared unconstitutionally vague. The case was argued on December 8, 1971, and decided on February 24, 1972. The respondent was the city of Jacksonville, Florida.
 Facts 
Eight defendants were involved in this case.. Each had been convicted of violating a Jacksonville, Florida, vagrancy ordinance that criminalized vagrancy, loitering, and related activity.
 Vagrancy ordinance 
Jacksonville's ordinance at the time of the defendants' arrests and conviction was the following:Papachristou, 405 U.S. at 156 n.1, quoting Jacksonville Ordinance Code s 1—8 (1965).Rogues and vagabonds, or dissolute persons who go about begging, common gamblers, persons who use juggling or unlawful games or plays, common drunkards, common night walkers, thieves, pilferers or pickpockets, traders in stolen property, lewd, wanton and lascivious persons, keepers of gambling places, common railers and brawlers, persons wandering or strolling around from place to place without any lawful purpose or object, habitual loafers, disorderly persons, persons neglecting all lawful business and habitually spending their time by frequenting houses of ill fame, gaming houses, or places where alcoholic beverages are sold or served, persons able to work but habitually living upon the earnings of their wives or minor children shall be deemed vagrants and, upon conviction in the Municipal Court shall be punished as provided for Class D offenses. Class D offenses at the time of these arrests and convictions were punishable by 90 days' imprisonment, a $500 fine, or both.
 Defendants' conduct 
Four of the eight defendants—Margaret Papachristou, Betty Calloway, Eugene Eddie Melton, and Leonard Johnson—were charged with "prowling by auto" under the Jacksonville vagrancy ordinance.Papachristou, 405 U.S. at 158. Papachristou and Calloway were white women; Melton and Johnson, black men. At the time of their arrest, which was early on a Sunday morning, they were driving in Calloway's car in Jacksonville. The arresting officers denied that the racial makeup of the car's passengers was a factor in the arrest; rather, the officers claimed that they arrested the defendants because they had stopped near a used-car lot that had been broken into several times.Papachristou, 405 U.S. at 159. The morning they were arrested, however, there had been no evidence of breaking and entering. Shortly after the defendants' arrest, someone from the police department had called Papachristou's parents and told them she had "been out with a negro."Petitioner's Brief, Papachristou v. City of Jacksonville, 1971 WL 133167 (U.S.), 7 (U.S., 2004).
A fifth defendant, Jimmy Lee Smith, was charged with being a "vagabond" under the vagrancy ordinance. He and a companion had been waiting for a friend to lend them a car when he was arrested. It was before 10 a.m. on a weekday. It was a cold morning, so Smith and his companion had walked into a dry cleaning store to wait. The dry cleaning store owners asked Smith and his companion to leave, and they did. Smith and his companion then walked back and forth a few times over a two-block stretch looking for their friend. The dry cleaning store owners became suspicious and contacted the police, who searched the two men. The police found no weapon, but proceeded to arrest them. The arresting officers said they arrested Smith and his companion because they didn't have identification and because they didn't believe their story that they were waiting for a friend. Smith was also a "part-time organizer for a Negro political group" at the time he was arrested.
Henry Edward Heath was arrested for being a "common thief" under the ordinance. He had driven up to his girlfriend's home, where police officers were already in the process of arresting another man.Papachristou, 405 U.S. at 160. When he started to back out of the driveway, the officers told him to stop and get out of his car. He did so, and officers searched him and his car. The officers found nothing but arrested him, charging him with being a "common thief" because that was allegedly his reputation. (Heath's co-defendant, who was not one of the eight defendants in the Papachristou case, had been charged with loitering for standing in the driveway; the officers conceded that he was only doing so at their command.)
Thomas Owen Campbell was also charged with being a "common thief." He was arrested as he was going home early one morning. Officers claimed to have stopped him because he was driving quickly, but they did not charge him with speeding.
Finally, Hugh Brown was charged with "disorderly loitering on street" and "disorderly conduct -- resisting arrest with violence." He was arrested when a police officer saw him leave a hotel. The officer summoned Brown to his police cruiser and began to search him. A police witness later testified he had a reputation for being a "thief, narcotics pusher, and generally opprobrious character." As the officer was searching Brown, he touched a pocket where Brown was storing heroin, and Brown began to resist. Brown was charged under the Jacksonville vagrancy ordinance; he was also charged with a narcotics violation, but that was .Papachristou, 405 U.S. at 161.
 Procedural history 
 Jacksonville Municipal Court convictions 
Each of the eight defendants in this case was first convicted in the Jacksonville, Florida, Municipal Court for violating Jacksonville's vagrancy ordinance.
 Circuit Court decisions 
The municipal court convictions were then affirmed at the state trial court level. A Florida Circuit Court judge held that the convictions were not unconstitutional.
 Brown v. City of Jacksonville 
After losing in municipal court and at the trial court, the defendants sought review in one of Florida's intermediate appellate courts, the District Court of Appeal of Florida, First Circuit. The case at this phase was named Brown v. City of Jacksonville after defendant Hugh Brown; it would later be renamed after Margaret Papachristou as lead petitioner.
The three-judge panel unanimously dismissed the defendants' petition for review, on June 9, 1970.Brown, 236 So. 2d at 142.
The appellate court held that the trial court had not exceeded its authority or failed to uphold the law when it affirmed the defendants' municipal court convictions.Brown, 236 So. 2d at 141-42. Rather, the court explained that the trial court had properly followed existing Florida state law at that time, given that in a previous case, Johnson v. State,See  the Florida Supreme Court had upheld the constitutionality of a statute similar to the vagrancy ordinance at issue.
 Writ of certiorari to U.S. Supreme Court 
On June 14, 1971, the U.S. Supreme Court granted the petitioners' petition for writ of certiorari..
Decision
Justice Douglas delivered the opinion of the court. It was a 7-0 decision, with Justices Powell and Rehnquist not taking part in deciding the case.Papachristou, 405 U.S. at 171.
 Holding 
The Supreme Court held that Jacksonville's vagrancy ordinance was unconstitutionally vague.
 Reasoning 
The vagrancy ordinance was unconstitutionally "void for vagueness" for two reasons.Papachristou, 405 U.S. at 162. First, it failed to provide fair notice to individuals about what conduct was forbidden by the law. Second, it encouraged arbitrary arrests and convictions.
 Insufficient notice 
The Court cited a series of Supreme Court precedent standing for the proposition that a law must give fair notice about what conduct it prohibits, including Lanzetta v. New Jersey, Connally v. General Construction Co., and United States v. L. Cohen Grocery Co.
The Court reasoned that the Jacksonville ordinance  did not give sufficient notice about what was forbidden and that, as written, it could in fact criminalize a variety of innocent activities.
For example, the ordinance forbid "habitually living without visible means of support," which the Court noted may be involuntary.Papachristou, 405 U.S. at 163. Similarly, the ordinance labeled as vagrants men who were "able to work but habitually liv[e] upon the earnings of their wives or minor children." The Court reasoned that this would encompass both men who were unemployed due to a recession or structural employment, as well as men who had married rich women.
The ordinance also prohibited "nightwalking," which the Court observed that many people do simply when they can't sleep, and "wandering or strolling around from place to place without any lawful purpose or object."Papachristou, 405 U.S. at 163-64. Far from being criminal, the Court stated, wandering about with no purpose is an activity that is "historically part of the amenities of life as we have known them," and has even been extolled by the likes of Walt Whitman, Vachel Lindsay, and Henry Thoreau.Papachristou, 405 U.S. at 164. The Court held that such an activity is not only inherently innocent but also constitutionally protected.
 Arbitrary arrests 
The Court held that the vagrancy ordinance was also unconstitutionally vague because it gave too much arbitrary power to the police. ("Another aspect of the ordinance's vagueness appears when we focus, not on the lack of notice given a potential offender, but on the effect of the unfettered discretion it places in the hands of the Jacksonville police."Papachristou, 405 U.S. at 168.)
The Court pointed to the dangers inherent in such a law, which could offer a pretense for a bad-faith arrest and which "permits and encourages an arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement of the law."Papachristou, 405 U.S. at 170. The Court acknowledged that poor people and minorities would often be the ones implicated by this kind of imprecise law, rendering the equal and even-handed administration of justice impossible.Papachristou, 405 U.S. at 170-71.
The Court also rejected the City's argument that the vagrancy ordinance allowed them to "nip crime in the bud" as "too extravagant to deserve extended treatment."
 Impact 
 "Loitering-plus" laws 
Papachristou did not strike down loitering and vagrancy laws altogether. Rather, by declaring Jacksonville's ordinance unconstitutionally vague, the decision imposed clarity requirements on future laws of this type. It also strongly suggested that criminalization of "mere" loitering or vagrancy would be unconstitutional.
Thus, in response to Papachristou, many local governments amended their loitering and vagrancy laws in an attempt to make them constitutional.Peter W. Poulos, Chicago's Ban on Gang Loitering: Making Sense of Vagueness and Overbreadth in Loitering Laws, 83 Calif. L. Rev. 379 (1995).Joel D. Berg, The Troubled Constitutionality of Antigang Loitering Laws, 69 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 461 (1993). Available at: https://scholarship.kentlaw.iit.edu/cklawreview/vol69/iss2/11 Cities no longer prohibited simply loitering or wandering around but instead enacted so-called "loitering-plus" laws that imposed additional elements.
For example, some loitering-plus laws require one or more of the following: that the individual lack an apparent or sufficient purpose for loitering, that the individual fails to give a satisfactory explanation for loitering, that the individual fails to obey a police order to disperse, that the individual obstructs others from passing, and/or that the individual constitutes a threat to public safety.
 Examples of loitering-plus laws 
Examples of loitering-plus laws that municipalities enacted or kept on the books after the Papachristou decision include:
 a Florida ordinance forbidding loitering or prowling "in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals, under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property"
 an Iowa ordinance forbidding individuals "to collect, assemble, or group together, and after [doing so] . . . to stand, or loiter . . . to the hindrance or obstruction to free passage of any person or persons"
 an Illinois ordinance forbidding any habitual drunkard, person known to be a drug addict or prostitute, or person previously convicted of a felony to congregate in public with other people of these classes
 City of Chicago v. Morales 
The loitering-plus laws were still subject to the same judicial scrutiny as previous ordinances that prohibited mere loitering or vagrancy. In 1999, the ACLU challenged the constitutionality of Chicago's loitering-plus law, in a case called City of Chicago v. Morales.. The ACLU brought the case on behalf of 66 defendants who were arrested and prosecuted under the ordinance.
The ordinance at issue in that case, entitled the Gang Congregation Ordinance, forbade "criminal street gang members" from loitering in public places, defined as "remain[ing] in any one place with no apparent purpose." Under the ordinance, a police officer who observed someone whom he or she reasonably believed to be a gang member loitering with one or more other people could order them to disperse. Anyone who did not obey would be considered in violation of the ordinance and subject to arrest.
A plurality of the Supreme Court declared the Chicago ordinance unconstitutionally vague for similar reasons as had doomed the Jacksonville ordinance.
Papachristou has been cited in over 1,500 opinions since 1972.
 See also 
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 405
Kolender v. Lawson, 461 U.S. 352 (1983)
Vagueness doctrine
References
Further reading
 Malone, Mark (1982). "Homelessness in a Modern Urban Setting." Fordham Law Review. 10 (4): 749–781. Available at: https://heinonline.org/HOL/Page?handle=hein.journals/frdurb10&id=767&collection=journals
 Peter W. Poulos, Chicago's Ban on Gang Loitering: Making Sense of Vagueness and Overbreadth in Loitering Laws, 83 Calif. L. Rev. 379 (1995). Available at: https://scholarship.law.berkeley.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1696&context=californialawreview.
 Joel D. Berg, The Troubled Constitutionality of Antigang Loitering Laws, 69 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 461 (1993). Available at: https://scholarship.kentlaw.iit.edu/cklawreview/vol69/iss2/11
 "Validity of Vagrancy Statutes and Ordinances," 25 A.L.R.3d 792 (Originally published in 1969).
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:20th century in Jacksonville, Florida
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:Void for vagueness case law
Category:Vagrancy laws
Category:Homelessness in the United States
"""

From "Papish v. Board of Curators of University of Missouri" ==> """
Papish v. Board of Curators of University of Missouri is a court case that was heard and decided by the U.S. Supreme Court on March 19, 1973.
In 1969, Barbara Susan Papish, a graduate student at the University of Missouri, distributed a newspaper containing a political cartoon of policemen raping the Statue of Liberty and the Goddess of Justice with the caption "With Liberty and Justice for All." She and three of her classmates were arrested for "possessing and attempting to sell obscene literature". The university tried to expel Papish for violating their student conduct code that prohibited "indecent conduct or speech" and the lower courts agreed. In 1973, the Supreme Court overturned the lower ruling, rejecting the notion that such content-based discipline could be justified, and ruled that public universities couldn't punish students for offensive speech that didn't cause disruption or interfere with the rights of others. The Court held that the school's expulsion of Papish violated the First Amendment.
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Freedom of speech in the United States
Category:Student rights case law in the United States
Category:Higher education case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1973 in United States case law
"""

From "The Paquete Habana" ==> """
The Paquete Habana; The Lola, 175 U.S. 677 (1900), was a landmark decision of the United States Supreme Court concerning the applicability and recognition of international law by the United States. The Court held that the capture of fishing vessels as prizes of war violated customary international law, which is integrated with U.S. law and binding as such.John O. McGinnis and Ilya Somin, "Should International Law Be Part of Our Law?" Stanford Law Review at 59 STAN. L. REV. 1175 (2007), [www.stanfordlawreview.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/3/2010/04/mcginnis.pdf www.stanfordlawreview.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/3/2010/04/mcginnis.pdf] Paquete Habana influenced subsequent court decisions that incorporated international law regarding other matters.Stucky, Scott W. (1985) "The Paquete Habana: A Case History in the Development of International Law," University of Baltimore Law Review: Vol. 15: Iss. 1, Article 2. Available at: http://scholarworks.law.ubalt.edu/ublr/vol15/iss1/2 The case is also notable for citing a wide breadth of historical and international sources, including jurists from around the world and foreign state practices going back centuries.
Background of the case
In April 1898, two fishing vessels, the Paquete Habana and the Lola, separately sailed from the Spanish colony of Cuba. Both were eventually captured by merchant vessels comprising the United States blockade of the island, which, unbeknownst to the crew, had been instituted amid rising tensions between the two countries. President William McKinley proclaimed that the blockade was "in pursuance of the laws of the United States, and the law of nations applicable to such cases." 
Shortly thereafter, the Spanish–American War was officially declared, and McKinley issued another proclamation stating that the war would be conducted "in harmony with the present views of nations and sanctioned by their recent practice" and establishing rules for the capture of prizes; however, there was no mention of fishing vessels. The Paquete Habana and the Lola were ultimately taken to Key West, Florida, where they were auctioned by the federal district court, which has jurisdiction over prize cases.
Admiral William T. Sampson, who commanded the blockade, justified the seizures by stating that most fishing vessels flying under the Spanish banner were manned by well trained seamen with prior naval experience who could be called up to fight for Spain. The U.S. also relied on the longstanding international practice of capturing enemy vessels as prizes of war.
The owners of the vessels appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, citing a centuries-long tradition of nations exempting fishing vessels from prize capture, even during war. At the time of capture, neither vessel had evidence of aiding the enemy, no arms were found on board, and no attempts were made to either run the blockade or resist capture. Pointing to McKinley's proclamation that the blockade conformed with international law, the claimants thus argued that the blockade should not have captured the vessels as prizes.
On appeal, the U.S. government argued that it had complied with international law, under which there was precedent for the executive of a nation, through his military commanders, to exercise discretion as to whether there was an exemption of fishing vessels from prize capture. Notably, the government never contested that it must abide by international law. 
Both parties in the case were invoking customary international law—the prevailing and long-running practices and norms that are observed and accepted by most countries as obligations—but differed as to what it permitted with respect to prizes.
Decision
In a 6–3 decision authored by Justice Gray, the Supreme Court ruled that coastal fishing vessels are exempt from capture as prizes of war under customary international law, which, barring a "controlling executive or judicial decision," must be incorporated into the corpus of U.S. law. 
The Court cited lengthy legal precedents in support of this conclusion, which it described as an "ancient usage among civilized nations, beginning centuries ago, and gradually ripening into a rule of international law." In 1403, King Henry IV of England decreed his officers leave fisherman alone during times of war. He then signed a treaty with France reaffirming this act between both parties. Similarly, in 1521, a treaty between Emperor Charles V of the Holy Roman Empire and Francis I of France exempted fishing vessels from capture, on the basis that both nations would face widespread hunger if fishermen did not feel safe to set sail.
Justice Gray also relied on the theories and opinions of contemporary jurists and commentators from across the world to buttress the Court's reasoning, decades before such scholarly legal work would be codified as a primary source of international law:[A]t the present day, by the general consent of the civilized nations of the world, and independently of any express treaty or other public act, it is an established rule of international law, founded on considerations of humanity. . . and of the mutual convenience of belligerent states, that coast fishing vessels, with their implements and supplies, cargoes and crews, unarmed and honestly pursuing their peaceful calling of catching and bringing in fresh fish, are exempt from capture as prize of war.Among the most oft-cited and famous quotes of the decision concerned the relationship of international law to domestic U.S. law:International law is part of our law, and must be ascertained and administered by the courts of justice of appropriate jurisdiction as often as questions of right depending upon it are duly presented for their determination. For this purpose, where there is no treaty and no controlling executive or legislative act or judicial decision, resort must be had to the customs and usages of civilized nations, and, as evidence of these, to the works of jurists and commentators who by years of labor, research, and experience have made themselves peculiarly well acquainted with the subjects of which they treat. Such works are resorted to by judicial tribunals, not for the speculations of their authors concerning what the law ought to be, but for trustworthy evidence of what the law really is.Eric George Reeves, United States V. Ja Vino: Reconsidering The Relationship Of Customary International Law To Domestic Law, 50 Wash. & Lee L. Rev. 877 (1993), https://scholarlycommons.law.wlu.edu/wlulr/vol50/iss2/17The Supreme Court decision reversed the district court and ordered that the proceeds of the auctions, as well as any profits made from the vessels' cargo, be restored to the claimants "with damages and costs."
Fuller's dissent
Justice Fuller delivered a dissenting opinion, which was joined by Justices Harlan and McKenna. Fuller essentially agreed with the federal government's position, arguing that the capture of fishing vessels as prizes was both in accordance with customary international law and militarily necessary, and that any exemption is under the discretion of the President as the nation's executive.
See also
 Garcia-Mir v. Meese
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 175
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States admiralty case law
Category:1900 in international relations
Category:1900 in United States case law
Category:Cuba–United States relations
Category:Spanish–American War
Category:Prize warfare
 External links 
The Paquete Habana Case Brief
Abridged version of the case
"""

From "Parents Involved in Community Schools v. Seattle School District No. 1" ==> """
Parents Involved in Community Schools v. Seattle School District No. 1, 551 U.S. 701 (2007), also known as the PICS case, is a United States Supreme Court case which found it unconstitutional for a school district to use race as a factor in assigning students to schools in order to bring its racial composition in line with the composition of the district as a whole, unless it was remedying a prior history of de jure segregation. Chief Justice Roberts wrote in his plurality opinion that “The way to stop discrimination on the basis of race is to stop discriminating on the basis of race.” Some have credited this decision as contributing to schools resegregating in the United States, and it's been noted that American schools are more racially segregated now than in the late 1960s.
At issue were efforts for voluntary school desegregation and integration in Seattle, Washington, and Louisville, Kentucky. Both school districts voluntarily used individualized racial classifications to achieve diversity and/or to avoid racial isolation through student assignment.
The Court recognized that seeking diversity and avoiding racial segregation in schools are compelling state interests. However, the Court struck down both school districts' assignment plans, finding that the plans were not sufficiently "narrowly tailored", a legal term that suggests that the means or method being employed (in this case, a student assignment plan based on individualized racial classifications) is closely and narrowly tied to the ends (the stated goals of achieving diversity and/or avoiding racial isolation).
The Parents Involved decision was a "split decision." The Court split 4–1–4 on key aspects of the case, with Justice Kennedy writing the swing vote opinion and agreeing with four Justices (Roberts, Scalia, Thomas, and Alito) that the programs used by Seattle and Louisville did not pass constitutional muster (because the districts failed to demonstrate that their plans were sufficiently narrowly tailored), but Kennedy also found, along with four Justices (Breyer, Stevens, Souter, and Ginsburg), that compelling interests exist in avoiding racial isolation and promoting diversity. With respect to avoiding racial isolation, Kennedy wrote, "A compelling interest exists in avoiding racial isolation, an interest that a school district, in its discretion and expertise, may choose to pursue." He went on to say, "What the government is not permitted to do, absent a showing of necessity not made here, is to classify every student on the basis of race and to assign each of them to schools based on that classification."
According to Kennedy, "The cases here were argued upon the assumption, and come to us on the premise, that the discrimination in question did not result from de jure actions." That point was challenged in Justice Breyer's dissent (joined by Stevens, Souter and Ginsberg). Justice Breyer questioned the utility "of looking simply to whether earlier school segregation was de jure or de facto in order to draw firm lines separating the constitutionally permissible from the constitutionally forbidden use of 'race-conscious' criteria." Justice Breyer noted, "No one here disputes that Louisville's segregation was de jure" and cites a 1956 memo where the Seattle School Board admitted its schools were de jure segregated as well. All of the dissenting Justices acknowledged that "the Constitution does not impose a duty to desegregate upon districts" if they have not practiced racial discrimination. However, the dissenters argued that the Constitution permits such desegregation even though it does not require it.
The 4–1–4 split makes PICS somewhat similar to the 1978 Bakke case, which held that affirmative action was unconstitutional in the case directly before the Court. Nonetheless, Bakke was used to uphold the validity of affirmative action programs that fostered diversity in higher education for a quarter of a century. To that end, in 2011, the U.S. Department of Education and U.S. Department of Justice jointly issued Guidance on the Voluntary Use of Race to Achieve Diversity and Avoid Racial Isolation in Elementary and Secondary Schools, acknowledging the flexibility that school districts have in taking proactive steps to meet the compelling interests of promoting diversity and avoiding racial isolation within the parameters of current law.
Background
Seattle School District
The Seattle School District allowed students to apply to any high school in the District. Since certain schools often became oversubscribed when too many students chose them as their first choice, the District used a system of tiebreakers to decide which students would be admitted to the popular schools. The second most important tiebreaker was a racial factor intended to maintain racial diversity. If the racial demographics of any school's student body deviated by more than a predetermined number of percentage points from those of Seattle's total student population (approximately 41% white and 59% non-white), the racial tiebreaker went into effect. At a particular school either whites or non-whites could be favored for admission depending on which race would bring the racial balance closer to the goal.  No distinction was made between various categories of non-whites; Asian-Americans, Latinos, Native Americans, and African-Americans were all treated solely as "non-white" for purposes of the tiebreaker.
A non-profit group, Parents Involved in Community Schools, sued the District, arguing that the racial tiebreaker violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment as well as the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Washington state law. The Western District of Washington dismissed the suit, upholding the tiebreaker. On appeal, a three-judge panel the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed, but upon en banc rehearing the court affirmed the lower court decision.
Under the Supreme Court's precedents on racial classification in higher education, Grutter v. Bollinger and Gratz v. Bollinger, race-based classifications must be directed toward a "compelling government interest" and must be "narrowly tailored" to that interest. Applying these precedents to K-12 education, the Circuit Court found that the tiebreaker scheme was not narrowly tailored. The District then petitioned for an en banc ruling by a panel of 11 Ninth Circuit judges. The en banc panel came to the opposite conclusion and upheld the tiebreaker. The majority ruled that the District had a compelling interest in maintaining racial diversity. Applying a test from Grutter, the Circuit Court also ruled that the tiebreaker plan was narrowly tailored, because 1) the District did not employ quotas, 2) the District had considered race-neutral alternatives, 3) the plan caused no undue harm to races, and 4) the plan had an ending point.
Jefferson County
This case is the last of a trilogy of cases against Jefferson County Public Schools (JCPS), including McFarland v. Jefferson County Public Schools, and their use of race in assigning students to schools. The first case started in 1998 when five African American high school students sued JCPS to allow them to attend Central High School, a magnet school. The suit alleged that they were denied entrance because they were black. In 2000, Federal Judge John Heyburn, after finding that the JCPS school system did not need to be under a court-ordered desegregation policy, ruled that race could not be used for student assignment placement in the JCPS school system in regard to their magnet school programs. In 2004, he ruled the same for the traditional schools, but allowed the regular public schools to use race as the admission requirement. It is this part that went before the US Supreme Court as the other two cases were not appealed by JCPS.
JCPS is the 26th largest school district in the United States. Students are assigned to school based on the race makeup of each school, no less than 15%, no more than 50%. Race is defined as Black and "Other". Asian, Hispanic, White, etc. are classified as "Other". Magnet and Traditional are exempt from this ratio per the 2000 and 2003 Court Order. Louisville's population is about 58% White; 38% Black, 2% Asian, 1.3% Hispanic.
Opinion of the Court
Chief Justice John Roberts wrote the opinion of the court as to Parts I, II, III-A and III-C.
Part I recounted the background of the plans of the two school boards.
Part II dismissed the respondent's attempts to argue that Parents Involved lacks standing.
First, Seattle claimed that none of the current members of Parents Involved can claim an imminent injury. Roberts wrote:  "The fact that it is possible that children of group members will not be denied admission to a school based on their race—because they choose an undersubscribed school or an oversubscribed school in which their race is an advantage—does not eliminate the injury claimed.
Second, Seattle noted that it has ceased using the racial tiebreaker pending the outcome of this litigation. "But the district vigorously defends the constitutionality of its race-based program, and nowhere suggests that if this litigation is resolved in its favor it will not resume using race to assign students. Voluntary cessation does not moot a case or controversy unless 'subsequent events ma[ke] it absolutely clear that the allegedly wrongful behavior could not reasonably be expected to recur,'"Roberts provides the following string citation:
"Friends of Earth, Inc. v. Laidlaw Environmental Services (TOC), Inc., 528 U.S. 167, 189, 120 S. Ct. 693, 145 L. Ed. 2d 610 (2000) (quoting United States v. Concentrated Phosphate Export Ass'n, 393 U.S. 199, 203, 89 S. Ct. 361, 21 L. Ed. 2d 344 (1968); internal quotation marks omitted)" a heavy burden that Seattle has clearly not met.Parents Involved in Cmty. Sch. v. Seattle Sch. Dist. No. 1, 551 U.S. 701 (U.S. 2007) http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?court=us&vol=000&invol=05-908 
Part III A first reiterated that "when the government distributes burdens or benefits on the basis of individual racial classifications, that action is reviewed under strict scrutiny."Parents Involved in Cmty. Sch. v. Seattle Sch. Dist. No. 1, 551 U.S. 701 (U.S. 2007).  Here Roberts provides the following string citation:
"Johnson v. California, 543 U.S. 499, 505–506, 125 S. Ct. 1141, 160 L. Ed. 2d 949 (2005);  [*2752] Grutter v. Bollinger, 539 U.S. 306, 326, 123 S. Ct. 2325, 156 L. Ed. 2d 304 (2003); Adarand, supra, at 224, 115 S. Ct. 2097, 132 L. Ed. 2d 158.
"
This is because "'racial classifications are simply too pernicious to permit any but the most exact connection between justification and classification.'" quoting Gratz v. Bollinger, 539 U.S. 244, 270, 123 S. Ct. 2411, 156 L. Ed. 2d 257 (2003) (quoting [***38]  Fullilove v. Klutznick, 448 U.S. 448, 537, 100 S. Ct. 2758, 65 L. Ed. 2d 902 (1980) (Stevens, J., dissenting); brackets omitted). In order to survive strict scrutiny analysis, "a narrowly tailored plan" must be presented in order to achieve a "compelling government interest."Roberts cites Adarand, supra, at 227, 115 S. Ct. 2097, 132 L. Ed. 2d 158.
Roberts noted that prior Supreme Court cases had recognized two compelling interests for the use of race.Parents Involved in Cmty. Sch. v. Seattle Sch. Dist. No. 1, 551 U.S. 701 (U.S. 2007)
First, "remedying the effects of past intentional discrimination."Here Roberts provides the following string citation:
"See Freeman v. Pitts, 503 U.S. 467, 494, 112 S. Ct. 1430, 118 L. Ed. 2d 108 (1992)."
But the Seattle schools had never been segregated by law; and the Kentucky schools, though previously segregated by law, had their desegregation decree dissolved by a District Court in 2000 on the finding the school district had "eliminated the vestiges associated with the former policy of segregation and its pernicious effects".Parents Involved, 551 U.S. 701 (2007)
Neither school could plead this compelling interest, because "[w]e have emphasized that the harm being remedied by mandatory desegregation plans is the harm that is traceable to segregation, and that 'the Constitution is not violated by racial imbalance in the schools, without more.'"Here, Roberts provides the following string cite:
Milliken v. Bradley, 433 U.S. 267, 280, n. 14, 97 S. Ct. 2749, 53 L. Ed. 2d 745 (1977). See also Freeman, supra, at 495–496, 112 S. Ct. 1430, 118 L. Ed. 2d 108; Dowell, 498 U.S., at 248, 111 S. Ct. 630, 112 L. Ed. 2d 715; Milliken v. Bradley, 418 U.S. 717, 746, 94 S. Ct. 3112, 41 L. Ed. 2d 1069 (1974).
Second, "the interest in diversity in higher education", as upheld in Grutter v. Bollinger.
But Roberts distinguished Grutter from this case, and argued that this case was more similar to Gratz v. Bollinger. In Grutter, the interest was student body diversity "in the context of higher education", and was not focused on race alone but encompassed "all factors that may contribute to student body diversity".Id., at 337, 123 S. Ct. 2325, 156 L. Ed. 2d 304: "[The law school's] policy makes clear there are many possible bases for diversity admissions, and provides examples of admittees who have lived or traveled widely abroad, are fluent in several languages, have overcome personal adversity and family hardship, have exceptional records of extensive community service, and have had successful careers in other fields." Id., at 338, 123 S. Ct. 2325, 156 L. Ed. 2d 304 (brackets and internal quotation marks omitted).  The Grutter Court quoted the articulation of diversity from Regents of Univ. of Cal. v. Bakke, noting that "it is not an interest in simple ethnic diversity, in which a specified percentage of the student body is in effect guaranteed to be members of selected ethnic groups, that can justify the use of race."Roberts provides the following citation:
"Grutter, supra, at 324–325, 123 S. Ct. 2325, 156 L. Ed. 2d 304 (citing and quoting Bakke, supra, at 314–315, 98 S. Ct. 2733, 57 L. Ed. 2d 750 (opinion of Powell, J.); brackets and internal quotation marks omitted)." What was upheld in Grutter was consideration of "a far broader array of qualifications and characteristics of which racial or ethnic origin is but a single though important element."539 U.S., at 325, 123 S. Ct. 2325, 156 L. Ed. 2d 304 (quoting Bakke, supra, at 315, 98 S. Ct. 2733, 57 L. Ed. 2d 750 (opinion of Powell, J.); internal quotation marks omitted). "The entire gist of the analysis in Grutter was that the admissions program at issue there focused on each applicant as an individual, and not simply as a member of a particular racial group."  As the Grutter Court explained, "[t]he importance of this individualized consideration in the context of a race-conscious admissions program is paramount."  The point of the narrow tailoring analysis in which the Grutter Court engaged was to ensure that the use of racial classifications was indeed part of a broader assessment of diversity, and not simply an effort to achieve racial balance, which the Court explained would be "patently unconstitutional."Roberts cites to: "Id., at 330, 123 S. Ct. 2325, 156 L. Ed. 2d 304."  In the present cases, by contrast, race is not considered as part of a broader effort to achieve "exposure to widely diverse people, cultures, ideas, and viewpoints", ibid.; race, for some students, is determinative standing alone.  Even when it comes to race, the plans here employ only a limited notion of diversity, viewing race exclusively in white/nonwhite terms in Seattle and black/"other" terms in Jefferson County. "The way Seattle classifies its students bears this out. Upon enrolling their child with the district, parents are required to identify their child as a member of a particular racial group. If a parent identifies more than one race on the form, "[t]he application will not be accepted and, if necessary, the enrollment service person taking the application will indicate one box.""Parents Involved, Note 11  Furthermore, Roberts wrote:
In upholding the admissions plan in Grutter ... this Court relied upon considerations unique to institutions of higher education, noting that in light of "the expansive freedoms of speech and thought associated with the university environment, universities occupy a special niche in our constitutional tradition."Roberts cites to:  "539 U.S., at 329, 334, 123 S. Ct. 2325, 156 L. Ed. 2d 304. See also Bakke, 438 U.S., at 312, 313, 98 S. Ct. 2733, 57 L. E. 2d 750 (opinion of Powell, J.)." The Court explained that "[c]ontext matters" in applying strict scrutiny, and repeatedly noted that it was addressing the use of race "in the context of higher education."Roberts cites to:  Grutter, supra, at 327, 328, 334, 123 S. Ct. 2325, 156 L. Ed. 2d 304. The Court in Grutter expressly articulated key limitations on its holding—defining a specific type of broad-based diversity and noting the unique context of higher education—but these limitations were largely disregarded by the lower courts in extending Grutter to uphold race-based assignments in elementary and secondary schools. The present cases are not governed by Grutter.
Part III B (joined only by a plurality of the Court) rejected the notion that racial balancing could be a compelling state interest, as to do so "would justify the imposition of racial proportionality throughout American society, contrary to our repeated recognition that "[a]t the heart of the Constitution's guarantee of equal protection lies the simple command that the Government must treat citizens as individuals, not as simply components of a racial, religious, sexual or national class."Here Roberts provides the following string citation:
"Miller v. Johnson, 515 U.S. 900, 911, 115 S. Ct. 2475, 132 L. Ed. 2d 762 (1995) (quoting Metro Broadcasting, 497 U.S., at 602, 110 S. Ct. 2997, 111 L. Ed. 2d 445 (O'Connor, J., dissenting); internal quotation marks omitted)."  Allowing racial balancing as a compelling end in itself would "effectively assur[e] that race will always be relevant in American life, and that the 'ultimate goal' of 'eliminating entirely from governmental decisionmaking such irrelevant factors as a human being's race' will never be achieved."Here Roberts provides the following string citation:
"Croson, supra, at 495, 109 S. Ct. 706, 102 L. Ed. 2d 854 (plurality opinion of O'Connor, J.) (quoting Wygant v. Jackson Bd. of  [**530]  Ed., 476 U.S. 267, 320, 106 S. Ct. 1842, 90 L. Ed. 2d 260 (1986) (Stevens, J., dissenting), in turn quoting Fullilove, 448 U.S., at 547, 100 S. Ct. 2758, 65 L. Ed. 2d 902 (Stevens, J., dissenting); brackets and citation omitted)." An interest "linked to nothing other than proportional representation of various races . . . would support indefinite use of racial classifications, employed first to obtain the appropriate mixture of racial views and then to ensure that the [program] continues to reflect that mixture."Here, Roberts provides the following string citation:
"Metro Broadcasting, supra, at 614, 110 S. Ct. 2997, 111 L. Ed 2d 445 (O'Connor, J., dissenting)."
Part III C addressed the school districts' claim that "the way in which they have employed individual racial classifications is necessary to achieve their stated ends."  Roberts replied that these classifications were clearly not necessary, since they had a "minimal effect" on student assignments.Roberts noted that:
"Seattle's racial tiebreaker results, in the end, only in shifting a small number of students between schools. Approximately 307 student assignments were affected by the racial tiebreaker in 2000–2001; the district was able to track the enrollment status of 293 of these students. App. in No. 05-908, at 162a. Of these, 209 were assigned to a school that was one of their choices, 87 of whom were assigned to the same school to which they would have been assigned without the racial tiebreaker. Eighty-four students were assigned to schools that they did not list as a choice, but 29 of those students would have been assigned to their respective school without the racial tiebreaker, and 3 were able to attend one of the oversubscribed schools due to waitlist and capacity adjustments. Id., at 162a-163a. In over one-third of the assignments affected by the racial tiebreaker, then, the use of race in the end made no difference, and the district could identify only 52 students who were ultimately affected adversely by the racial tiebreaker in that it resulted in assignment to a school they had not listed as a preference and to which they would not otherwise have been assigned. As the panel majority in Parents Involved VI concluded: "[T]he tiebreaker's annual effect is thus merely to shuffle a few handfuls of different minority students between a few schools—about a dozen additional Latinos into Ballard, a dozen black students into Nathan Hale, perhaps two dozen Asians into Roosevelt, and so on. The District has not met its burden of proving these marginal changes . . . outweigh the cost of subjecting hundreds of students to disparate treatment based solely upon the color of their skin." 377 F.3d at 984–985. Similarly, Jefferson County's use of racial classifications has only a minimal effect on the assignment of students. Elementary school students are assigned to their first- or second-choice school 95 percent of the time, and transfers, which account for roughly 5 percent of assignments, are only denied 35 percent of the time—and presumably an even smaller percentage are denied on the basis of the racial guidelines, given that other factors may lead to a denial. McFarland I, 330 F. Supp. 2d, at 844–845, nn 16, 18. Jefferson County estimates that the racial guidelines account for only 3 percent of assignments. Brief in Opposition in No. 05-915, p 7, n 4; Tr. of Oral Arg. in No. 05-915, at 46. As Jefferson County explains, "the racial guidelines have minimal impact in this process, because they 'mostly influence student assignment in subtle and indirect ways.'" Brief for Respondents in No. 05-915, pp 8–9. He contrasted this circumstance to Grutter, where "the consideration of race was viewed as indispensable" in more than tripling minority representation at the law school—from 4 to 14.5 percent.Here Roberts cites: "See 539 U.S., at 320, 123 S. Ct. 2325, 156 L. Ed. 2d 304." The districts have also failed to show that they considered methods other than explicit racial classifications to achieve their stated goals. Narrow tailoring requires "serious, good faith consideration of workable race-neutral alternatives",  Grutter, supra, at 339, 123 S. Ct. 2325, 156 L. Ed. 2d 304, and yet in Seattle several alternative assignment plans—many of which would not have used express racial classifications—were rejected with little or no consideration.  Jefferson County has failed to present any evidence that it considered alternatives, even though the district already claims that its goals are achieved primarily through means other than the racial classifications. By contrast, Croson notes that racial classifications are permitted only "as a last resort".488 U.S., at 519, 109 S. Ct. 706, 102 L. Ed. 2d 854 (Kennedy, J., concurring in part [*2761]  and concurring in judgment)
Part IV (again joined only by a plurality of the Court) addressed Justice Breyer's dissent.  
Plurality opinion by Chief Justice Roberts
Justice Anthony Kennedy did not join the rest of the opinion by the Chief Justice, therefore, those parts of the opinion did not command a majority. In this plurality opinion, Roberts wrote that the schools at issue contend that a racially diverse environment is beneficial for education and they submit this as the reason why they consider race alone in their school assignments. However, Roberts considers that this interest is not compelling and that the use of race for this goal is not narrowly tailored, it is instead used for racial balancing, which is unconstitutional. The schools base their numbers in demographics, therefore making this goal a means to achieve a numerical quota to achieve racial balancing. Roberts concludes that racial balancing cannot be a compelling state interest.
The Chief Justice finally concludes his opinion by answering some of the issues raised by Justice Stephen Breyer in his dissent. He writes that Justice Breyer misused and misapplied previous Supreme Court precedents in this area and that he greatly exaggerates the consequences of the decision of this case. He also chastises Justice Breyer for saying that the Court silently overruled Grutter with this case and that the method that Breyer applies to this case is that of "the ends justify the means". Roberts concludes his opinion for the plurality by saying:
The way to stop discrimination on the basis of race is to stop discriminating on the basis of race.
Concurrence by Justice Thomas
In concurrence with the majority opinion Justice Clarence Thomas restated his view, in agreement with Justice Harlan's dissent in Plessy, that the Constitution is "color-blind."  For Thomas, this means that no discrimination on the basis of race is permitted by the Constitution, even for a so-called "benign" purpose (Thomas rejected the notion that there could be a purely benign purpose in his concurrence in Adarand because the benignity or malignity of race-based discrimination turns on "whose ox is being gored" or is "in the eye of the beholder").  Justice Thomas also rejected the view advanced by the dissent that these school districts were in danger of resegregation.  He contended that whatever trends toward classroom racial imbalance have obtained, they were not the result of state-sanctioned segregation as in the pre-Brown era. Justice Thomas goes on to call out the dissent for adopting segregationist reasoning advanced in Brown, particularly its insistence that the Court should defer to local school board knowledge, expertise, and judgment.  He also wrote about the unsettled debate concerning whether racial balance or diversity has a positive effect on educational outcomes.  Justice Thomas recoils at the suggestion that black students can only learn if they are sitting next to white students.  Some of the concurrence consists of social science citations and statistics showing that black students can succeed in majority black schools such as HBCUs.  Justice Thomas concludes noting "If our history has taught us anything it has taught us to beware of elites bearing racial theories."  In a footnote the Justice added a personal mention of Justice Breyer: "Justice Breyer's good intentions, which I do not doubt, have the shelf life of Justice Breyer's tenure.".  He goes on to explain that he is skeptical that school boards will always have such good intentions in their race-based decisionmaking, for, as Madison said, "if men were angels, no government would be necessary."
Concurrence by Justice Kennedy
Justice Anthony Kennedy did not join parts of the opinion of Chief Justice Roberts. In cases where an opinion or parts of an opinion do not reach a majority, the narrower opinion represents the holding, so Justice Kennedy's opinion represents parts of the holding of the case. In his concurrence, Kennedy differed with the plurality because, he found, the goal of obtaining a diverse student body is a compelling state interest.
Diversity, depending on its meaning and definition, is a compelling educational goal a school district may pursue.
Furthermore, Kennedy found that race-conscious mechanisms can be used by school districts to further the goal of diversity, a position rejected by the plurality.  Kennedy argued that the government had an interest in ensuring racial equality: "The plurality opinion is too dismissive of the legitimate interest government has in ensuring all people have equal opportunity regardless of their race."
Kennedy's opinion also emphasized the risks posed by allowing for the proliferation of mechanically imposed individual race classifications of its citizens.  He made it clear that "To be forced to live under a state-mandated racial label is inconsistent with the dignity of individuals in our society".
Finally, Kennedy wrote:
A compelling interest exists in avoiding racial isolation, an interest that a school district, in its discretion and expertise, may choose to pursue. Likewise, a district may consider it a compelling interest to achieve a diverse student population. Race may be one component of that diversity, but other demographic factors, plus special talents and needs, should also be considered.
Nevertheless, Kennedy found the school districts did not narrowly tailor the use of race to achieve the compelling interests in the case.  Specifically, Kennedy finds that the districts could have achieved the same goal through less racially charged means.
Justice Kennedy asserts that the dissent must "brush aside two concepts of central importance" to uphold the racial classification in the case.  First, Kennedy harshly faults the dissent for consciously ignoring the difference between de jure and de facto segregation.  And second, Kennedy faults the dissent for ignoring the "presumptive invalidity of a State's use of racial classifications to differentiate its treatment of individuals."
Dissent by Justice Stevens
Justice John Paul Stevens wrote a sharply worded short dissent in which he accused the plurality of misusing and misapplying previous Supreme Court precedents including Brown v. Board of Education. He concluded by saying that the current Court has greatly changed and that previously:
"[I]t was...more faithful to Brown and more respectful of our precedent than it is today. It is my firm conviction that no Member of the Court that I joined in 1975 would have agreed with today's decision."
Dissent by Justice Breyer
Justice Stephen G. Breyer, in the principal dissenting opinion, dismissed Justice Kennedy's proposed alternatives to the labeling and sorting of individual students by race and, in a surprisingly emotional 20 minute speech from the bench, denounced the plurality opinion.  "It is not often in the law that so few have so quickly changed so much," Justice Breyer said of the Court's decision.  In the Justice's 77-page written opinion he called the ruling a "radical" step away from established law that would take from communities a critical tool used for many years in the prevention of resegregation.
Subsequent developments
The opinion came less than two months before the start of the regular school year in King County and less than three weeks before the start of year-round school in the District. At a press conference the day of the opinion, Attorney for the Plaintiff Teddy Gordon stated that he would, if necessary, seek legal measures to prevent the use of the current Student Assignment Plan for the 2007–2008 school year. When questioned about the close timing, Gordon stated that all the District had to do was "push a button" to change things over to a plan compliant with the Court's ruling.
In a separate conference, JCPS Representative Pat Todd emphasized that the current assignment plan would remain in effect for the 2007–2008 school year, citing the finalization of budgets, staffing, assignments and busing as prevailing reasons for no change being logistically possible.
Over a period of several months in 2007–2008, JCPS developed a diversity plan based upon social economic and minority status (income of parents), a plan suggested by school board members Steve Imhoff and Larry Hujo in 2002. These changes conformed with the concurring opinion of Justice Kennedy. This plan is in place as of 2017.
See also
 Mendez v. Westminster
 Plessy v. Ferguson
 Tape v. Hurley
 Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education
 Green v. County School Board of New Kent County
References
Further reading
External links
 Parents v. Seattle at Discourse DB
Category:United States school desegregation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:Education in Seattle
Category:Jefferson County Public Schools (Kentucky)
Category:United States affirmative action case law
Category:History of Louisville, Kentucky
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Parham v. J.R." ==> """
Parham v. J.R., 442 U.S. 584 (1979), was a United States Supreme Court case that reviewed Georgia's procedures for the commitment of a child to a mental hospital based on the request of a parent. The Court rejected, by a vote of 6-3, a class-action lawsuit from a group of minors, who claimed that the state's procedures were insufficient to ensure that parents did not use state mental hospitals as a "dumping ground" for children, and to ensure that minors committed to mental hospitals by their parents actually suffered from a condition sufficient to justify commitment."Appellees, children being treated in a Georgia state mental hospital, instituted in Federal District Court a class action against Georgia mental health officials. Appellees sought a declaratory judgment that Georgia's procedures for voluntary commitment of children under the age of 18 to state mental hospitals violated the Due Process Clause..."  Parham, 442 U.S. at 584.  In so doing, the Court reversed a lower court ruling holding numerous aspects of the Georgia mental health system unconstitutional. 
 Majority 
The five-justice majority, composed of Chief Justice Burger and Justices White, Powell, Blackmun, and Rehnquist, concluded that the Due Process Clause did not afford minors committed to state mental hospitals by their parents the right to an adversarial hearing before a judicial or administrative authority. This is due to the presumption in United States constitutional law, built on the doctrine of parental rights, that parents act in the best interest of their child unless rebutted by a finding, based on compelling evidence, that they have abused their authority. 
The majority rejected the "statist notion that governmental power should supersede parental authority ... because some parents abuse and neglect children." While the Court recognized that parents could abuse their power to commit a child to a mental hospital, these cases would be rare, and would be precluded by the procedures already in place. An adversarial hearing, Chief Justice Burger wrote, would create an unacceptable intrusion into the parent-child relationship, and would be inconsistent with the constitutional presumption of parental competence and good intentions."Another problem with requiring a formalized, factfinding hearing lies in the danger it poses for significant intrusion into the parent-child relationship. Pitting the parents and child as adversaries often will be at odds with the presumption that parents act in the best interests of their child." 442 U. S. at 610. 
Finally, the Court determined that because of the potential for abuse, the due process rights of minors required that state mental hospitals provide a neutral factfinder to review, after admission, parental decisions to involuntarily commit their minor child. However, the Court did not require pre-commitment hearings, and stated that the post-commitment procedures were not required to be adversarial or formal; the due process requirement could be fulfilled by a review of the parental decision by a neutral medical professional, considering all relevant information which that professional would rely on to make medical decisions."We do no more than emphasize that the decision should represent an independent judgment of what the child requires and that all sources of information that are traditionally relied on by physicians and behavioral specialists should be consulted." 442 U. S. at 608. 
As such, the District Court was reversed and remanded.
 Concurrence 
Justice Stewart, concurring only in the judgment, accepted the majority's recognition of the presumption that parents act in their children's best interest, and stated that due to this presumption, Georgia's system did not violate the Constitution. However, he did not agree that the Constitution required states to respect parents' decisions in this area, citing Prince v. Massachusetts, where the Court held that parental rights may be restricted to serve a compelling government interest. 
 Concurrence in part and dissent in part 
Justice Brennan, joined by Justices Marshall and Stevens, agreed that due process did not require pre-commitment hearings for all juveniles committed by their parents. However, they argued that at least one  post-admission hearing was required, where juveniles committed by their parents would possess the right to be "informed of the reasons for their commitment... the right to be present at the commitment determination, the right to representation, the right to be heard, the right to be confronted with adverse witnesses, the right to cross-examine, [and] the right to offer evidence of their own."442 U. S. at 634 Brennan, Marshall, and Stevens also stated that children in state custody were entitled to adversarial pre-commitment hearings, and that the consideration that parents act in the best interest of their children does not apply to social workers, who are themselves government agents. These three justices would have reversed the lower court decision in part and affirmed it in part. 
 Impact 
The American Journal of Law and Medicine has argued that the decision's failure to provide protections for mature minors and wards of the state was inconsistent with due process, and has urged reconsideration of the ruling. Winsor C. Schmidt, Jr., writing in the Journal of Psychiatry and Law, has criticized the decision, stating that its use of medical studies was "unsophisticated and noncomprehensive." 
 See also 
 Troxel v. Granville
 Involuntary commitment
 Due Process Clause
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1979 in United States case law
"""

From "Paris Adult Theatre I v. Slaton" ==> """
Paris Adult Theatre I v. Slaton, 413 U.S. 49 (1973), was a case in which the U.S. Supreme Court upheld a state court's injunction against the showing of obscene films in a movie theatre restricted to consenting adults.. The Court distinguished the case from Stanley v. Georgia,. saying that the privacy of the home that was controlling in Stanley was not present in the commercial exhibition of obscene movies in a theatre.
See also
 Comstock laws
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 413
 United States obscenity law
References
External links
Category:United States obscenity case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1973 in United States case law
"""

From "Parisi v. Davidson" ==> """
Parisi v. Davidson, 405 U.S. 34 (1972), was a United States Supreme Court case resulting in the grant of habeas corpus relief to a soldier, Joseph Parisi, seeking an honorable discharge as a conscientious objector. The case was argued on October 19 and 20, 1971, and decided on February 23, 1972. The respondent was then Major General Phillip B. Davidson.
Parisi had brought a petition to Federal District Court that the Army's refusal to discharge him constituted habeas corpus – that in effect he was being unlawfully imprisoned. As a result, court-martial charges were brought against him by the Army. The Federal District Court and Court of Appeals concluded that consideration of his petition should be deferred pending the result of the court-martial. The Supreme Court decision overturned this, freeing the District Court to consider his petition.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 405
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States military case law
Category:American conscientious objectors
Category:1972 in United States case law
"""

From "Park 'N Fly, Inc. v. Dollar Park & Fly, Inc." ==> """
REDIRECT Park 'N Fly
Category:United States trademark case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Parker v. Brown" ==> """
Parker v. Brown, 317 U.S. 341 (1943), was a United States Supreme Court case on the scope of United States antitrust law. It held that actions taken by state governments were exempt from the scope of the Sherman Act.
Facts
The case was an appeal from a decree of a district court of three judges enjoining the enforcement, against the appellee, of a marketing program adopted pursuant to the California Agricultural Prorate Act.
Significance
The Supreme Court clarified its position in later judgments.
See also
US antitrust law
Notes
External links
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:1943 in United States case law
Category:United States state sovereign immunity case law
"""

From "Parker v. Ellis" ==> """
Parker v. Ellis, 362 U.S. 574 (1960), was a United States Supreme Court decision (per curiam) in which the court granted certiorari to review dismissal of petitioner's application for a habeas corpus review. The petitioner  claimed that his conviction in a state court had violated the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause. However, the petitioner was released from incarceration before his case could be heard..
Decision
The court held that the case was now moot; therefore the court had no jurisdiction to evaluate the merits of petitioner's claim. The writ of certiorari was dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 362
Jones v. Cunningham, 
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:1960 in United States case law
"""

From "Parker v. Flook" ==> """
Parker v. Flook, 437 U.S. 584 (1978), was a 1978 United States Supreme Court decision that ruled that an invention that departs from the prior art only in its use of a mathematical algorithm is patent eligible only if there is some other "inventive concept in its application.". The algorithm itself must be considered as if it were part of the prior art, and the claim must be considered as a whole. The case was argued on April 25, 1978 and was decided June 22, 1978. This case is the second member of the Supreme Court's patent-eligibility trilogy.
The other two cases were: , and .
Prior history
The case revolves around a patent application for a "Method for Updating Alarm Limits". These limits are numbers between which a catalytic converter is operating normally. The numbers are determined by taking a time-weighted average of values of a relevant operating parameter, such as temperature inside the reactor, in accordance with a smoothing algorithm.For an explanation of the mathematics and a graph illustrating a similar algorithm see Engineering Statistics Handbook, U.S. Dept. of Commerce. When the values of these numbers leave this range an alarm may be sounded. The claims, however, were directed to the numbers (the "alarm limits") themselves.
Flook's method was identical to previous systems except for the mathematical algorithm. In fact, although the patent examiner assumed that Flook had originated the mathematical technique, someone else had published it a number of years earlier.Robert G. Brown is credited with the "invention" of this "smoothing" technique, which is described. among other places, in Robert G. Brown, Smoothing, Forecasting, and Prediction of Discrete Time Series (1963). Another source states that the technique of exponential smoothing was first suggested by C.C. Holt in 1957. Flook's application, Ser. No. 194,032, was filed October 29, 1971, eight years after Brown and fourteen years after Holt. In Gottschalk v. Benson, the court had ruled that the discovery of a new formula is not patentable. This case differed from Benson by including a specific application—catalytic conversion of hydrocarbons—for the formula as a claim limitation (a so-called field of use limitation). The patent examiner rejected the patent application as "in practical effect" a claim to the formula or its mathematics. When the decision was appealed, the Board of Appeals of the Patent and Trademark Office sustained the examiner's rejection.
Next, the Court of Customs and Patent Appeals (CCPA) reversed the Board's decision, saying that the patent only claimed the right to the equation in the limited context of the catalytic chemical conversion of hydrocarbons, so that the patent would not wholly pre-empt the use of the algorithm. Finally, the Government, on behalf of the (Acting) Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks, filed a petition for a writ of certiorari to the CCPA in the Supreme Court.
Supreme Court's decision
The law which is applicable to this case is section 101 of the Patent Act.Section 101 says, "Whoever invents or discovers any new and useful process, machine, manufacture, or composition of matter, or any new and useful improvement thereof may obtain a patent therefor, subject to the conditions and requirements of this title." Section 100(b) gives the definition for process, "The term ‘process’ means process, art or method, and includes a new use of a known process, machine, manufacture, composition of matter, or material." . If Flook's patent claim can meet the definition of a "process" under that law then it is patent-eligible (that is, it is the kind of thing that can receive a patent if it is also novel, unobvious, and the like). The Court decided that the patent claim under review was instead a claim to a "principle" or a "law of nature" and thus not patent-eligible. The Court relied on a line of cases following from the Neilson blast furnace case.Neilson v. Harford, 151 Eng. Rep. 1266, 8 M. & W. 806, Web. Pat. Cas. 273 (1844). An excerpted version is available at  Geo. Wash. L.S. The principle of that case, as explained in O'Reilly v. Morse,. is that that patent-eligibility must be analyzed on the basis of it being as if the principle, algorithm, or mathematical formula were already well known (was in the prior art). Flook's process is thus ineligible for a patent "because, once that algorithm is assumed to be within the prior art, the application, considered as a whole, contains no patentable invention." In a nutshell:
Even though a phenomenon of nature or mathematical formula may be well known, an inventive application of the principle may be patented. Conversely, the discovery of such a phenomenon cannot support a patent unless there is some other inventive concept in its application. [Emphasis supplied.]The same legal principle was determinative in Funk Brothers Seed Co. v. Kalo Inoculant Co., where the inventor had discovered that certain species of leguminous bacteria did not inactivate one another, as most did, and he proceeded to exploit this phenomenon of nature by providing a package containing a mixture of the particular bacterial species. Because the Court considered this implementation trivial on its face, it held that the patent was no different from one on the phenomenon itself, which was impermissible. Flook therefore applied to a process the legal principle that Funk applied to an article of manufacture or composition.
The Court did not agree with Flook's assertion that the existence of a limitation to a specific field of use made the formula patent-eligible. The majority opinion said of this argument:
A competent draftsman could attach some form of post-solution activity to almost any mathematical formula; the Pythagorean theorem would not have been patentable, or partially patentable, because a patent application contained a final step indicating that the formula, when solved, could be usefully applied to existing surveying techniques.
The court moderated that assertion by agreeing that not all patent applications involving formulas are patent-ineligible by saying, "Yet it is equally clear that a process is not unpatentable simply because it contains a law of nature or a mathematical algorithm." Patents involving formulas, laws of nature, or abstract principles are eligible for patent protection if the implementation of the principle is novel and unobvious—unlike this case, in which it was conceded that the implementation was conventional.The patent examiner so found and Flook did not contest the ruling. Accordingly, in Flook's case, there was no "other inventive concept in its application", and thus no eligibility for a patent.
Criticism and response to Flook
In In re Bergy, a 1979 decision of the United States Court of Customs and Patent Appeals (C.C.P.A.), Judge Giles Rich extensively criticized Justice Stevens's Flook opinion. The Supreme Court had vacated an earlier Bergy opinion,In re Bergy, 563 F.2d 1031 (C.C.P.A. 1977), vacated sub nom. . with terse instructions that the CCPA should give the matter "further consideration in light of Parker v. Flook, 437 U.S. 584 (1978)." Judge Rich began by protesting that "[t]he Court gave no intimation of what bearing it thought Flook has on the single issue in these appeals [whether the claimed subject matter was patent-eligible], except as it may be gleaned from the Flook opinion." After an exhaustive analysis of what Flook, the Constitution, and the patent statute provide about the grant of patents--which said little or nothing about the patent-ineligibility of abstract ideas and how section 101 of the patent law relates to that--Judge Rich summarized his view: "To conclude on the light Flook sheds on these cases, very simply, for the reasons we have stated, we find none."
Before reaching his conclusion, however, Judge Rich condemned the Flook opinion as embodying:
an unfortunate and apparently unconscious, though clear, commingling of distinct statutory provisions which are conceptually unrelated, namely, those pertaining to the categories of inventions in § 101 which may be patentable and to the conditions for patentability demanded by the statute for inventions within the statutory categories, particularly the nonobviousness condition of § 103.
The reason for this confusion in the Court's opinion he attributed to "subversive nonsense" in the government's briefs for the Patent Office:
We have observed with regret that the briefs filed by the Solicitor General for Acting Commissioner Parker in Parker v. Flook, a case which, as the Court noted, "turns entirely on the proper construction of § 101," badly, and with a seeming sense of purpose, confuse the statutory-categories requirement of § 101 with a requirement for the existence of "invention." This they do by basing argument on the opening words of § 101, "Whoever invents or discovers," thereby importing into the discussion of compliance with § 101 a requirement for "invention" in a patentability sense.
To Judge Rich, even though section 101 says "whoever invents or discovers," there is no basis for importing into the analysis any inquiry into the nature of what it is that the patent applicants purports to have invented, and whether it is the kind of thing that can be patented as an invention. Thus, when the Flook Court says that Flook's process is not the kind of process that the patent law permits to be patented, even though it is a process in the ordinary dictionary sense of the word, Judge Rich finds the inquiry impermissible because "§ 101 was never intended to be a 'standard of patentability'; the standards, or conditions as the statute calls them, are in § 102 and § 103." The only legitimate question, he says, is whether the claimed subject matter is "new, useful, and unobvious."This ignores the admonition in Graham that the words of the patent statute must be read and interpreted in the light of the words of the Constitution and the purpose of the patent clause. In 2011 the Federal Circuit remarked in passing: "We note that Bergy is no longer binding law." 
Judge Rich could not agree that the implementation of a natural principle must be "inventive" rather than concededly conventional (as Flook had conceded). To him, that improperly mixed obviousness under section 103 up with statutory subject matter under section 101. But Judge Rich overlooked what Justice Stevens pointed out--that Flook did not purport to have implemented the process in anything but a conventional way and did not purport to have added anything to what was previously known but the use of the smoothing formula. Justice Stevens saw the case as one in which Flook did not even purport to have invented anything capable of being patented. (Justice Stevens responded to the Bergy critique in his dissenting opinion in the Diehr case.)
Actually, the concession by Flook made the Flook case an easy one. But one could hardly expect any applicant in a subsequent case to make a similar concession. It is unclear how to apply the principle of the Flook case to other cases where no such concession exists. In one class of case, where the implementation is utterly trivial on its face, as in Funk v. Kalo Inoculant Co., the applicability of the same principle seems clear. But that appears to be the outer limit of the easy case. Once reasonable persons can differ on whether the implementation is barely removed from the natural principle, it would seem that the Flook principle cannot be employed. If a full-scale Graham v. Deere analysis must be used to evaluate the implementation, it would seem that the case can no longer be disposed of on section 101 grounds. That is what appears to have happened in the next member of the trilogy, Diamond v. Diehr.
For many years commentators thought that Diehr overruled Flook or reduced it to innocuous desuetude. In Mayo v. Prometheus, however, the Supreme Court "rehabilitated" Flook and harmonized it, Diehr, and the other decisions of the Supreme Court as well as the 19th century English decision of Neilson v. Harford.The harmonization effort and the "rehabilitation" is discussed in Richard H. Stern, Mayo v. Prometheus: No Patents on Conventional Implementations of Natural Principles and Fundamental Truths, [2012] Eur. Intell. Prop. Rev. 502. The Mayo Court read the prior cases to establish as a centerpiece of this branch of law that for a claimed invention based on the implementation of a law of nature or a "principle" to gain a patent monopoly, the implementation must not be conventional or trivial but must instead be inventive, which is to say, presumably, novel and not obvious. This has led to further controversy, as discussed in the Wikipedia article on Mayo v. Prometheus. The subsequent opinion of the Supreme Court in Alice Corp. v. CLS Bank International confirmed the reaffirmation of Flook in the Mayo case, holding that simply implementing an abstract idea on a computer could not confer patent eligibility.
References
External links
 Digital law copy of the case
 Government's Main Brief and Reply Brief in Flook case
  Nicholas Szabo, Elemental Subject Matter (January 10, 2006)
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Software patent case law
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Parker v. North Carolina" ==> """
Parker v. North Carolina, 397 U.S. 790 (1970), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that a plea agreement was valid even if the defendant entered into it in order to avoid the death penalty and even if his decision was based on a possibly mistaken belief on the part of the defendant and his lawyer that a confession the defendant had made would be admissible in court.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1970 in United States case law
"""

From "Paroline v. United States" ==> """
Paroline v. United States, 572 U.S. 434 (2014), is a case in which the United States Supreme Court ruled that to recover restitution under , the government or the victim must establish a causal relationship between the defendant's conduct and the victim's harm or damages. The decision vacated the appellate court decision, and remanded it.. A legislative fix was subsequently proposed by Marci Hamilton. Ultimately, the Amy, Vicky, and Andy Child Pornography Victim Assistance Act of 2018 was introduced in response.
References
External links
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:Restitution
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Parratt v. Taylor" ==> """
Parratt v. Taylor, 451 U.S. 527 (1981), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court, in which the court considered the applicability of Due Process to a claim brought under Section 1983.
 Background 
The respondent was an inmate at the Nebraska Penal and Correctional Complex who had ordered hobby materials by mail. When the hobby materials were lost, he brought suit under 42 U.S.C. section 1983 to recover their value, $23.50.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court held that when procedural due process guarantees only a post-deprivation hearing, provision of a right to sue in state court was provision of that hearing.
The Court found that the deprivation did not occur as the result of some established state procedure, but as the result of the unauthorized failure of state agents to follow established state procedure, and  because Nebraska had a tort claims procedure that provided a remedy to persons who had suffered a tortious loss at the hands of the State, but which respondent did not use, such procedure could have fully compensated respondent for his property loss and were sufficient to satisfy the requirements of due process.
The Court found that although the respondent was deprived of property under color of state law, he had not sufficiently alleged a violation of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
The Court also held that a merely negligent deprivation of property under color of state law was actionable under 42 U.S.C. § 1983.  This holding was mostly overruled by Daniels v. Williams in 1986, which held that a 1983 action only lies for an intentional deprivation of rights. The only aspect of Parratt that remains good law is that a claimant must prove any possible state remedies are constitutionally deficient in order to proceed with a 1983 action.
Subsequent jurisprudence
Logan v. Zimmerman Brush Co.
The year after Parratt, the Court decided Logan v. Zimmerman Brush Co., another case where the adequacy of the procedure was held to be insufficient and a denial of the petitioner's due process rights. Logan had filed a complaint with Illinois's Fair Employment Practices Commission, the exclusive forum under state law for the resolution of his claim that Zimmerman had fired him after a month primarily because of his disability. His timely filed claim was administratively  dismissed with prejudice after the commission accidentally scheduled a required fact-finding conference five days after the deadline for doing so. At Zimmerman's request, the Supreme Court of Illinois issued a writ of prohibition against the FEPC, disallowing further processing of the claim, and Logan petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court for certiorari.
The Court sided unanimously with Logan, holding that he had been denied due process due to the state's incompetence and overly rigid adherence to the statute. Justice Harry Blackmun wrote both the opinion of the Court as well as an unusual separate concurrence holding that Logan's equal protection rights had also been denied, with Justice Lewis Powell agreeing in his own concurrence but cautioning that the Court's holding should have been limited to the specific facts of the case. Zimmerman had argued that per Parratt, Logan should have been allowed to avail himself of postdeprivation remedies, but Blackmun said that "missed Parratts point", as the earlier case had involved a random unforeseeable act of negligence for which no predeprivation hearing was possible, whereas Logan's deprivation had come about as a result of the operation of law.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1981 in United States case law
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States civil due process case law
"""

From "Parsons v. United States" ==> """
Parsons v. United States, 167 U.S. 324 (1897), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court concerning the Appointments Clause. 
 References 
 External links 
Category:1897 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
"""

From "Pasadena City Board of Education v. Spangler" ==> """
Pasadena City Board of Education v. Spangler, 427 U.S. 424 (1976), was a United States Supreme Court case.
Parties and litigants
Phil C. Neal argued the cause for petitioners; with him on the briefs were Lee G. Paul, Peter D. , Robert G. Lane, Philip B. Kurland, and Alan L. Unikel. 
Fred Okrand argued the cause and filed a brief for respondents Spangler et al. Solicitor General Bork argued the cause for the United States. With him on the brief were Assistant Attorney General Pottinger, Deputy Solicitor General Wallace, and Brian K. Landsberg.Briefs of amici curiae urging affirmance were filed by Vilma Socorro Martínez and Morris J. Baller for the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund; by Nathaniel R. Jones, William L. Taylor, Paul R. Dimond, William E. Caldwell, Norman J. Chachkin, Thomas D. Barr, John W. Douglas, J. Harold Flannery, Albert E. Jenner, Jr., Milan C. Miskovsky, Whitney North Seymour, and Chesterfield Smith for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People et al.; by Jack Greenberg, James M. Nabrit III, Charles Stephen Ralston, Drew S. Days III, and Melvin Leventhal for the N. A. A. C. P. Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.; by Ralph J. Moore, Jr., Richard M. Sharp, David Rubin, Peter T. Galiano, and Horace Wheatley for the National Education Assn. et al.; and by Nathaniel S. Colley for the Western Regional Office, National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, et al.
Raymond B. Witt, Jr., filed a brief for the Board of Education of Chattanooga, Tenn., as amicus curiae. [427 U.S. 424, 427]
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:United States school desegregation case law
Category:Pasadena Unified School District
"""

From "Pasquantino v. United States" ==> """
Pasquantino v. United States, 544 U.S. 349 (2005), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a plot to defraud a foreign government of tax revenue violates the federal wire fraud statute.
 Background 
Prior to 1996, Canada raised the excise tax on liquors such that Canadian excise taxes greatly exceeded comparable United States taxes. From 1996-2000, Carl and David Pasquantino purchased large amounts of liquor over the phone from discount stores in Maryland. In order to avoid paying Canadian excise tax on imported alcohol, they hired individuals to smuggle the liquor over the border by automobile. The Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives learned about the smuggling operation and investigated, leading to the arrest of the Pasquantinos and their associates.
 Federal district court 
The smuggling operation did not violate any federal alcohol statute or any applicable anti-smuggling statute, so the Pasquantinos and one of their conspirators, Arthur Hilts, were indicted under the federal wire fraud statute, 18 U.S.C. § 1343. The statute prohibits using wires, radio, or television to conduct "any scheme or artifice to defraud, or for obtaining money or property by means of false or fraudulent pretenses, representations, or promises." The statute was implicated when the Pasquantinos ordered alcohol over the phone.  
Before trial, the Pasquantinos and Hilts asked the court for a dismissal, claiming that the government did not have a sufficient interest in enforcing Canadian revenue laws and that the Canadian tax revenue did not constitute property under the wire fraud statute; the court denied the motion and the case went to trial. The Pasquantinos were convicted by a jury and sentenced to 57 months in prison for each of six counts, to be served concurrently, and Hilts to 21 months in prison.
Canada also indicted the men for tax fraud, but had not adjudicated the claim before the U.S. criminal court made its determination. 
 Federal appeals court 
The Pasquantinos and Hilts appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit. The Fourth Circuit initially vacated the convictions in a 2-1 panel decision, deciding that the prosecutions violated the common law revenue rule. According to the Restatement (Third) of Foreign Relations Law of the United States, the "revenue rule" means that “[c]ourts in the United States are not required to recognize or to enforce judgments for the collection of taxes, fines, or penalties rendered by the courts of other states.” The panel reasoned that the prosecutions violated the rule because they required U.S. courts to interpret and enforce foreign revenue law. 
The Fourth Circuit granted a rehearing en banc, vacating the earlier ruling and reinstating the convictions by a 9-2 vote. According to the en banc court, the revenue rule was inapplicable to the prosecutions because the rule was intended only to bar enforcement of a foreign judgment in U.S. courts.
The Fourth Circuit decision deepened a circuit split. The Second Circuit had held the revenue rule inapplicable, and that prosecutions for operations to defraud foreign government are not barred by the federal wire fraud statute; the First Circuit had vacated such convictions, reasoning that the convictions were penal enforcement of foreign laws and ran afoul of underlying purposes of the common law revenue rule.
 Supreme Court 
The Supreme Court granted a writ of certiorari, noting the split among circuit courts on the applicability of the federal wire fraud statute in cases where a scheme to defraud involves foreign tax revenue.
 Majority opinion 
In a 5–4 decision, Justice Thomas delivered the opinion of the court, joined by Justices Rehnquist, Stevens, O'Connor, and Kennedy. The court held that prosecution for international tax fraud was possible in U.S. court under the federal wire fraud statute. The majority concluded first, that the petitioner's acts fell within the literal terms of the wire fraud statute; second, that the prosecutions did not violate the common law revenue rule; and third, that no underlying purpose of the rule suggested it should apply to the prosecutions. 
The court applied the modern definition of the common law revenue rule, which prevents "courts of one sovereign [from] enforc[ing] final tax judgments or unadjudicated tax claims of other sovereigns." The court found the revenue rule to be inapplicable because U.S. officials brought the prosecution, rather than Canadian officials. The court also reasoned that the revenue rule is inapplicable because Canadian tax laws were "incidental" to the enforcement of the wire fraud statute.
 Dissents 
Justice Ginsburg wrote the dissent, joined by Justice Breyer and in part by Justices Scalia and Souter. The dissent argued that the revenue rule does not allow for a prosecution that is essentially charging the violation of another country's revenue laws, and that the majority wrongly gives the federal wire fraud statute extraterritorial effect.
 See also 
 Mail and wire fraud
 Common law revenue rule
 2004 term opinions of the Supreme Court of the United States
 2004 term United States Supreme Court opinions of Clarence Thomas
 2004 term United States Supreme Court opinions of Ruth Bader Ginsburg
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 544
 References 
 Sources 
 External links 
Text of Pasquantino v. United States, 544 U.S. 349 (2004) is available from: Oyez (slip opinion and oral argument) Legal Information Institute Justia Supreme Court (slip opinion)
Category:Mail and wire fraud
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Passenger Cases" ==> """
Smith v. Turner; Norris v. Boston, 48 U.S. (7 How.) 283 (1849),. were two similar cases, argued together before the United States Supreme Court, which decided 5–4 that states do not have the right to impose a tax that is determined by the number of passengers of a designated category on board a ship and/or disembarking into the State. The cases are sometimes called the Passenger Case or Passenger Cases.
The Court did not produce a majority opinion. Eight Justices authored separate opinions, and the respective stances on various issues did not always align with other Justices in their concurrences or dissents. The issues addressed in the various opinions included the following:
Whether the Commerce Clause exclusively commits the power to regulate foreign commerce, interstate commerce and commerce with the Indian tribes to the federal government and thus makes state regulation concerning foreign commerce an unconstitutional violation of the Commerce Clause, or whether the states were free to regulate until such regulation conflicted with a valid federal regulation or involved an area that could be regulated only on a uniform basis.
Whether regulation of migration of free individuals (as distinct from slaves) was included in the meaning of "commerce" covered by the Commerce Clause.
Whether states had an absolute right to determine who could enter its geographical domain that could not be compromised, even by ratification of a foreign treaty, by the federal government except with respect to federal officials, employees and agents, and foreign diplomats.
Whether the federal government had any constitutional authority to regulate immigration from foreign nations (as distinct from its acknowledged power to determine which immigrants could be naturalized).
Whether such laws violated the requirement of the introductory clause of Article I, Section 8, of the US Constitution, mandating any imposts to be "uniform throughout the United States.
Whether Article I, Section 9, of the Constitution, making 1808 a watershed date regarding congressional power over "Such Persons as any of the States now existing should think proper to admit," referred only to the slave trade or also to immigration of free persons.
Whether the nature of the New York and the Massachusetts laws imposed a tax on the passengers or on the ships, and the implications of this distinction with respect to the nature of the taxation power of the states; and for those Justices concurring in the judgment of the Court; and the status and meaning of City of New York vs. Miln.34 U.S. (11 Pet.) 85 (1835).
The Passenger Cases is of historical interest. It portrays a diversity of views on several constitutional questions, especially whether the Commerce Clause prohibits any state regulation of interstate and foreign commerce in the absence of federal law or treaty. A bitter personal attack on Chief Justice Taney by Justice Wayne also provided a glimpse of the personal dynamics of the fractious court. However, the failure of the court to produce a majority opinion significantly diminished the value of the Passengers Case as formal legal precedent.
Background
In each case, a state imposed a tax to be collected from the master of a ship entering a harbor of that state. In each case, the captain of a British ship challenged the constitutionality of the state law. Other facts varied between the two cases.
Smith v. Turner
The State of New York imposed a tax on the passenger and the crew of each ship entering the Port of New York at the following rates:
If the vessel traveled from Connecticut, New Jersey or Rhode Island, the tax would be 25 cents for each person on board on the first occasion of each month such ship entered the Port of New York.
If the vessel traveled from another state, the tax would be 25 cents for each person on board with respect to each voyage including an entry into the Port of New York.
If the vessel traveled from a foreign port, the tax would be $1.50 for the master of the ship, $1.50 for each passenger of cabin class, $1.00 for each other crew member, and $1.00 for each passenger of steerage class.
The revenues collected would be first directed to cover expenses of a marine hospital to care for those who arrived in a sickened state at the Port of New York. Excess revenues not needed for the maintenance of the marine hospital were redirected to the Society for the Reformation of Juvenile Delinquents in the City of New York, a charitable organization caring for and confining delinquent boys.
Smith was the master of Henry Bliss a British ship. It sailed from Liverpool, England, and entered the Port of New York in June 1841. Steerage-class passengers, 295 in number, disembarked in New York City. Smith refused to pay the portion of the New York State tax that was measured by these steerage-class passengers.  Turner, the Health Commissioner of the Port of New York, sued Smith for $295 in taxes due under New York State law.
Norris v. City of Boston
Massachusetts had a law that required an appropriate official to board each ship that had alien passengers on board and had entered one of its port of that State. The official was to examine each alien passenger and determine which of them, if any, were a lunatic, an idiot, maimed, aged, an infirm person, an incompetent, or a current or former pauper or who had been a pauper. Such a passenger would be permitted to disembark only upon the posting of a bond for $1000. Other alien passengers would be permitted to disembark upon the payment of a tax by the master, owner, consignee, or agent of such vessel amounting to the sum of $2.00 for each such passenger so disembarking.
The revenue collected would be directed to a fund to pay for the support of aliens who had become paupers in Massachusetts.
Norris was the master of the Union Jack, a schooner from St. John, of the Province of New Brunswick, then part of the British Empire. It sailed from St. John and arrived in the Boston harbor on June 26, 1837. Norris was compelled by Bailey, an official of Boston, to pay $38.00 before the 19 alien passengers, none of whom being in such a state or having such a history requiring the posting of a bond, were permitted to disembark. Norris sued the City of Boston to recover the $38.00 as having been improperly compelled.
Decision
In each case, the Supreme Court held 5-4 that part of the respective State statute to be unconstitutional. A federal constitutional principle, known as "standing," precludes the giving of an advisory opinion, a pronouncement of a decision that goes beyond the facts and record of the particular case. Thus, parts of the respective statutes not implicated by the specific facts of the case are not supposed to be ruled upon until a case involving a contest over such matters is actually presented to the court.
In Smith v. Turner, the portion of the New York statute concerning the collection of a tax measured by the number of steerage-class passengers from ships arriving from a foreign port was declared unconstitutional.
In Norris v. City of Boston, that portion of the Massachusetts law imposing a tax measured by the number of alien passengers allowed to disembark without a bond was struck down as unconstitutional.
Concurring opinions
Justices McLean, Wayne, Catron, McKinley and Grier all concurred with the judgment of the United States Supreme Court in both cases. All five of the concurring Justices wrote a concurring opinion. The opinions of McLean and Wayne addressed the various issues that they considered to be implicated in both cases. Catron's opinion addressed only the Smith (New York) case; Grier's opinion addressed only the Norris (Massachusetts) case. Catron and Grier unequivocally joined each other's respective opinions. Wayne also endorsed Catron's and Grier's opinions. McKinley's opinion was limited to a discussion of the first clause of Article I, Section 9 of the US Constitution. (McKinley's opinion on that topic was also endorsed by Wayne.) McKinley may be deemed to be joining Grier's opinion (concerning the Norris case), as he stated that such opinion had expressed their "joint views in the cause coming up from Massachusetts" and that the writing of such opinion by Grier "has been done to [McKinley's] entire satisfaction."48 U.S. at 452.
McKinley remarked that he had "examined the opinions of... McLean and... Catron, and concur with the whole reasoning upon the main question." What McKinley viewed as that "main question" is not explained but probably referred to the apparently harmonious views of McLean and Catron concerning the nature of the Commerce Clause and its implications with respect to the reserved taxation and police powers of the states. The sequence in which the concurring opinions appear in the official reports follows the seniority of the respective concurring Justices who authored each opinion.
McLean's opinion
Justice McLean, the most senior member of the Court at the time, began his opinion by weighing in on the debate concerning the nature of the Commerce Clause. He asserted that the Commerce Clause "is exclusively vested in Congress."48 U.S. at 400. 
Therefore, if the federal government does not regulate a particular area of foreign or interstate commerce, the omission is not an invitation to the states to provide interim regulation but is an expression of federal policy that the area should remain unregulated.
McLean derived that interpretation of the Commerce Clause from a fundamental rejection of the concept of concurrent power. Only one authority can exercise any given power, and the judicial task is to determine whether a particular subject falls within a power delegated to the federal government or within a power reserved to the states. McLean denied that a power may be exercised by the states unless the federal government chooses to exercise the same power when state regulation is trumped by the federal action. 
Although he recognized that both Congress and the states may impose a tax on the same object, he insisted that the respective taxations result from the exercise of distinct powers and do not represent any concurrent exercise of the same power.
It is unclear what role the Supremacy Clause had in McLean's constitutional theory since he apparently viewed each level of government as supreme in its own legitimate and distinct sphere of operations.
One of the key debates in the Passenger Cases concerned the question whether the transport of free persons, as distinct from goods and slaves, was to be included or excluded from the concept of "commerce" for purposes of the Commerce Clause. McLean construed the Commerce Clause to include the transport of free persons within its scope. In support, McLean cited the following passage from Gibbons v. Ogden: "the power to regulate commerce applies equally to the regulation of vessels employed in transporting men who pass from place to place voluntarily, and to those who pass involuntarily."48 U.S. at 401, quoting from 22 U.S. at 216-217.
McLean wrote in his opinion, "A state cannot regulate foreign commerce, but it may do many things which more or less affect it."48 U.S. at 402. Thus, the next judicial task was to discern whether the New York tax was a regulation of foreign and interstate commerce or merely an exercise of legitimate state authority having an incidental effect on foreign and interstate commerce.
McLean did not consider attempts on the part of a State to defend itself from the introduction of harm to be a regulation of commerce. Thus, McLean viewed exclusion of infectious people from the state as a quarantine measure and part of the state's reserved right to protect the health of its citizens and in no sense a regulation of foreign or interstate commerce. He further acknowledged that a state may charge a fee reflecting the actual cost of the inspection for disease. He also acknowledged a right for states to prevent the entry of paupers to prevent the imposition of an economic burden. However, McLean did not recognize an unqualified right of the states to screen new entrants: "Except to guard its citizens against diseases and paupers, the municipal power of a state cannot prohibit the introduction of foreigners brought to this country under the authority of Congress."48 U.S. at 406.
McLean rejected the characterization of the New York statute as a health measure. Although the revenues were applied in the first instance to a hospital, surplus revenues were diverted to a charitable society in New York City caring for delinquent boys. To McLean, a law that demanded payment beyond a fee for actual cost of inspection was a revenue measure, with no principled limitation that could be placed on the state as to the use of that revenue. McLean insisted that the law imposed a tax on passengers and crew and that if a tax of $1.00 per passenger could be extracted by New York, a higher tax could also be imposed, including in an amount that would completely stifle the commercial activity of transporting passengers into the Port of New York. McLean thus concluded that the New York statute at bar was a regulation of commerce and an intrinsic violation of the Commerce Clause.
McLean also considered the New York law a violation of Article I, Section 8, of the US Constitution, requiring all duties, imposts, and excises to be uniform throughout the United States. McLean considered the clause to be enforceable against the states as well as Congress and considered a tax on passengers entering the United States to be an "impost" and a state tax on such passengers to have the effect of making such imposts non-uniform.
He went beyond the facts of the case to comment (as dictum"Dictum" refers to judicial comments that are superfluous to those necessary to decide the case at bar. The antonym is "desideratum," referring to reasoning that was essential or necessary to produce the judgment. Strictly speaking, dictum, even when it appears in a majority decision of the United States Supreme Court, is not binding precedent on lower courts.) that the tax, when applied to the crew and passengers of coastal vessels traveling from other states, violated the sixth clause of Article I, Section 9, prohibiting the imposition of duties on vessels traveling from one state to another.
McLean commented that under the Commerce Clause, the Massachusetts tax on immigrant passengers was unconstitutional. McLean did not refer to his views regarding uniformity of imposts in his short discussion of the latter case.
McLean did not join the vituperative debate concerning the manner in which the majority opinion in City of New York v. Miln11 U.S. 1 was adopted, but he reconciled his assent to the majority opinion in the Miln decision with his opinion in the Passenger Cases by noting that the Miln case involved no question concerning the validity of a tax but only the validity of a reporting requirement.
Wayne's opinion
Justice Wayne's concurrence with the judgment, although referring to several particular provisions of the US Constitution, was apparently derived from a holistic understanding of the general impact of all of its provisions on commerce as well as the nature of commerce as it exists, even in the absence of formal documents such as the Constitution or the preceding Articles of Confederation. His analysis was formed from a consideration of many provisions of Article I of theConstitution, including the proviso of the first clause of its Section 8 on the uniformity of "Duties, Imposts and Excises;" the passages of the third clause of Section 8 authorizing Congress to "regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States" (the Commerce Clause); the passage of the fourth clause of Section 8 authorizing Congress to "establish a uniform Rule of Naturalization!;" and the passage of the clauseWayne labeled this clause the "fifth" clause of Section 9, 48 U.S. at 420, even though many scholars treat this particular clause as the sixth clause of Section 9. prohibiting any "Preference" with respect to any "Regulation of Commerce or Revenue to the Ports of one State over those of another;" the provision of the first clause of Section 10, prohibiting the states from entering into any treaty; the provisions of the second clause of Section 10 prohibiting the states from laying, without the consent of Congress, any "imposts or Duties on Imports or Exports, except what may be absolutely necessary for executing it's inspection Laws;" and the provisions of the Third Clause of Section 10, prohibiting the States, again without the consent of Congress, from laying any duty of tonnage, or entering into any "Agreement or Compact with another State."
To Wayne, one has to examine the nature of commerce to understand the meaning of the Commerce Clause, which authorizes Congress to "regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States...." Wayne noted that even without explication in a formal document such as a constitution, nations, at least in Europe, had recognized traditions of regulating their commerce in ways that varied between peacetime and wartime conditions. Under the European tradition "[a] nation is... fully authorized to prohibit the entry or exportation of certain merchandise, to institute customs and to augment them at pleasure, to prescribe the manner in which the commerce with its dominions shall be carried on, to point out the places where it shall be carried on, or to exempt from it certain parts of its dominions, to exercise freely its sovereign power over the foreigners living in its territories, [and] to make whatever distinctions between the nations with whom it trades it may find conducive to its interests."48 U.S. at 416, quoting from "Summary of the Laws of Nations" by Martens. According to Wayne, the very nature of commerce, as experienced in the European tradition and brought forth into the Commerce Clause, had to be a matter for the regulation of the nation as a whole: "Keeping, then, in mind what commerce is, and how far a nation may legally limit her own commercial transactions with another state,The term "state" refers here not to one of the States of the United States but to a foreign state or nations. we cannot be at a loss to determine, from the subject matter of the clauseClause 3 of Section 8 of Article I in the Constitution, that the meaning of the terms used in it is to exclude the statesThe term "states" here refers to the various States of the United States, not to foreign states or nations. from regulating commerce in any way, except their own internal trade, and to confide its legislative regulation completely and entirely to Congress."48 U.S. at 417. Wayne did not recapitulate the various ways in which Congress, by treaty and statute, actually regulates that foreign commerce on immigrants and other alien passengers from abroad, particularly from Britain, preferring to incorporate by reference the detailed treatment of these measures by Catron.
Notwithstanding the firmness of his opinion regarding the right of Congress, to the complete exclusion of state prerogative, to regulate foreign and interstate commerce, and even his view that the exclusivity principle had been authoritatively established by prior precedent of the Supreme Court, Wayne criticized a parallel discussion of Justice McLean and announced that he and the other Justices concurring in the judgment "do not think it necessary in these cases to reaffirm,... what this Court has long since decided, that the constitutional power to regulate 'commerce with foreign nations, and among the several states and with the Indian tribes,' is exclusively vested in Congress and that no part of it can be exercised by a state."48 U.S. at 411. He reasoned that even those who take the position that the states have the right to regulate foreign and interstate commerce in the absence of federal regulation readily admit that when the federal government actively regulates some aspect of foreign or interstate commerce, the states are prohibited by the Supremacy ClauseThe second clause of Article VI of the U.S. Constitution. from enacting or enforcing any law inconsistent with the federal law. He deemed that the federal government had engaged in regulating foreign commerce regarding passengers arriving from Britain when it entered into a series of treaties with that country. Wayne declared that the New York and Massachusetts statutes "conflict with treaty stipulations existing between the United States and Great Britain, permitting the inhabitants of the two countries 'freely and securely to come, with their ships and cargoes, to all places, ports, and rivers in the territories of each country to which other foreigners are permitted to come, to enter into the same, and to remain and reside in any parts of said territories, respectively;....'"48 U.S. at 413.The first commercial treaty between the United States and Great Britain was adopted in 1794. That particular treaty was abrogated by the War of 1812. However, similar treaty provisions were renewed in a subsequent treaty between the United States and Britain adopted in 1815, the second article of which contains the language quoted.
To Wayne, taxes represent a cost, which may be imposed on some item, person, activity, or status that is already within or relates to what or who is already within the jurisdiction of the taxing authority. Duties and imposts are levied upon items and/or persons coming into the jurisdiction of the levying authority. Wayne also observes a distinction between commerce, which concerns an exchange or transportation of persons, goods, documents, or information, on the one hand, and police powers, which concern the regulation of the conduct of persons and the condition of persons/or items within the jurisdiction, on the other hand. Wayne recognized that states have very broad powers of taxation but insisted that some of that power of taxation was yielded with the adoption of the Constitution. The general principle that he adopted was that if a power is delegated to Congress or to the national government, so much of the power of taxation that might interfere with the prerogatives of Congress and the federal government are constrained in service of the federal system. Specifically, the exclusive federal control over immigration and naturalization precludes any state taxation that would interfere with federal policy in those areas.
Wayne, like all other Justices, recognized states as the primary repository of "police powers." (The federal government can exercise "police powers" only in territory that is federal: District of Columbia, territories, and federal enclaves in the States, such as military bases and federal buildings.) "Police powers" encompass the various measures taken to assure the safety and well-being of people at the local level. Thus, the police power of a state to protect the health of its residents includes the right to exclude from its territory diseased people. A curious example of police power, recognized by all of the Justices involved in the Passenger Case, was the right of slave States to exclude free citizens from Sub-Saharan Africa, for fear that they might help organize slave rebellions. However, the police power that was most critical, especially to part of the Massachusetts statute, was the right of a state to protect its economy and social fabric from an onslaught of paupers. The judgment in Norris technically did not strike down the portion of the statute concerning paupers. However, Wayne insisted that analysis of the various views of the five Justices concurring in the judgment establishes the willingness of a majority of the Supreme Court to strike down state taxation of immigrant paupers or the shipping companies that bring them to shore. To Wayne the goal of rebuffing paupers was legitimate, but taxation was an unconstitutional means. He counseled states to examine immigrants and expel those found to be diseased, paupers, fugitives from criminal justice, or those otherwise unworthy of admission for other reasons related to the welfare of the citizens and residents of the state. Wayne even commented in dictum that if Congress ever exercised its power of regulating immigration to compel states to accept such persons, that the United States Supreme Court would readily strike down such a federal statute as unconstitutional.
The clause of Section 9 of Article I of the Constitution prohibiting any "Preference" with respect to "Regulation of Commerce or Revenue to the Ports of one State over those of another" is not limited to federal action but also precludes any action by the states that would result in such a preference. Wayne deems a tax of the nature imposed by the New York and Massachusetts statutes to create a "Preference" between ports, in violation of the Constitution. Wayne construed the clause to even prohibit implicitly a state from creating a situation that would disadvantage the usage of its own port if that had the consequence of creating a preference for shippers in favor of the ports of other states.
Wayne used a parallel logic in construing the first clause of Section 8 of Article I of the Constitution, which qualified the authority of Congress to "lay and collect Taxes, Duties, Imposts and Excises" with a provision that "all Duties, Imposts and Excises shall be uniform throughout the United States." Again, although Article I concerns Congress and Section 9 concerns an authority expressly granted to Congress, Wayne construed uniformity as not only placing a limitation on the exercise of Congressional power but also imposing on the states the duty not to compromise the uniformity of "Duties, Imposts and Excises" collected "throughout the United States."
In addition to Wayne's discussion of the constitutional issues, he expounded at length on the alleged history and imputed status of Miln.36 U.S. 102. According to Wayne, the opinion authored by Justice Barbour, which purports to be the official opinion of the Supreme Court in that case, "had not at any time the concurrence of a majority of its members."48 U.S. at 429. He also bitterly accused Chief Justice Taney of knowingly disregarding that supposed fact and thus creating a false precedent in the official reports.
Catron's opinion
As noted above, Justice Catron's opinion ostensibly addressed only the New York case. However, its discussion of congressional statutes and treaties applaud to both the New York and the Massachusetts cases.
Catron discussed federal law on naturalization of immigrants as American citizens. The Declaration of Independence had included in the offenses of the British King that he had "endeavored to prevent the population of the colonies by obstructing the laws for the naturalization of foreigners, and refusing to pass others to encourage their migration hither."That language is the paraphrasing of Justice Catron, 48 U.S. at 440, not a quote from the Declaration of Independence. The US Constitution commits to Congress the power "to establish a uniform rule of naturalization."First Provision of the Fourth Clause of Section 8 of Article I. Catron discussed congressional implementation of its jurisdiction over naturalization. On March 26, 1790 Congress enacted legislation, permitting any immigrant alien who was a "free white person" to become a naturalized United States citizen after only two years of residence in the United States.1 Stat. at L. 103, "An act to establish a uniform rule of naturalization." Congress later (April 14, 1802)Catron misstated the date as April 26, 1802. 48 U.S. at 440. amended the naturalization statute to require five years of residence.2 Stat. at L. 153, "An act to establish a uniform rule of naturalization, and to repeal the acts heretofore passed on that subject." Catron waxed regarding the benefits that promoting immigration had conferred on the United States:
Under these laws have been admitted such numbers, that they and their descendants constitute a great part of our population. Every department of science, of labor, occupation, and pursuit, is filled up, more or less, by naturalized citizens and their numerous offspring. From the first day of our separate existence to this time has the policy of drawing hither aliens, to the end of becoming citizens, been a favorite policy of the United States; it has been cherished by Congress with rare steadiness and vigor. By this policy our extensive and fertile country has been, to a considerable extent, filled up by a respectable population, both physically and mentally, one that is easily governed and usually of approved patriotism."48 U.S. at 440.
Catron had no doubt that the 295 immigrants aboard the Henry Bliss whom New York State proposed to tax were responding to that federal policy:
We have invited to come to our country from other lands all free white persons, of every grade and of every religious belief, and when here to enjoy our protection, and at the end of five years to enjoy all our rights, except that of becoming President of the United States. Pursuant to this notorious and long established policy, the two hundred and ninety-five passengers in the Henry Bliss arrived at the port of New York."
Catron observed that the states may not tax goods or possessions of immigrant passengers and cited both a federal statuteCatron referred to Section 46 of a federal law, which he called the "General Collection Act of 2 March 1799." 48 U.S. at 441. The official title of that act was "An Act to regulate the collection of imports and tonnage." 1 Stat. at Large 627. The portion of Section 46 to which Catron referred and the excerpt that he quoted is found at 1 Stat. at Large 661. and the Supreme Court opinion of Brown v. Maryland.25 U.S. 419. He then posed the question as to whether the result should be any different with respect to taxation based on the passengers themselves.
See also
 Head Money Cases A similar U.S. Supreme Court case over a head tax imposed on Dutch immigrants.
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 48
References
External links
Category:1849 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:United Kingdom–United States relations
Category:Port of New York and New Jersey
"""

From "Patchak v. Zinke" ==> """
Patchak v. Zinke, 583 U.S. ___ (2018), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld the Gun Lake Trust Land Reaffirmation Act, which precludes federal courts from hearing lawsuits involving a particular parcel of land., 138 S. Ct. 897 (2018). This article incorporates public domain material from this U.S government document. Although six Justices agreed that the Gun Lake Act was constitutional, they could not agree on why. In an opinion issued by Justice Thomas, a plurality of the Court read the statute to strip federal courts of jurisdiction over cases involving the property and held that this did not violate Article III of the U.S. Constitution. In contrast, Justices Ginsburg and Sotomayor, both of whom concurred in the judgment, upheld the Act as a restoration of the government's sovereign immunity. Chief Justice Roberts, writing for himself and Justices Kennedy and Gorsuch, dissented on the ground that the statute intruded on the judicial power, in violation of Article III.
 Background 
 Legal backdrop 
The Supreme Court has repeatedly struggled to reconcile Congress's power to alter the metes and bounds of federal court jurisdiction with the judicial power, which Article III vests in the courts alone.See Sarah Herman Peck, Cong. Research Serv., R44967, Congress’s Power over Courts: Jurisdiction Stripping and the Rule of Klein (2018), https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R44967.pdf. Patchak v. Zinke implicated two of these cases in particular:
 United States v. Klein 
United States v. Klein, 13 Wall. 128 (1872): During the Civil War, the Treasury Department seized abandoned or captured property in Confederate territory to support the Union.Abandoned Property Collection Act, ch. 120, 12 Stat. 820 (1863). After the War, President Johnson declared that Southerners could receive the proceeds of their confiscated property after receiving a presidential pardon and swearing an oath of loyalty to the United States.. Subsequently, in United States v. Padelford, the Supreme Court held that a pardon rendered such claimants "innocent in law as though he had never participated" in the War and, therefore, was entitled to the proceeds. (internal quotation marks omitted). In response, Congress enacted a law providing that a presidential pardon in a suit brought for the proceeds of abandoned or captured property shall be treated as "conclusive evidence" of disloyalty, and, upon such proof, "the jurisdiction of the court in the case shall cease, and the court shall forthwith dismiss the suit of such claimant."Klein, 80 U.S. at 133.
The Court struck down the statute. The Court held that, because Congress "prescribe[d] a rule for the decision of a cause in a particular way," it had "passed the limit which separates the legislative from the judicial power."Klein, 80 U.S. at 147. But the Court also suggested that the law was unconstitutional because it "impair[ed] the effect of a pardon, and thus infring[ed] the constitutional power of the Executive." Thus, while its outcome is clear, the precise holding of Klein has generated much debate.See e.g., , 136 S. Ct. 1310, 1323 n.18 (2016) (acknowledging that Klein has been described as "a deeply puzzling decision" (citation omitted)); Gordon G. Young, Congressional Regulation of Federal Courts’ Jurisdiction & Processes: United States v. Klein Revisited, 1981 Wis. L. Rev. 1189, 1195 (1981) ("[T]he Klein opinion combines the clear with the delphic.").
 Bank Markazi v. Peterson 
Bank Markazi v. Peterson, 136 S.Ct. 1310 (2016): Victims and estate representatives sued Iran for its role in the 1983 bombing of the U.S. Marine barracks in Beirut, Lebanon under 28 U.S.C. § 1605A, which provides "money damages . . . against a foreign state for personal injury or death that was caused by" acts of terrorism., 136 S. Ct. 1310, 1317 (2016) (quoting ). The plaintiffs prevailed in their lawsuit and sought to enforce the judgment against the Central Bank of Iran, known as "Bank Markazi," under the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act, which authorizes the enforcement of judgments obtained under § 1605A against "blocked assets."Bank Markazi, 136 S. Ct. at 1318 (quoting ); see also Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002,  (2002). While the litigation was pending, Congress enacted the Iran Threat Reduction and Syria Human Rights Act of 2012 (codified at 22 U.S.C. § 8772).Bank Markazi, 136 S. Ct. at 1318 (citing ); see also Iran Threat Reduction and Syria Human Rights Act of 2012,  (2012). That statute referenced the litigation by docket number and authorized the Bank's assets to be seized to enforce a judgment pursuant to § 1605A if the court concluded the assets were (1) held in the United States; (2) a "blocked asset"; (3) an asset of Iran; and (4) owned only by Iran..
Relying on Klein, Bank Markazi argued § 8772 violated Article III by "effectively dictat[ing] specific factual findings in connection with a specific litigation—invading the province of the courts."Bank Markazi, 136 S. Ct. at 1322 (internal quotation marks omitted). The Supreme Court disagreed. The Court upheld § 8772 on the logic that Congress "does not impinge on judicial power when it directs courts to apply a new legal standard to undisputed facts."Bank Markazi, 136 S. Ct. at 1325. Here, the statute "provides a new standard clarifying that, if Iran owns certain assets, the victims of Iran-sponsored terrorist attacks will be permitted to execute against those assets."Bank Markazi, 136 S. Ct. at 1326. In upholding the statute, however, the Court cautioned that an Act which merely said "in Smith v. Jones, Smith wins" would violate Article III because it "fails to supply any new legal standard."
Chief Justice Roberts, joined by Justice Sotomayor, dissented, arguing Congress unconstitutionally invaded the judicial power by "enacting a bespoke statute tailored to this case that resolves the parties’ specific legal disputes to guarantee respondents victory."Bank Markazi, 136 S. Ct. at 1330 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting).
 Facts and Procedural History 
The Match-E-Be-Nash-She-Wish Band of Pottawatomi Indians (also known as the Gun Lake Tribe) live in what is today southwestern Michigan.Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 903. Despite having been recognized by the federal government in numerous treaties during the 1800s,See, e.g., The Treaty of Greenville, Aug. 3, 1795, 7 Stat. 49; Treaty with the Ottawa, etc., U.S.-Ottawa, Chippewa, and Potawatomi Nations of Indians, Aug. 29, 1821, 7 Stat. 218. the Secretary of the Interior did not formally recognize the Band until 1999.Final Determination to Acknowledge the Match-e-be-nash-she-wish Band of Pottawatomi Indians of Michigan,  (1998). Once the Band received recognition, it sought to obtain land to reaffirm its sovereign status. The Tribe identified a 147-acre parcel of land in Wayland Township, Michigan (the Bradley Property) and asked the Secretary of the Interior to take the land into trust under the Indian Reorganization Act (IRA) (codified at 25 U.S.C. § 465). The Secretary agreed in 2005, and the Department of Interior published a notice in the Federal Register announcing the Secretary's intent to take the Bradley Property into trust.Notice of Determination,  (2005).
In response, the Michigan Gambling Opposition sued to stop the Secretary. The United States District Court for the District of Columbia dismissed the lawsuit, and the D.C. Circuit affirmed. In 2009, the Secretary took the land into trust. Before the Secretary could do so, however, David Patchak, a resident of Wayland Township, filed a complaint in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, challenging the Secretary's action under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) (codified at 5 U.S.C. § 500 et seq.) and the IRA. Specifically, he contended the Secretary lacked authority to take the Bradley Property into trust because the IRA empowers the Secretary to take land into trust only for tribes who were recognized when that law was enacted in 1934, but the Match-E-Be-Nash-She-Wish were not federally recognized until 1999. While Patchak's suit was pending, the Supreme Court embraced this interpretation of the IRA in Carcieri v. Salazar..
The District Court dismissed Patchak's claims, concluding he lacked standing to vindicate violations of the IRA.Patchak, 646 F. Supp. 2d at 76. The D.C. Circuit reversed and also held that the government had waived its sovereign immunity through the APA, which permits claims for prospective, nonmonetary relief. The Supreme Court granted certiorari on both issues.Match-E-Be-Nash-She-Wish Band of Pottawatomi Indians v. Patchak, SCOTUSblog, https://www.scotusblog.com/case-files/cases/match-e-be-nash-she-wish-band-of-pottawatomi-indians-v-patchak/ (last visited May 3, 2019). In 2012, the Court affirmed the D.C. Circuit in Match-E-Be-Nash-She-Wish Band of Pottawatomi Indians v. Patchak, holding that Patchak's lawsuit could proceed..
In September 2014, while Patchak's case was again pending before the district court, Congress enacted the Gun Lake Act.Gun Lake Trust and Reaffirmation Act,  (2014). That law contained two sections:
 Section 2(a) provides: "The land taken into trust by the United States for the benefit of the Match-E-Be-Nash-She-Wish Band of Pottawatomi Indians and described in the final Notice of Determination of the Department of the Interior (70 Fed. Reg. 25596 (May 13, 2005)) is reaffirmed as trust land, and the actions of the Secretary of the Interior in taking that land into trust are ratified and confirmed." 
 Section 2(b) provides: "Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an action (including an action pending in a Federal court as of the date of enactment of this Act) relating to the land described in subsection (a) shall not be filed or maintained in a Federal court and shall be promptly dismissed."
The legislative history of the Act makes clear that Congress acted with the express purpose of "void[ing] a pending lawsuit challenging the lawfullness of the Secretary's original action to acquire the Bradley Property," even mentioning David Patchak by name.H. Rep. No. 113-590, at 2 (2014).
Although Patchak argued the Act was unconstitutional, the district court dismissed his case on the ground that it "lack[ed] jurisdiction to reach the merits of plaintiff’s claim." The D.C. Circuit affirmed the District Court's ruling because, "if an action relates to the Bradley Property, it must promptly be dismissed."
The Supreme Court granted certiorari on May 1, 2017.Patchak v. Zinke, SCOTUSblog, https://www.scotusblog.com/case-files/cases/patchak-v-jewell/ (last visited May 3, 2019).
Relevant Constitutional Provisions
Section 1, Article III of the U.S. Constitution provides: "The judicial Power of the United States, shall be vested in one supreme Court, and in such inferior Courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and establish."U.S. Const. Art. III, § 1.
 Supreme Court 
 Question Presented 
Does a statute violate the Constitution's separation-of-powers principles if it directs the federal courts to dismiss any pending lawsuit against a particular property but does not amend substantive or procedural laws?
 Justice Thomas’s Plurality Opinion 
Writing for a plurality of the Court, Justice Thomas held the Gun Lake Act was a lawful exercise of Congress's legislative authority that did not encroach on the judiciary's Article III powers.Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 904. He acknowledged that Congress could not pass a statute that says, "In Smith v. Jones, Smith wins," because this would impermissibly withdraw from the courts "the power to interpret and apply the law to the [circumstances] before it."Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 905 (internal quotation marks omitted). But he went on to observe that Article I entitles Congress to "make laws that apply retroactively to pending lawsuits, even when it effectively ensures that one side wins." Thus, to determine if the Act impermissibly usurps the judiciary's power, the Court had to examine whether it "compels findings or results under old law," or "changes the law." The former is unlawful; the latter is constitutional.
The Gun Lake Act passed this test because it changes the law.See Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 905-08. The Act's language and its consequences—that actions relating to the Bradley Property "shall be promptly dismissed"—made the law jurisdictional.See Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 905-06. And laws "that strip jurisdiction change the law for the purpose of Article III."Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 907 (internal quotation marks omitted). Accordingly, Justice Thomas concluded the Act "is a valid exercise of Congress's legislative power."Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 908.
Justice Thomas rejected Patchak's arguments that even if the Act is jurisdictional, it nonetheless violated Article III. Regarding Patchak's contention that the Act was unlawful because it "directs" an outcome without having courts interpret new law, Justice Thomas again repeated that the statute "creates new law for suits relating to the Bradley Property." And he dismissed Patchak's attempt to analogize his case to United States v. Klein. Rather, Justice Thomas clarified that the statute in Klein was unconstitutional because Congress could not alter the effect of presidential pardons and therefore "could not achieve the same result by stripping jurisdiction."Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 909. Thus, this case was unlike Klein because the Gun Lake Act "does not attempt to exercise a power that the Constitution vests in another branch."
Justice Thomas likewise found unpersuasive Patchak's argument that the Act violated Article III because it "attempts to interfere with the Court’s decision in Patchak I." Although Congress cannot compel courts to reopen and alter final judgments, Congress does have the power to change the applicable law and direct courts to apply it to pending cases. Thus, Patchak's claim was meritless because his suit was pending when Congress passed the Act. That the Act effectively singled out Patchak's lawsuit was of no moment, Justice Thomas explained, pointing out that Congress targeted specific cases in Bank Markazi v. Peterson by referencing their docket number in the statute.Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 910.
 Concurrences    
 Justice Breyer’s Concurrence 
Justice Breyer joined the plurality in full but also wrote a separate concurrence in which he agreed with Justice Thomas that the Act did not violate Article III.Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 911-12 (Breyer, J., concurring). In his view, Section 2(b)’s jurisdiction stripping provision reinforces Section 2(a), in which Congress expressly gave the Secretary authority to take the Bradley Property into trust. Accordingly, Section 2(b) merely "gilds the lily" by "provid[ing] an alternative legal standard for courts to apply that seeks the same real world result as does [Section 2(a)]: The Bradley Property shall remain in trust."Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 911. To Justice Breyer, Congress's use of its jurisdictional powers to "supplement" Section 2(a)—"action that no one has challenged as unconstitutional"—was "unobjectionable."
 Justice Ginsburg’s Concurrence 
Justice Ginsburg issued an opinion concurring in the judgment for herself and Justice Sotomayor.Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 912-13 (Ginsburg, J., concurring in the judgment). In her view, the Act was best read as a retraction of the federal government's waiver of sovereign immunity. To be sure, sovereign immunity did not initially preclude Patchak's lawsuit because he sought declaratory and injunctive relief, remedies the APA permits plaintiffs to bring against the federal government.Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 912-13 (citing ). "But consent of the United States to suit may be withdrawn at any time." And that is precisely what the Act achieved, she observed. That is, Congress "displace[d] the APA's wiaver of immunity for suits against the United States with a contrary command applicable to the Bradley Property."Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 913. Accordingly, Justice Ginsburg would have affirmed the D.C. Circuit's opinion without reaching the constitutional questions Patchak raised.
 Justice Sotomayor’s Concurrence 
Justice Sotomayor also wrote an opinion concurring in the judgment.Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 913-14 (Sotomayor, J., concurring in the judgment). Like Justice Ginsburg, she believed the Act "should not be read to strip the federal courts of jurisdiction but rather to restore the Federal Government's sovereign immunity." She wrote separately to point out the relevance of Match-E-Be-Nash-She-Wish Band of Pottawatomi Indians v. Patchak, which addressed whether sovereign immunity foreclosed Patchak's lawsuit.Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 913-14 (citing Match– E–Be–Nash–She–Wish Band of Pottawatomi Indians, ). There, the Court suggested that Congress could reassert its sovereign immunity as a way to end the lawsuit.See Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 914. Justice Sotomayor thus voted to affirm on that "basis alone" and declined to address the separation-of-powers issues.
 Chief Justice Roberts’s Dissent 
Chief Justice Roberts, joined by Justices Kennedy and Gorsuch, dissented from the plurality's ruling.Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 914-22 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting). In his view, the Gun Lake Act was indistinguishable from a statue which commanded "In Smith v. Jones, Smith wins."Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 915-16, 920. The Chief Justice argued that the Court's precedents, including Klein, demonstrate "Congress violates [Article III] when it arrogates the judicial power to itself and decides a particular case."Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 916. In his view, the Act ran afoul of that clear rule: It "target[s] a single party for adverse treatment and direct[s] the precise disposition of his pending case."Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 918. Indeed, he found the Act even more objectionable than the one at issue Bank Markazi v. Peterson.  Whereas the statute in Bank Markazi, created a standard for courts to apply in particular cases, the Gun Lake Act "prevents the court from applying any new legal standard," instead mandating dismissal.Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 917-18. For that reason, "it is idle to suggest that § 2(b) preserves any role for the court beyond that of stenographer."
The Chief Justice then turned to contest the plurality's analysis. First, the Act was not jurisdictional. The Court, he explained, has "adopted a bright line rule treating statutory limitations as nonjurisdictional unless Congress clearly states otherwise," and here the Act "does not clearly state that it impose a jurisdictional restriction."Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 919 (internal quotation marks omitted). Second, in his view, the Act does not "change the law." To do so, a statute "must imply some measure of generality or preservation of an adjudicative role for the courts."Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 920. Here, however, the Act merely strips the courts of jurisdiction over a particular lawsuit.
Finally, he responded to each of the concurrences. He dismissed the position of Justices Ginsburg and Sotomayor that the Act was a restoration of sovereign immunity.Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 921-22. To reinstate sovereign immunity, Congress "must express an unambiguous intention to withdraw a remedy."Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 921 (internal quotation marks omitted). Since the Act did not reference sovereignty or immunity, it did not reflect this clear intent. And with respect to Justice Breyer, the Chief Justice observed, "Congress cannot 'gild the lily' by relieving the Judiciary of its job—applying the law to the case before it."Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 922.
Thus, the Chief Justice would "hold that Congress exercises the judicial power when it manipulates jurisdictional rules to decide the outcome of a particular pending case" and, consequently, would invalidate the Gun Lake Act.Patchak, 138 S. Ct. at 919-20.
 References 
Further reading
External links
 Case page at SCOTUSblog
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:Potawatomi
Category:Allegan County, Michigan
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Native American history of Michigan
"""

From "Patel v. Garland" ==> """
Patel v. Garland, 596 U.S. ___ (2022), was a United States Supreme Court case related to the jurisdiction of federal courts over immigration appeals.
 Background 
Pankajkumar Patel entered the United States illegally in February 1992. In August 2007, he applied for adjustment of status to receive a green card. In December 2008, Patel sought to renew his Georgia driver's license and checked a box on the application specifying that he was a United States citizen. An immigration judge later denied his application for adjustment of status on that basis, and the Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) affirmed. Patel asserted that because he would be eligible for the driver's license regardless of his citizenship status, his mistake on the form should not matter when it comes to his immigration application. He subsequently petitioned the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit for review of the BIA's decision, but a panel of the court held it lacked jurisdiction to consider the claim. Both Patel and the government disagreed with this reading of the jurisdiction-stripping provision of the immigration code, and the court granted rehearing en banc. The Eleventh Circuit again reached the same outcome, this time in an 11–4 vote. Patel filed a petition for a writ of certiorari.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case on June 28, 2021. As both Patel and the government disagreed with the Eleventh Circuit's decision, the court appointed Taylor Meehan of Consovoy McCarthy to defend the judgment below. Oral arguments were held on December 6, 2021. On May 16, 2022, the Supreme Court affirmed the Eleventh Circuit in a 5–4 decision, with Justice Amy Coney Barrett writing the majority, and Justice Neil Gorsuch writing the dissent.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
"""

From "Patent and Trademark Office v. Booking.com B. V." ==> """
Patent and Trademark Office v. Booking.com B. V., 591 U.S. ___ (2020), was a United States Supreme Court case dealing with the trademarkability of a generic terms appended with a top-level domain (TLD) specifier (in this case "Booking.com"). The Court ruled that such names can be trademarked unless the existing combination of term and TLD is considered to have a generic meaning to consumers.
Background
Booking.com is an online travel agency, operating under both that name and at that domain name. The company sought to trademark its name with the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). The USPTO had denied the application: it ruled that the term "booking" as applied the class of travel services was a generic term, and that Booking.com had not shown how their mark had gained distinctiveness. Booking.com appealed to the Trademark Trial and Appeal Board (TTAB), which upheld that "booking" was a generic term within the class of travel services, and simply appending ".com" did not change its generic nature.
Booking.com appealed the TTAB decision to the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia. There, the court reversed the TTAB's decision. The court found that while "booking" was a generic term related to arranging travel services, the addition of the top-level domain (TLD) of ".com", implying an online Internet commerce site, created a new concepts that was no longer generic. Further, the court agreed with evidence presented by Booking.com that the public recognized "Booking.com" as its brand through customer testimonials, including a "Teflon survey" of consumers in that market space where nearly 75% recognized "Booking.com" as a specific brand name for Booking.com's services. Additionally, the court recognized that with domain names being unique, this furthered the uniqueness of the trademark.
The USPTO appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, which in February 2019 upheld the District Court ruling in a 2-1 decision. A key issue raised on appeal was the consideration that the components of "booking.com" ("booking" and ".com") were both considered generic, but as the Fourth Circuit upheld, their combination was recognized by consumers as a unique service due to the online domain name, rather than a broad range of online booking services, as to align with the prior decision from the Supreme Court case Goodyear's India Rubber Glove Mfg. Co. v. Rubber Co., whereby simply adding "Company" to the end of a product name does not uniquely identify the company.. The dissenting judge feared that the decision would allow larger companies that had better resources to perform "Teflon surveys" and other consumer recognition tests could win out smaller companies in trademark dispute cases simply because of the domain name addition.
Supreme Court
The USPTO petitioned to the Supreme Court for review, which certified the case in November 2019. The oral arguments for the case on May 4, 2020, were the first ever to be held via teleconference for the Supreme Court as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. During the arguments, the Justices raised questions of how an Internet address trademark different from a street address or phone number trademark which are similarly unique and have been granted, as well as the impact if they reversed on how many trademarks would be invalidated.
The Court issued its ruling on June 30, 2020. The 8–1 decision affirmed the Fourth Circuit's decision, holding that "a term styled 'generic.com' is a generic name for a class of goods
or services only if the term has that meaning to consumers." Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote for the majority, joined by all but Justice Stephen Breyer. The majority's decision emphasized the importance of the Lanham Act and consumer perception, as well as the uniqueness of domain names. Ginsburg wrote "According to the PTO, adding '.com' to a generic term—like adding 'Company'—can convey no source-identifying meaning. That premise is faulty, for only one entity can occupy a particular Internet domain name at a time, so a 'generic.com' term could convey to consumers an association with a particular website. Moreover, an unyielding legal rule that entirely disregards consumer perception is incompatible with a bedrock principle of the Lanham Act: The generic (or nongeneric) character of a particular term depends on its meaning to consumers, i.e., do consumers in fact perceive the term as the name of a class or, instead, as a term capable of distinguishing among members of the class." Ginsburg concluded from this "We have no cause to deny Booking.com the same benefits Congress accorded other marks qualifying as nongeneric."
In his dissent, Breyer wrote "By making such terms eligible for trademark protection, I fear that today's decision will lead to a proliferation of 'generic.com' marks, granting their owners a monopoly over a zone of useful, easy-to-remember domains."
 References 
External links
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States trademark case law
Category:Booking Holdings
Category:Domain Name System
"""

From "Patterson v. Alabama" ==> """
Patterson v. Alabama, 294 U.S. 600 (1935), was a United States Supreme Court case which held that an African-American defendant is denied due process rights if the jury pool excludes African-Americans.
Background
This case was the second landmark decision arising out of the Scottsboro Boys trials (the first was the 1932 case, Powell v. Alabama).   Haywood Patterson, along with several other African-American defendants, were tried for raping two white women in 1931 in Scottsboro, Alabama.  The trials were rushed, there was virtually no legal counsel, and no African-Americans were permitted in the jury.  All defendants, including Patterson, were convicted.  The Communist Party of the United States assisted the defendants and appealed to the Supreme Court, which overturned the convictions in 1932 (in the Powell v. Alabama decision) due to lack of legal counsel.
A second set of trials was then held in Decatur, Alabama.   In spite of lack of evidence, the jury sentenced Patterson to death in the electric chair.  Judge James Edwin Horton overturned the verdict, and a third trial was held in 1933.  The third trial also resulted in a death penalty verdict.  No African Americans were included in any of the juries, nor were any ever considered for jury duty in Alabama.  This decision was appealed to the Supreme Court, on the basis that the absence of African Americans from the jury pool denied the defendants due process.
The Supreme Court agreed, and the convictions were overturned.
In 1936, the defendants were tried, some for the fourth time, again for rape.  In this trial, the verdicts were again guilty, but sentences were long prison terms rather than the death penalty.
Notes and references
External links
  Norris v. Alabama - 294 U.S. 587 (1935)
Category:1935 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:African-American history of Alabama
Category:1935 in Alabama
Category:Legal history of Alabama
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Patterson v. Colorado" ==> """
Patterson v. Colorado, 205 U.S. 454 (1907), was a First Amendment case.  Before 1919, the primary legal test used in the United States to determine if speech could be criminalized was the  bad tendency test.Rabban, pp 132–134, 190–199. Rooted in English common law, the test permitted speech to be outlawed if it had a tendency to harm public welfare.  One of the earliest cases the Supreme Court heard addressing punishment after material was published was   1907's Patterson v. Colorado in which the Court used the bad tendency test to uphold contempt charges against a newspaper publisher who accused Colorado judges of acting on behalf of local utility companies.Before 1907, most free speech issues addressed prior restraint rather than punishment after speaking.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 205
Footnotes
References
Rabban, David, Free Speech in Its Forgotten Years, Cambridge University Press, 1999, 
External links
Category:1907 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Patterson v. New York" ==> """
Patterson v. New York, 432 U.S. 197 (1977), was a legal case heard by the Supreme Court of the United States that stated that the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause did not prevent the burdening a defendant with proving the affirmative defense of extreme emotional disturbance as defined by New York law.
The court found that the State of New York had reclassified provocation ("extreme emotional disturbance") as an excuse (an affirmative defense requiring proof by preponderance of the evidence), rather than a circumstance negating the mental element (mens rea), which the prosecution had to prove beyond a reasonable doubt, as was the situation in Mullaney v. Wilbur (1975).Criminal Law - Cases and Materials, 7th ed. 2012, Wolters Kluwer Law & Business; John Kaplan, Robert Weisberg, Guyora Binder, , 
Background
During his brief and unstable marriage, the appellant, Gordon Patterson, Jr., became estranged from his wife, Roberta. She resumed an association with John Northrup, a neighbor to whom she had been engaged prior to her marriage to appellant. On December 27, 1970, Patterson borrowed a rifle from an acquaintance and went to the residence of his father-in-law. There, he observed his wife through a window in a state of semiundress in the presence of John Northrup. He entered the house and killed Northrup by shooting him twice in the head.
Patterson was charged with second-degree murder. In New York, there were two elements of that crime: (1) "intent to cause the death of another person" and (2) "causing the death of such person or of a third person." – N.Y. Penal Law. Malice aforethought is not an element of the crime. The State of New York allowed a person accused of murder to raise an affirmative defense that he "acted under the influence of extreme emotional disturbance for which there was a reasonable explanation or excuse."
The New York law required that the defendant in any prosecution for second-degree murder prove by a preponderance of the evidence the affirmative defense of extreme emotional disturbance to reduce the crime to manslaughter.
A trial court jury found Patterson guilty for murder.  On appeal, the New York Court of Appeals found the law (and verdict) not to violate Patterson's Constitutional rights as guaranteed under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
The case was appealed to the US Supreme Court and was argued March 1, 1977 and decided June 17, 1977
Victor Rubino argued the cause for the appellant. With him on the briefs was Betty Friedlander. John Finnerty argued the cause for the appellee. With him on the brief was Alan Marrus.
Decision
The Supreme Court affirmed and decided that shifting the burden of proof of a mitigating circumstance affirmative defense to the defendant is allowed by the Due Process Clause of the U.S. Constitution.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 432
Further reading
References
External links
Overview by Nebraskapen.org
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:United States criminal burden of proof case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Paul v. Davis" ==> """
Paul v. Davis, 424 U.S. 693 (1976), is a United States Supreme Court case in which a sharply divided Court held that the plaintiff, whom the local police chief had named an "active shoplifter," suffered no deprivation of liberty resulting from injury to his reputation.. In the case, the court broke from precedents and restricted the definition of the constitutional right to privacy "to matters relating to 'marriage procreation, contraception, family relationships, and child rearing and education".
Background
The plaintiff, Edward C. Davis III, had been previously arrested on shoplifting charges. After the charges were dropped, Davis sued the Louisville, KY chief of police for distributing "active shoplifter" posters to merchants throughout the city.
Majority holding
In a 5-3 decision in favor of the police chief, Paul, Justice Rehnquist wrote the opinion for the majority. The majority opinion held that petitioner's alleged defamation, a typical state court claim, was not actionable under the Due Process Clause and 42 U.S.C. § 1983. The procedural guarantees of the Due Process Clause could not be the source for a body of general federal court law. The Court also found that respondent's injury to reputation was not specially protected by § 1983 and the Due Process Clause. Damage to reputation, alone, apart from some more tangible interests, was not sufficient to invoke the protection of the Due Process Clause. Further, the police chief did not deprive respondent of any state-provided right, and respondent's case was not within the constitutional zone of privacy. The Court reversed the judgment.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Brennan wrote the dissenting opinion which was joined by Justice Marshall and which Justice White concurred in part. Justice Brennan pointed out that the majority's opinion was inconsistent with the Court's prior case law and was unduly restrictive in its construction of the Bill of Rights.
Justice Brennan pointed out that the majority misread the precedence in Adickes v. S. H. Kress & Co.. which they believed supported the idea that the existence of a state remedy (such as a cause of action for defamation) would be relevant to the determination whether there is a separate cause of action under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 citing Monroe v. Pape. and McNeese v. Board of Educ.. which clarified that the federal remedy is supplementary to the state remedy and that the state remedy need not be first sought and refused before the federal one could be invoked.
Justice Brennan further points out that the majority "by mere fiat and with no analysis, wholly excludes personal interest in reputation from the ambit of "life, liberty, or property" under the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments, thus rendering due process concerns never applicable to the official stigmatization, however arbitrary, of an individual" adding that "The logical and disturbing corollary of this holding is that no due process infirmities would inhere in a statute constituting a commission to conduct ex party trials of individuals, so long as the only official judgment pronounced was limited to the public condemnation and branding of a person as a Communist, a traitor, an "active murderer," a homosexual, or any other mark that "merely" carries social opprobrium" further pointing out that "The potential of [the majority's holding] is frightening for a free people." and that it finds no support in relevant constitutional jurisprudence.
The Court previously held in Meyer v. Nebraska that "Without doubt, [liberty] denotes not merely freedom from bodily restraint, but also the right of the individual . . . generally to enjoy those privileges long recognized . . . as essential to the orderly pursuit of happiness by free men.".
In a concurring opinion in Rosenblatt v. Baer, Justice Stewart pointed out that the individual's right to the protection of his own good name...reflects no more than our basic concept of the essential dignity and worth of every human being—a concept at the root of any decent system of ordered liberty. The protection of private personality, like the protection of life itself, is left primarily to the individual States under the Ninth and Tenth Amendments. But this does not mean that the right is entitled to any less recognition by this Court as a basic of our constitutional system.". See also .
Justice Brennan also points out that the majority essentially ignored the case of Jenkins v. McKeithen,. a case closely akin to the factual pattern of the current case which was also about an action brought under § 1983, and recognized that the public branding of an individual implicates interests cognizable as either "liberty" or "property" and held that such public condemnation cannot be accomplished without procedural safeguards designed to eliminate arbitrary or capricious executive action.
Justice Brennan went on to say 
I have always thought that one of this Court's most important roles is to provide a formidable bulwark against governmental violation of the constitutional safeguards securing in our free society the legitimate expectations of every person to innate human dignity and sense of worth. It is a regrettable abdication of that role and a saddening denigration of our majestic Bill of Rights when the Court tolerates arbitrary and capricious official conduct branding an individual as a criminal without compliance with constitutional procedures designed to ensure the fair and impartial ascertainment of criminal culpability.
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Second Enforcement Act of 1871 case law
"""

From "Paul v. Virginia" ==> """
Paul v. Virginia, 75 U.S. (8 Wall.) 168 (1869), is a U.S. corporate law decision by the United States Supreme Court. It held that a corporation is not a citizen within the meaning of the Privileges and Immunities Clause. Of greater consequence, the Court further held that "issuing a policy of insurance is not a transaction of commerce," effectively removing the business of insurance beyond the United States Congress's legislative reach (until partially overturned in United States v. South-Eastern Underwriters Association).
Facts
In the 19th century, the insurance business was exclusively regulated by the states, individually. As a result, a patchwork of separate regulations proliferated to the dismay of insurance companies which sought uniform regulation across states. In an effort to promote federal regulation of the insurance industry, a number of New York insurance companies orchestrated a test case to try to invalidate state regulation. On February 3, 1866, the legislature of Virginia had passed a statute provided that an insurance company not incorporated under the laws of the state should not carry on its business within the State without previously obtaining a license for that purpose and that it should not receive such license until it had deposited with the treasurer of the state bonds in an amount varying from thirty to fifty thousand dollars.
In May 1866, Samuel Paul, a resident of the Commonwealth of Virginia, was appointed the agent of the New York insurance companies, to carry on the general business of insurance against fire. He then applied for a license to act as such agent within the state, offering at the time to comply with all the requirements of the statute with the exception of the provision requiring a deposit of bonds with the treasurer of the state. Based on his failure to comply with the requirements of the statute, the license was refused. Notwithstanding this refusal he undertook to act in the State as agent for the New York companies without any license.
Paul sold a fire insurance policy to a citizen of Virginia. He was then indicted and convicted in the Circuit Court of the city of Petersburg, and was sentenced to pay a fine of $50. Paul claimed that the statute was invalid.
Judgment
Supreme Court of Virginia
The Supreme Court of Appeals of the State, the judgment was affirmed, and the case was then appealed to the Supreme Court. Paul claimed that the writ of error on the judgment in the lower court violated Privileges and Immunities Clause, which provides that "The Citizens of each State shall be entitled to all Privileges and Immunities of Citizens in the several States" and the Commerce Clause, which empowers Congress "to regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the several States."
Supreme Court of the United States
thumb|alt=The Chase Court in 1868.|The Chase Court as of 1869.
The US Supreme Court held that a corporation is not a citizen within the meaning of the Privileges and Immunities Clause. A corporation has a right to operate in states where it is not incorporated where that state allows it to. It also held that "issuing a policy of insurance is not a transaction of commerce," effectively removing the business of insurance beyond the United States Congress's legislative reach.
Significance
In 1944, the Supreme Court overturned the holding of Paul v. Virginia in United States v. South-Eastern Underwriters Ass'n, finding that insurance transactions were subject to federal regulation under the Commerce Clause..
See also
US corporate law
Legal person
Insurance law
Notes
References
Henry N. Butler, Nineteenth century jurisdictional competition in the granting of corporate privileges (1985) 14(1) Journal of Legal Studies 129
F Tung, Before Competition: Origins of the Internal Affairs Doctrine (2006) 32 Iowa Journal of Corporate Law 33
External links
Category:1869 in United States case law
Category:1869 in Virginia
Category:Legal history of Virginia
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Four case law
Category:Privileges and Immunities case law
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
Category:Corporate personhood
Category:Insurance in the United States
"""

From "Payne v. Tennessee" ==> """
Payne v. Tennessee, 501 U.S. 808 (1991), was a United States Supreme Court case which held that testimony in the form of a victim impact statement is admissible during the sentencing phase of a trial and, in death penalty cases, does not violate the Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause of the Eighth Amendment.. Payne narrowed two of the Courts' precedents: Booth v. Maryland (1987) and South Carolina v. Gathers (1989).
Background
Pervis Tyrone Payne (born March 1, 1967) was the defendant in this trial prosecuted in Tennessee. According to his criminal conviction, on Saturday, June 27, 1987, he attempted to rape an acquaintance of his, Charisse Christopher, and murdered her and her two-year-old daughter, Lacie Jo. Neighbors alleged they heard noises and yelling, and called the police. Upon arriving, a police officer "immediately encountered Payne who was leaving the apartment building, so covered in blood that he appeared to be 'sweating blood'".
The defendant, in contrast, said that he was in the building on a visit to his girlfriend and hearing screams from the room of the murder victims he went in to help. Payne and many other witnesses saw a man leaving the crime scene shortly before Payne arrived. He had found the knife still stuck in the throat of Charisse and pulled it out. He fled when he saw police arrive.
The police found "a horrifying scene." Forty-two stab wounds were on Charisse's body, and Lacie Jo and Nicholas, Charisse's three-year-old son, had suffered stab wounds as well. Payne fled to his girlfriend's house, and discarded his clothes, which were allegedly soaked in blood. Meanwhile, Nicholas Christopher held in his intestines while the emergency medical technicians transported him to the emergency room. The physical evidence implicating the defendant was: his fingerprints on cans of malt liquor, the victims' blood soaked into his clothes, and his property left at the scene of the crime.
Dozens of witnesses, including the police, friends, the neighbors, and experts, testified at the trial. The evidence that he perpetrated the attacks was "overwhelming," according to Chief Justice Rehnquist. Payne denied the charges, claiming he came upon the bloody victims. The district attorney stressed, in his closing arguments, the senselessness of the killings, the violence displayed by the defendant, and the innocence of the victims. The jury convicted him of two counts of first-degree murder and two counts of attempted murder and a related charge.
At the sentencing phase, the judge allowed both the public defender to adduce mitigating testimony from the defendant's friends and family, and the district attorney (DA) to introduce evidence from the grandmother/mother of the victims. Payne appealed to the Tennessee Supreme Court, and then asked for a writ of certiorari from the United States Supreme Court. Certiorari was granted, with the Court noting that it would have to reconsider its past precedent. The case was argued on April 24, 1991 and decided on June 27, 1991.Facts are re-worded from the decision, q.v., Findlaw.com. Retrieved September 22, 2008.
Opinion of the Court
The Court held that testimony in the form of a victim impact statement was admissible and constitutional in death penalty cases, thus expressly limiting two prior cases, Booth v. Maryland (1987) and South Carolina v. Gathers (1989).
Writing for the Court, Chief Justice Rehnquist provided a variety of reasons for the decision:
 The sentencer has the right to consider all relevant evidence, within the rules of evidence.
 The principle that the punishment should fit the crime is relevant here, and this was a particularly aggravated and savage murder.
 Stare decisis is "not an inexorable command", and the Supreme Court, since Marbury v. Madison (1803), has decided what the law is.
 Because the defendant has the right to present mitigating evidence at the sentencing phase, the prosecution should be able to present aggravating evidence about the victim (Justice Stevens, in dissent, characterizes this argument as a non sequitur: the defendant has constitutional rights because he is on trial - the victim is not on trial and has no constitutional rights in the proceeding).
 The trial was fair in all respects, and mitigating evidence ought to be presented with damaging evidence when available.
Justices Stevens and Marshall wrote dissenting opinions, with Justice Blackmun joining each of them."Victims of Crime - Victims' Rights" on Library Index website. Retrieved September 22, 2008.
Impact
Payne has had a significant, ongoing impact in victim's rights, criminology, stare decisis, and the lives of the parties involved.
The case allowed victim impact statements in U.S. courts, and the overwhelming majority of states now allow such use in the sentencing phase of trials, and was a significant development in the victims' rights movement. One scholar wrote:
Another scholar calls the verdict in Payne an example of "symbolic violence."Wood, Jennifer K, "Refined raw: The symbolic violence of victims' rights reforms," College Literature, Winter 1999, found at BNet FindArticles.com. Retrieved September 22, 2008. It was pointed out that:
The case was one in a line of cases that showed how the Rehnquist Court shifted to the conservative or "right" on criminal cases.AP, "Excerpts from Rehnquist opinions: Chief justice oversaw conservative shift in court during tenure," September 4, 2005, found at nbcnews.com website. Retrieved September 22, 2008. The case is cited by at least one major college text book as a "capstone case."  Colin Starger has pointed out that the current split in the Court's jurisprudence between "strong" and "weak" conceptions of stare decisis (both of which are ultimately descended from a 1932 dissenting opinion by Louis Brandeis) arises from the disagreement between the Rehnquist majority opinion and the Marshall dissenting opinion in this case. Available via SpringerLink.
Scheduled executions
Payne's execution was stayed in April 2007,Pro death Penalty website. Retrieved September 22, 2008. and after protracted litigation,In re Pervis T. Payne (2007), list found at Tennessee Administrative Office of the Courts government website. Retrieved September 22, 2008.Tennessee Coalition to Abolish State Killing website. Retrieved September 22, 2008.   again scheduled in December 2007,Tneesse Corrections Department website. Retrieved September 22, 2008. and stayed again that month.Life on Death Row website. Retrieved September 22, 2008.Capital Defense Weekly website. Retrieved September 22, 2008.Payne v. Bredesen, No. 3-07-0714 (U.S.D.S. M.D. Tenn. 2007), found at US District Court, Middle District of Tennessee government website.  Retrieved September 22, 2008.Jared Allen, "Stay granted for Dec. 12 execution", Nashville City Paper, December 7, 2007, found at Nashville City Paper website. Retrieved September 22, 2008.
Payne was later scheduled to be executed on December 3, 2020. However, he was granted a temporary reprieve until April 9, 2021, due to the COVID-19 pandemic in Tennessee.
Subsequent developments
Payne continues to maintain his innocence and has attracted supporters such as The Innocence Project and The Southern Christian Leadership Conference founded by Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. In September 2020, DNA testing was ordered to investigate Paynes claims of innocence.https://www.wsbtv.com/news/trending/pervis-payne-death-row-inmate-nearing-execution-granted-bid-dna-testing-double-murder/BJXKIMVEZRAPVGZJTDYPKYVCBE/
On November 18, 2021, the Shelby County District Attorney General announced that Payne was no longer on death row and would instead serve two consecutive life sentences. Since 2002, executions of people with intellectual disabilities have been ruled unconstitutional in the United States, and a law passed by the Tennessee General Assembly in April 2021 allowed for death row inmates to appeal their sentences on intellectual disability grounds. After a review of the evidence, Payne was found to have an intellectual disability, making him ineligible for execution. On January 31, 2022, Payne was resentenced to two concurrent life sentences, including credit for time served for an assault charge; Payne will be eligible for parole by 2027.
See also
 Crime in the United States
 Criminology
 Crime victim advocacy program
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 501
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 Victimology
 Victim Support
 Victim study
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:1991 in United States case law
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:Victimology
Category:Capital punishment in Tennessee
"""

From "Payton v. New York" ==> """
Payton v. New York, 445 U.S. 573 (1980), was a United States Supreme Court case concerning warrantless entry into a private home in order to make a felony arrest. The Court struck down a New York statute providing for such warrantless entries because the Fourth Amendment draws a firm line at the entrance to the house. Absent exigent circumstances, that threshold may not be reasonably crossed without a warrant. The court, however, did specify that an arrest warrant (as opposed to a search warrant) would have sufficed for entry into the suspect's residence if there had been reason to believe that the suspect was within the home.
Payton and related case law establish that the principle that a person in a home, particularly his or her own, is entitled Fourth Amendment protections not afforded to persons in automobiles, as per Whren v. United States, or to persons in public, as per United States v. Watson.
Background
Theodore Payton of New York City was suspected of murdering an employee of a gas station in the city. Thinking Payton was home, the New York City police "forcibly entered Payton's home." Payton was in fact not home, and the police gathered evidence from his home connecting him to the murder of the gas station attendant. The police acted under a New York law "allowing police to enter a private residence to make a felony arrest without a warrant." At his trial, Payton was unable to have the evidence thrown out, and his conviction was upheld at the appellate level. The judge noted that the police entering Payton's house was "authorized by the New York law" and therefore was permissible.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 445
Miller v. United States, 
Ker v. California, 
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1980 in United States case law
"""

From "Pearce v. Ham" ==> """
Pearce v. Ham, 113 U.S. 585 (1885), was an appeal from the Circuit Court of the United States for the Southern District of Illinois regarding a bill filed by Charles I. Ham, the appellee, against Isaac N. Pearce and Andrew J. Kuykendall, the appellants.  Originally, one Joseph K. Frick contracted with the County Court of Johnson County in the State of Illinois, where he agreed to build, according to certain plans and specifications, a courthouse for said county at Vienna, the county seat, furnishing the material and completing it by the first Monday of September 1870, in consideration whereof the county court agreed to pay him $38,357 in the bonds of Johnson county, bearing ten percent interest, and due in six years. Frick never did any work on the building, and, owing to some misunderstanding with the county court, abandoned the contract and told Kuykendall that he might go on and build the courthouse if he chose to do so. On September 9, 1869, Kuykendall, as the agent and attorney in fact of Frick, assigned the contract of the latter to Ham and Pearce, Ham being the appellee, and Pearce one of the appellants, who had formed a partnership for the purpose of building the courthouse under said contract..
Frick contracted with a county to construct a public building, and gave bond with Kuykendall as surety for the performance of the contract. Frick abandoned the contract. After procuring some modifications in it at request of Ham, Kuykendall assigned the contract to Pearce and Ham as partners with equal interests. Pearce and Ham agreed with Wickwire to construct the building. Ham then left the vicinity and engaged in other work elsewhere. Wickwire constructed the building. Kuykendall received the compensation under the original contract, paid Wickwire in full for the work done by him, and divided the profits with Pearce, claiming to be partner. Held that Ham could recover one-half of the profits from Pearce and from Kuykendall.
The object of the suit was to obtain an account of what was due to Ham by virtue of his said partnership and partnership enterprise, and that Pearce and Kuykendall might be decreed to pay him what might be found due on such accounting either in cash or Johnson county bonds.
Upon final hearing upon the pleadings and evidence, the circuit court rendered a decree in favor of Ham against Kuykendall and Pearce for $5,001. The appeal of Kuykendall and Pearce brings that decree under review.
The high court found that The entire profits were appropriated by Pearce and Kuykendall, and they must account to Ham for his share and the Decree was affirmed.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
"""

From "Pearcy v. Stranahan" ==> """
Pearcy v. Stranahan, 205 U.S. 257 (1907), was a 1907 ruling of the Supreme Court of the United States in a tax case in which it determined that the Isle of Pines off the southern coast of Cuba was a "foreign country" for the purposes of tariffs under the Dingley Tariff Act of 1897, even though Cuba and the United States had agreed that the legal status of that island would remain undetermined until they settled the question by treaty.. 
Context
Under the terms of the 1898 Treaty of Paris that concluded the Spanish–American War, Spain dropped its claims to Cuba. Because of a lack of clarity in the language of that treaty with respect to the Isle of Pines (now known as the Isla de Juventud or "isle of youth"), and because some business interests in the United States were promoting the annexation of the Isle of Pines, Cuba and the United States agreed in their May 1903 Treaty of Relations:
Just weeks later, U.S. Secretary of State John Hay and Gonzalo de Quesada, Cuban Ambassador to the United States, signed a treaty recognizing Cuban sovereignty over Isle of Pines. The U.S. Senate withheld ratification of the Hay-Quesada Treaty until 1925, though it was supported by successive presidents and secretaries of state.
The case
The collector of the port of New York seized cigars that Pearcy brought to New York City from Isle of Pines, "where they had been produced and manufactured". He asserted they were subject to a tariff under the Dingley Tariff Act, which imposed duties "on articles imported from foreign countries". Pearcy brought suit, claiming that the Isle of Pines was "in possession of and part of the United States".
Chief Justice Melville Fuller wrote for a unanimous court. He found, citing Jones v. United States (1890), that the court needed to examine what the legislative and executive branches had determined with respect to Isle of Pines. For example, after citing evidence that "all the world knew that [Isle of Pines] was an integral part of Cuba", he asked with respect to the Treaty of Paris: "Has the treaty been otherwise interpreted by the political departments of this government?" He found no evidence that U.S. authorities had taken actions that showed they viewed the Isle of Pines as falling within the jurisdiction of the United States. After reviewing the language of various international agreements, military orders, official correspondence, and the activities of government administrators at various levels, he found that the United States had never exercised sovereignty over the Isle of Pines, that since being ceded by Spain it had been under the de facto jurisdiction of Cuba, and that it was therefore foreign territory for tariff purposes. He concluded:
In 1925 the Hay-Quesada Treaty was ratified between the U.S. and Cuba, recognizing Cuban sovereignty.
See also
Teller Amendment
Platt Amendment
References
External links
Cuba's Island of Dreams: Voices from the Isle of Pines and Youth
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1907 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Isla de la Juventud
Category:Cuba–United States relations
"""

From "Pearson v. Callahan" ==> """
Pearson v. Callahan, 555 U.S. 223 (2009), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court dealing with the doctrine of qualified immunity..
The case centered on the application of mandatory sequencing in determining qualified immunity as set by the 2001 decision, Saucier v. Katz, in which courts were to first ask whether a constitutional right was clearly violated by a government official at the time of the action before evaluating if a law had clearly been broken. The Court took to the unusual step of asking the parties to argue whether past precedent should be overturned. The theory under Saucier is that without courts first ruling on constitutional questions, the law would go undeveloped in many areas. Many legal commentators have criticized the ruling in Saucier.
The Supreme Court, in its opinion, withdrew the mandatory sequencing required under Saucier, giving courts the discretion of asking the constitutional or law question first. While this discretionary approach can free resources of the court, it has led to additional criticism, as it can often favor defendants, particularly in cases involving excessive force and police brutality.
Background
In 2002, a confidential police informant working with five officers from the Central Utah Narcotics Task Force went undercover at the Fillmore, Utah mobile home of a suspected drug dealer, Afton D. Callahan, to purchase $100 worth of methamphetamine. The officers had arranged for the informant, who was "wired" with a listening device, to give them a sign indicating a successful drug deal; when he did, they entered the home.
The case focuses on "consent once removed," a theory espoused by some lower courts that acts as an exception to the search warrant requirement of the Fourth Amendment. Under the doctrine, if a suspect to a crime opens the door for an undercover police officer, the suspect unknowingly is also allowing further police officers to enter without a warrant. In the criminal case at issue in this civil case, the police officers sent an undercover informant in to make a drug deal. When the informant succeeded, the police officers then entered Callahan's home without a warrant. The police in the case argued that "consent once removed" applied, since the informant was acting as an agent of the police. 
The criminal charges against Callahan were prosecuted in Utah state court. The judge rejected Callahan's argument that the evidence obtained from the search was not admissible because the search was unconstitutional, and Callahan accepted a conditional guilty plea while he appealed the judgment. A Utah appeals court found the search unconstitutional and overturned the guilty verdict. 
Callahan then filed a civil lawsuit against five members of the Central Utah Narcotics Task Force who had conducted the search, claiming they violated his Fourth Amendment rights. If the case was not decided in the officers' favor, they would face the prospect of paying monetary damages to the plaintiff. The officers claimed that they could not be sued due to qualified immunity, a doctrine that states government officials cannot be held liable for violating a facet of the Constitution that is unclear.
The question had divided lower courts, which disagreed about the "consent once removed" doctrine. Federal judge Paul G. Cassell said in 2006 that even if the search was unconstitutional, the police officers could be granted immunity because at the time of the search, it would have been reasonable for them to believe that it was constitutional. He noted that three federal circuits abided by "consent once removed," although not the Tenth, in whose jurisdiction Utah falls.  
However, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit ruled against the officers' claim of immunity and allowed Callahan to proceed with the lawsuit. The court did not adopt "consent once removed" as other federal circuits have done. The appeals court said that a reasonable police officer would have known not to proceed in the case without a warrant.
Supreme Court case
The Supreme Court agreed to hear the case in March 2008. 
The Court added another issue to the officers' request for certiorari: how to deal with officers' requests for immunity from constitutional issues. This issue was last heard in the Supreme Court in 2001 in Saucier v. Katz, in which the Court ruled that such suits had to be adjudicated in two phases: first, deciding the constitutionality, and then deciding if the law had been unclear enough for officers not to be liable. Saucier v. Katz is widely criticized because it has resulted in judges spending time deciding difficult constitutional issues, even in cases where official immunity obviously applies and the case will eventually be thrown out. One such case that went to the Supreme Court was Morse v. Frederick.
Supreme Court Decision
The Court's decision severely limited Saucier v. Katz 533 U.S. 194 (2001). The Court modified Saucier's two-step inquiry in two ways. First, it eliminated the requirement that qualified immunity issues be considered in order. Thus, courts after Pearson can first consider whether federal law forbidding an action was clearly established at the time of that action, instead of first analyzing the sometimes more difficult question of whether the law actually forbade the action, regardless of its clarity. Second, it made Saucier'''s two-step process advisory. The Court said: "we conclude that, while the sequence set forth (in Saucier v. Katz'') is often appropriate, it should no longer be regarded as mandatory."
Consequences
This case allowed judges to skip the question of whether or not a police officer used excessive force and to focus solely on whether or not the conduct violated clearly established law, which appeal courts have frequently done. Some legal experts assert that this has created a "closed loop" in which "the case law gets frozen" because it largely prevents the introduction of case law that clearly establishes new instances of the use of excessive force.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 555
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:United States constitutional torts case law
"""

From "Peel v. Attorney Disciplinary Commission of Illinois" ==> """
Peel v. Attorney Disciplinary Commission of Illinois, 496 US 91 (1990), was a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States that Illinois' rule against attorneys advertising themselves as "certified" violated their freedom of speech under the First Amendment. The Illinois Attorney Registration and Disciplinary Commission (IARDC) had found that Peel's letterhead, which stated that he was "Certified Civil Trial Specialist By the National Board of Trial Advocacy," had broken state professional rules, and the Illinois Supreme Court had adopted their recommendation of public sanction. The U.S. Supreme Court reversed, saying the letterhead was truthful, and the First Amendment favored disclosure over concealing information.
 Background 
Gary E. Peel was admitted to the bar in Illinois in 1968, in Arizona in 1979, and in Missouri in 1981, and his law practice was located in Edwardsville, Illinois. In 1981 he earned a "Certificate in Civil Trial Advocacy" from the National Board of Trial Advocacy (NBTA), which was renewed in 1986. The requirements for this certificate included extensive trial experience, completion of relevant continuing legal education classes, and passing a day-long exam. In 1983, Peel starting including a mention of this certificate in his letterhead, along with the states where he was licensed to practice:
However, the Illinois Code of Professional Responsibility (in Rule 2-105(a)(3)) stated "A lawyer or law firm may specify or designate any area or field of law in which he or its partners concentrates or limits his or its practice. Except as set forth in Rule 2-105(a), no lawyer may hold himself out as 'certified' or a 'specialist.' "In Re Peel, 126 Ill. 2d 397, 534 N.E.2d 980 (1989) The IARDC filed a complaint in 1987.
 Disciplinary proceedings 
 Arguments 
The U.S. Supreme Court (in Bates v. State Bar of Arizona in 1977) had already ruled that advertising by attorneys was commercial speech, and therefore was protected by the First Amendment as long as it was not misleading. The IARDC thus argued that Peel's letterhead was misleading, and could be banned, because 1) the public might think the certificate was officially recognized in some way by the state of Illinois, which it was not, 2) "certified" was a technical term that the public might misunderstand, and 3) it was a claim about the quality of the services he offered, which was inherently misleading.
Peel, on the other hand, argued that the letterhead was simply the truth, and was relevant to a client's choice about which lawyer to hire. Moreover, given how strong the First Amendment's protection of free speech was, even commercial speech, the state should have to do more to justify its prohibition.
 Decision of the Illinois Supreme Court 
The Illinois Supreme Court ruled against Peel. To begin with, the Court felt it was important to protect the state's sole authority to license attorneys. Noting that the letter heading listed "Licensed: Illinois, Missouri, Arizona" immediately below the certification, the Court said it would easy for a member of the public (who might not know how the bar admission process worked) to not understand the difference. The Court also noted that the 1983 version of the Model Rules of Professional Conduct of the American Bar Association (ABA) contained a ban similar to Illinois' ban, and modifications to that model rule (Rule 7.4) in 1988 still left the ban on advertising of "certifications" intact. The official ABA comments to the modifications said,
As such, the Court said the current ban was justified. Peel appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
 Decision of the U.S. Supreme Court 
In a 5–4 decision, the U.S. Supreme Court reversed, holding that Peel's letterhead was protected commercial speech. The Court was rather divided about this case; the plurality opinion only represented four justices (Stevens—its author—joined by Brennan, Blackmun, and Kennedy), and only became the opinion of the court because Marshall voted with them (but wrote a separate concurring opinion, which was also joined by Brennan). The dissent was also divided, with Justices White and O'Connor writing separately, and Rehnquist and Scalia joining O'Connor's opinion.
 Plurality Opinion 
In an opinion written by Justice Stevens, the Court said that Illinois was wrong to focus on "implied claims" rather than the "facial accuracy" of Peel's claim of certification. While not every consumer would investigate the significance of the certification, or the trustworthiness of the NBTA, they certainly could do so if the wished:
The Court also rejected the idea that merely potential confusion or misinformation was enough to justify a ban. Because of the importance of protecting free speech, a rule that was "broader than reasonably necessary to prevent the perceived evil" was unconstitutional. States could certainly ban sham certifications, but the plurality could see no justification for banning certifications from bona fide organizations like the NBTA.
 Marshall's Concurrence 
Marshall wrote separately to say that, although agreed Peel's letterhead was neither "actually" or "inherently" misleading—and therefore the ruling against Peel had to be overturned—nevertheless the current professional rule may be constitutional with slight modifications, because:
 White's Dissent 
White agreed with Marshall's analysis that the letterhead was potentially misleading. He voted differently from Marshall, though, because "As I see it, it is the petitioner who should have to clean up his advertisement so as to eliminate its potential to mislead."
 O'Connor's Dissent 
O'Connor, joined by Rehnquist and Scalia, argued that proper professional regulation of attorneys required more deference to states than the plurality had granted:
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1990 in United States case law
Category:1990 in Illinois
Category:Legal history of Illinois
Category:Legal ethics
Category:Practice of law
Category:Freedom of expression
Category:Freedom of expression in the United States
Category:Advertising
Category:United States First Amendment case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
"""

From "Pegram v. Herdrich" ==> """
Pegram v. Herdrich, 530 U.S. 211 (2000), was a United States Supreme Court case that held that the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 does not provide a remedy for coverage determinations by health maintenance organizations. The case is important because by excluding suits involving coverage determinations from the Act, it does not pre-empt state law remedies..
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974
Category:2000 in United States case law
"""

From "Pembaur v. City of Cincinnati" ==> """
Pembaur v. City of Cincinnati, 475 U.S. 469 (1986), is a United States Supreme Court case that clarified a previous case, Monell v. Department of Social Services (1978), and established that municipalities can be held liable even for a single decision that is improperly made.
Background
A physician and owner of a medical clinic in Cincinnati, Ohio was indicted for fraud regarding welfare payments from state agencies. As part of the trial, subpoenas were issued for two clinic employees. The employees failed to appear in court, and warrants were issued for their arrest. Two county deputies went to the clinic to serve the warrants, but the doctor and another employee barred the entrance. Cincinnati officers arrived and attempted to persuade the doctor to open the door. 
Eventually the deputies were told by the county prosecutor to "go in and get" the employees in question. Subsequently, the door was chopped down and the deputies entered but were unable to locate the employees. The doctor was then charged and convicted with obstructing police in their authorized duties.
The doctor filed for damages. The district court dismissed based on Monell—that the officers were not acting pursuant to the official policy described in Monell—and the court of appeals affirmed.
Decision
The Supreme Court reversed and remanded. Here is the syllabus summary:
"1. The "official policy" requirement of Monell was intended to distinguish acts of the municipality from acts of the municipality's employees, and thereby make clear that municipal liability is limited to actions for which the municipality is actually responsible. Monell held that recovery from a municipality is limited to acts that are, properly speaking, "of the municipality," i.e., acts that the municipality has officially sanctioned or ordered. With this understanding, it is plain that municipal liability may be imposed for a single decision by municipal policymakers under appropriate circumstances. If the decision to adopt a particular course of action is directed by those who establish governmental policy, the municipality is equally responsible whether that action is to be taken only once or to be taken repeatedly. Pp. 475 U. S. 477-481.
"2. It was error to dismiss petitioner's claim against the county. Ohio law authorizes the County Sheriff to obtain instructions from the County Prosecutor. The Sheriff followed the practice of delegating certain decisions to the Prosecutor where appropriate. In this case, the Deputy Sheriffs received instructions from the Sheriff's Office to follow the orders of the County Prosecutor, who made a considered decision based on his understanding of the law and commanded the Deputy Sheriffs to enter petitioner's clinic. That decision directly caused a violation of petitioner's Fourth Amendment rights. In ordering the Deputy Sheriffs to enter petitioner's clinic to serve the capiases on the employees, the County Prosecutor was acting as the final decisionmaker for the county, and the county may therefore be held liable under § 1983. Pp. 475 U. S. 484-485.".
Dissent
Justice Powell, writing for the dissent, stated that the Court's holding "is wrong for at least two reasons. First, the Prosecutor's response and the Deputies' subsequent actions did not violate any constitutional right that existed at the time of the forcible entry. Second, no official county policy could have been created solely by an off-hand telephone response from a busy County Prosecutor."Pembaur, 475 U.S. at 492 (Powell, J., dissenting).
See also
Monell v. Department of Social Services of the City of New York (1978)
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 475
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:History of Cincinnati
"""

From "Peña-Rodriguez v. Colorado" ==> """
Peña-Rodriguez v. Colorado, 580 U.S. ___ (2017), was a United States Supreme Court decision holding that the Sixth Amendment requires a racial bias exception to the no-impeachment rule., slip op. at 17. According to two jurors, a third juror made a number of biased statements about the defendant's Mexican ethnicity, stating, "I think he did it because he’s Mexican and Mexican men take whatever they want."Peña-Rodriguez, slip op. at 4. In a 5–3 vote, the Court held that, notwithstanding a state evidentiary rule, the trial court must be permitted to consider the two jurors' testimony.Peña-Rodriguez, slip op. at 17, 21.
Background
The case involved Miguel Angel Peña-Rodriguez, a Colorado man accused of sexually assaulting two teenage girls in a restroom.Peña-Rodriguez, slip op. at 2. During jury deliberations, Juror H.C. allegedly made a number of racially biased comments, stating, "Mexican men had a bravado that caused them to believe they could do whatever they wanted with women," and "nine times out of ten Mexican men were guilty of being aggressive toward women and young girls."Peña-Rodriguez, slip op. at 3-4. Juror H.C. also stated that the defendant's alibi witness was not credible because the witness was "an illegal." The jury found Peña-Rodriguez guilty of unlawful sexual contact and harassment, but after the jury was discharged, two jurors, M.M. and L.T., remained to speak with defense counsel in private. Both signed affidavits describing H.C.'s remarks.Peña-Rodriguez, slip op. at 3; see also Peña-Rodriguez v. Colorado, 350 P. 3d 287 (2015).
On October 11, 2016, oral arguments were heard, where Professor Jeffrey L. Fisher appeared for the accused, the Colorado Solicitor General appeared for that state, and an assistant to the U.S. Solicitor General appeared as a friend in support of the state.
Opinion of the Court
On March 6, 2017, the Supreme Court delivered judgment in favor of the accused, voting 5–3 to reverse and remand to the state court.  Justice Anthony Kennedy authored the majority opinion.Peña-Rodriguez, slip op. at 1.The Supreme Court, 2016 Term — Leading Cases, 131 Harv. L. Rev. 273 (2017).
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 580
 References 
External links
 Case page at SCOTUSblog
Category:2017 in United States case law
Category:United States evidence case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment jury case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Penhallow v. Doane's Administrators" ==> """
Penhallow v. Doane's Administrators, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 54 (1795), was a United States Supreme Court case about prize causes, holding that federal district courts have the powers formerly granted to the Court of Appeals in Cases of Capture under the Congress of the Articles of Confederation. In the case:
it was held that the Congress under the Confederation had power to erect a court of appeals in prize causes, that its decrees were conclusive, and that the district courts of the United States created under the Constitution have, as courts of admiralty, power to carry into effect the decrees of the former court of appeals in prize causes erected by the Congress of the Confederation.Judicial settlement of controversies between states of the American union: cases decided in the Supreme Court of the United States, Volume 1 (Oxford University Press, 1918), page 341, footnote 1
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1795 in United States case law
Category:Prize warfare
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rutledge Court
"""

From "Penn Central Transportation Co. v. New York City" ==> """
Penn Central Transportation Co. v. New York City, 438 U.S. 104 (1978), was a landmark United States Supreme Court decision on compensation for regulatory takings.. 
Events leading up to the case
New York City Landmarks Law
The New York City Landmarks Law was signed into effect by Mayor Robert F. Wagner, Jr., in 1965. This law was passed after New York citizens grew concerned over the loss of culturally significant structures such as Pennsylvania Station, demolished in 1963. The Landmarks Law's purpose is to protect structures that are significant to the city and still retain their ability to be properly used. This law is enforced by the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission.About LPC
Railroad decline
Use of railroad systems saw its peak in the 1920s and began to falter in the mid-to-late 1930s.  World War II revitalized use of the railroad systems in the early 1940s and brought the industry back to prior success. While this period saw nearly half of Americans using the railroad systems, by the late 1940s, there was once again a steep decline in railroad use. That put many of the railroad companies out of business and left others to find new ways to increase revenue.http://www.politeia.co.uk/Portals/0/Final_Green.pdf
Early proposals to replace Grand Central Terminal
In 1954, the New York Central Railroad began to look at proposed plans to replace Grand Central Terminal. Early designs by William Zeckendorf and I. M. Pei included an ambitious 80-story,  tower that would be over  taller than the Empire State Building.New York Architecture Images- Grand Central Terminal None of the early designs ever made it past the sketch phase and, for the time being, all plans to replace Grand Central Terminal were abandoned.
The Pan Am Building
In 1958, Erwin S. Wolfson created proposals to replace Grand Central Terminal's six-story office building just north of the Terminal. Erwin S. Wolfson developed the project in the early 1960s with the assistance of the architects Emery Roth and Sons, Walter Gropius and Pietro Belluschi.Tishman Speyer The Pan Am Building was completed in 1963 and bought Grand Central Terminal more time away from proposed reconstructions.
New York Central Railroad merger with Pennsylvania Railroad
Despite increased office space, the New York Central Railroad found itself facing bankruptcy in 1967 because of continued decline in railroad use. The Pennsylvania Railroad found itself in a similar position after the offices that were built following the demolition of Pennsylvania Station were no longer bringing the company sufficient income.
In 1968, the New York Central Railroad merged with the Pennsylvania Railroad to create the Penn Central Railroad company. The newly formed Penn Central began to look into updating the uses of the Grand Central Terminal to increase revenue and save the company from financial straits.
Plans to build on top of Grand Central Terminal
In mid-1968, the Penn Central Railroad unveiled two designs by Marcel Breuer, one of which would potentially be built atop Grand Central Terminal. The first design (Breuer I) was a 55-story tall office building to be constructed on top of Grand Central. That building was to be cantilevered above the existing structure allowing Grand Central to maintain its facade. The second design (Breuer II) called for the demolition of one of the sides of Grand Central in order to create a unified facade for a new 53-story office building. Both designs were submitted to the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission after the structures met city zoning laws.
Landmarks Preservation Commission's rejections
Upon reviewing the submitted designs for Grand Central Terminal, the Landmarks Preservation Commission rejected the plans on September 20, 1968. Penn Central then filed for a Certificate of Appropriateness for both proposals but was again denied. The Landmarks Preservation Commission summarized their reason for rejecting both plans:
Breuer I 
Breuer II
The Landmarks Preservation Commission offered Penn Central the Transfer of Development Rights (TDRs) to allow them to sell the air space above Grand Central Terminal to other developers for their own use. Penn Central felt this was not enough to be considered just compensation for the loss of their land use.
State case
Penn Central files suit
After the New York City Landmark Preservation Commission rejected Penn Central's proposals for construction of a high rise building atop Grand Central Terminal, Penn Central filed suit against the city, arguing that under the New York Historical Preservation Law, it was entitled to a reasonable return on the value of its property, whereas in the existing condition, Grand Central Terminal could not break even and because (a) as a regulated railroad it could not go out of business, and (b) it was in bankruptcy, it could not cease the deficit-causing operations, thus suffering a taking of its property, for which it was entitled to compensation. The trial court agreed.
In a novel opinion that revisited some of Henry George's ideas, it ruled that in New York, a property owner was entitled to a return only on that increment of the property's value that was created by private entrepreneurship, not on the entire property's value. The court then affirmed the Appellate Division but, unaccountably, also granted Penn Central the opportunity to try the facts that would have to underlie the newly minted Court of Appeals holding.13 William & Mary Bill of Rights Journal pp. 722–737
Since this would have been impossible (Chief Judge Breitel later, in an extrajudicial statement, likened it to a search for the Holy Grail), and since the Court of Appeals conceded that such a task presented "impenetrable densities" and would require Penn Central to separate the inseparable, Penn Central sought review by the U.S. Supreme Court on a different legal theory.
Supreme Court decision
thumb|right|Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis (center) on board the Landmark Express, a special charter train by the Committee To Save Grand Central Terminal, on April 16, 1978. The group chartered the train to Washington D.C. for the day before oral arguments in the case.
In the United States Supreme Court, Penn Central changed theories. Instead of arguing that it was not receiving a reasonable return on its property because of the city regulations, it argued that the regulation took its air rights above Grand Central Terminal, which had been designed to accommodate a twenty-story building on top of it. The Supreme Court disagreed and held that under a new taking test that it formulated in this opinion, the economic impact on Penn Central was not severe enough to constitute a taking because Penn Central conceded that it could still continue with its present use whose return was reasonable. Thus, the regulation did not interfere with its reasonable investment-backed expectations. The court therefore found that the city's restrictions on Grand Central Terminal did not amount to a taking.
The case is perhaps best summarized in Section II-C of the Opinion of the Court.
The dissent argued that in this case there was a net transfer from Penn Central to the city. The dissent argued that it was not fair to have the entire burden of preserving Grand Central fall on its owners. That cost is the opportunity cost of not developing the airspace over the terminal.
Aftermath
Penn Central lost its trial, but was in bankruptcy by this time and lacked the funds to maintain Grand Central Terminal, which fell into disrepair. Eventually, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority assumed responsibility and restored it at public expense.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 438
Grand Central Terminal
Penn Central
Tahoe-Sierra Preservation Council, Inc. v. Tahoe Regional Planning Agency (2002)
 References 
 Bibliography 
Gideon Kanner, Making Laws and Sausages: A Quarter-Century Retrospective on Penn Central Transportation Co. v. City of New York. 13 William & Mary Bill of Rights Journal 653 (2005)
Schlichting, Kurt C. Grand Central Terminal: Railroads, Engineering, and Architecture in New York City. Baltimore, MD: JHU P, 2001.
PENN CENTRAL TRANSP. CO. V. NEW YORK CITY. No. 438 U.S. 104. US Supreme Court. 26 June 1978.
"Grand Central Station." Archiseek. 2007. The American Institute of Architects. 12 May 2008 <https://web.archive.org/web/20080724104921/http://usa.archiseek.com/newyork/newyork/grandcentralstation.html>.
Duerksen, Christopher J. A Handbook on Historic Preservation Law. Baltimore, MD: Conservation Foundation, 1983. 351-376.
Davis, Christina R. "About LPC." New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission. 2008. Government of New York City. 11 May 2008 <http://www.nyc.gov/html/lpc/html/about/about.shtml>.
"Grand Central Terminal." New York Architecture Images. 10 May 2008 <http://www.nyc-architecture.com/MID/MID031.htm>.
Kayden, Jerold S. "Celebrating Penn Central." Planning Magazine June 2003.
Miller, Julia H. A Layperson's Guide to Historic Preservation Law. Washington D.C.: National Trust, 2000. 22-27.
"Penn Central History." Penn Central Railroad Historical Society 4 April 2008. TainWeb.Com. 15 May 2008 <https://web.archive.org/web/20080604231315/http://www.pcrrhs.org/history.html>.
Schlichting, Kurt C. Grand Central Terminal: Railroads, Engineering, and Architecture in New York City. Baltimore, MD: JHU P, 2001.
"The MetLife Building." Tishman Speyer. 2008. 12 May 2008 <http://www.tishmanspeyer.com/properties/Property.aspx?id=57>.
Weiss, Lois. "Air Rights Case Headed for Supreme Ct. Review - Transferable Development Rights for Grand Central Terminal, New York, New York." Real Estate Weekly 4 May 1994.
Boyd, Lydia, and Lynn Pritcher. "Brief History of the U.S. Passenger Rail Industry." Duke University Libraries: Digital Collection. 25 January   2008. Duke University. 10 May 2008 <https://web.archive.org/web/20080501041925/http://library.duke.edu/digitalcollections/adaccess/rails-history.html>.
Dukeminier, Jesse, James E. Krier, Gregory S. Alexander, & Michael H. Schill."Property" 6th ed. Aspen Publishers. New York: 2006.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:United States land use case law
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:History of New York City
Category:1978 in New York City
Category:Penn Central Transportation
Category:Grand Central Terminal
Category:New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission
Category:City of New York litigation
"""

From "PennEast Pipeline Co. v. New Jersey" ==> """
PennEast Pipeline Co. v. New Jersey, 594 U.S. ___ (2021), was a United States Supreme Court case dealing with the sovereign immunity of states to delegated powers of eminent domain granted to private companies from federal agencies, in the specific case, acquiring property for the right-of-way to build a natural gas pipeline. The Court, in a 5–4 decision issued in June 2021, ruled that states, by nature of ratifying the Constitution, gave up their ability to exercise sovereign immunity from the federal government or from those parties whom they have delegated that authority.
Background
The PennEast Pipeline was proposed by the PennEast Pipeline Co., a consortium of five regional energy companies, to move up  of natural gas from the Marcellus Shale formation in Pennsylvania to New Jersey over a distance of about . As part of the approvals and permitting process, the consortium got approval from Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) for their proposed pipeline route in 2018. FERC's approval included the ability for PennEast to use eminent domain to obtain parcels of property along the route under terms of the Natural Gas Act of 1938 and its 1947 amendment to 15 U.S.C. §717f(e). This approval was met with numerous criticisms by New Jersey and other respondents, and a separate suit challenging the FERC's order was raised at the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.
As the case challenging the FERC order proceeded, PennEast began legal action to use the eminent domain power to acquire the land for the pipeline. About forty parcels of land were owned by the state of New Jersey and the New Jersey Conservation Foundation, and PennEast turned to court action to assert eminent domain. New Jersey requested these suits be dismissed on the basis of sovereign immunity, that the state should be immune from such a lawsuit by a private company. The United States District Court for the District of New Jersey denied the motion and allowed PennEast's suits to proceed. New Jersey appealed to the Third Circuit Court of Appeals, which reversed the District Court's ruling. The Third Circuit ruled that on the basis of the Eleventh Amendment to the United States Constitution, states did enjoy sovereign immunity from private lawsuits, blocking process of PennEast's suits.
Supreme Court
PennEast petitioned to the Supreme Court for review of the Third Circuit's ruling. The D.C. Circuit placed the larger challenge to FERC's approval on abeyance while litigation in this case proceeded. The Supreme Court granted certiorari in February 2021, with oral arguments held on April 28, 2021.
The Court issued its decision on June 29, 2021. The 5–4 decision reversed the Third Circuit's ruling and remanded the case for further review. The majority opinion was written by Chief Justice John Roberts and joined by Justices Stephen Breyer, Samuel Alito, Sonia Sotomayor, and Brett Kavanaugh. Roberts stated on the matter of sovereign immunity, "Although nonconsenting States are generally immune from suit, they surrendered their immunity from the exercise of the federal eminent domain power when they ratified the Constitution." Thus, PennEast's lawsuits "do not offend state sovereignty, because the states consented at the founding to the exercise of the federal eminent domain power, whether by public officials or private delegatees".
Justice Neil Gorsuch wrote one dissenting opinion, which was joined by Justice Clarence Thomas. A second dissent was written by Amy Coney Barrett, and joined by Thomas, Elena Kagan and Gorsuch. In her dissent, Barrett wrote "Congress cannot circumvent state sovereign immunity’s limitations on the judicial power through its Article I powers. Thus, even in areas where Article I grants it 'complete lawmaking authority,' Congress lacks a tool that it could otherwise use to implement its power: 'authorization of suits by private parties against unconsenting States.'"
Aftermath
In September 2021, less than three months after its victory in the Supreme Court, PennEast withdrew its eminent domain claims on New Jersey state land. PennEast and New Jersey announced this agreement in a notice sent to the Third Circuit. It was unclear whether PennEast would restart the eminent domain proceedings later, continue the pipeline project in other ways, or abandon the project. The company cited regulatory hurdles and timing as motivating factors for its decision.
References
 External links 
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:Pipelines in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Penner v. United States" ==> """
REDIRECT List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 399
Text of the case in full is:
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1970 in United States case law
"""

From "Pennhurst State School and Hospital v. Halderman" ==> """
Pennhurst State School and Hospital v. Halderman, 465 U.S. 89 (1984), was a United States Supreme Court decision holding that the Eleventh Amendment prohibits a federal court from ordering state officials to obey state law..
Background
Analysis and significance
thumb|280px|alt=A panel discussion: five people sitting at a long table facing an audience out of frame and the moderator, Janet Albert-Herman, standing at a podium. The room is slightly dark and woody. A screen with captioning is behind the panel.|Panel discussion, "The Disability Rights Movement: From Pennhurst Until Today", U.S. Capitol Visitor Center, Washington, D.C., 27 June 2016. Left to right: James W. Conroy, principal investigator on the Pennhurst Longitudinal Study and co-president of the Pennhurst Memorial and Preservation Alliance; Nancy Thaler, Deputy Secretary, Pennsylvania Department of Human Services; Peter Berns, chief executive officer, the Arc of the United States; Jean Searle, member of the Pennhurst class and co-president of the Pennhurst Memorial and Preservation Alliance; Thomas Gilhool, Public Interest Law Center of Philadelphia and lead plaintiff's attorney in Penshurst v. Halderman; Janet Albert-Herman, a board member of the Arc of Pennsylvania and Treasurer of the Pennhurst Memorial and Preservation Alliance.
References
Bibliography
Court documents
Law journal analyses
Journalism
Other sources
External links
 Suffer The Little Children, a 1968 exposé on Pennhurst State School by NBC10 reporter Bill Baldini.
Category:United States disability case law
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1981 in United States case law
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:Mental health case law in the United States
Category:Deinstitutionalization in the United States
"""

From "Pennock v. Dialogue" ==> """
Pennock v. Dialogue, 27 U.S. (2 Pet.) 1 (1829), was a United States Supreme Court decision in which the Court held invalid a patent on a method of making hose, because the inventor had commercially exploited the invention for years before filing the patent application..  The case has been cited many times for the proposition that the U.S. patent system was not established for the purpose of enriching inventors or their financiers but rather for the purpose of furthering the public interest by stimulating technological progress.See, e.g.,  ("Since Pennock v. Dialogue, 2 Pet. 1, was decided in 1829, this Court has consistently held that the primary purpose of our patent laws is not the creation of private fortunes for the owners of patents, but is 'to promote the progress of science and the useful arts.' ").
 Background 
Abraham L. Pennock and James Sellers in 1811 invented "an improvement in making leather hose or tubes for conveying water and other fluids; and they are constructed by lapping their edges over, and fastening them by metallic rivets and burs, so as to be rendered water proof, and capable of resisting a heavy pressure of that fluid."Pennock v. Dialogue, 19 F. Cas. 171, 173 (C.C.E.D. Pa. 1825). In 1818 they obtained a patent, but in the period before they applied for the patent they caused upwards of 13,000 feet of fire hose to be made and sold by a licensee Jenkins.Pennock, 27 U.S. at 3. 
Pennock and Sellers sued Adam Dialogue in the circuit court in Philadelphia for infringing their patent, and the jury returned a verdict for the defendant Dialogue. Pennock and Sellers then appealed to the Supreme Court.Pennock, 27 U.S. at 13.
 Ruling of Supreme Court 
150px|right|thumb|Justice Joseph Story
Justice Joseph Story wrote the opinion for a unanimous Court. He began his analysis by explaining that "many of the provisions of our patent act are derived from the principles and practice which have prevailed in the construction of that of England." Although the 1624 Statute of Monopolies is not identical with the U.S. statute, "the construction of it adopted by the English courts, and the principles and practice which have long regulated the grants of their patents, as they must have been known and are tacitly referred to in some of the provisions of our own statute," are instructive for us.Pennock, 27 U.S. at 18.
The main object of the patent system was "to promote the progress of science and useful arts." Story then asked how this object could best be accomplished, and explained that Pennock's seven years of commercial exploitation of the invention before filing a patent application was inconsistent with that:
[T]this could be done best, by giving the public at large a right to make, construct, use, and vend the thing invented, at as early a period as possible, having a due regard to the rights of the inventor. If an inventor should be permitted to hold back from the knowledge of the public the secrets of his invention; if he should for a long period of years retain the monopoly, and make, and sell his invention publicly, and thus gather the whole profits of it, relying upon his superior skill and knowledge of the structure, and then, and then only, when the danger of competition should force him to secure the exclusive right, he should be allowed to take out a patent and thus exclude the public from any further use than what should be derived under it during his fourteen years, it would materially retard the progress of science and the useful arts and give a premium to those who should be least prompt to communicate their discoveries.Pennock, 27 U.S. at 19. 
Accordingly, it would not be unreasonable for a patent law to "withhold from an inventor the privilege of an exclusive right unless he should, as early as he should allow the public use, put the public in possession of his secret and commence the running of the period that should limit that right." Such a provision should be in the statute, and if not there should be in the case law. Story found such case law in the jurisprudence surrounding the Statute of Monopolies, which is limited to "new manufactures" that "others, at the time of making such letters patent and grants, shall not use." Lord Coke, in his commentary upon this said that "if any other did use it at the making of the letters patent, or grant of the privilege, it [the patent] is declared and enacted to be void," and Story quoted English case law that held, "The public sale of that which is afterwards made the subject of a patent, though sold by the inventor only, makes the patent void."Pennock, 27 U.S. at 19–20.
Story then concluded that the U.S. statute should be interpreted to the same effect. That is:
[T]he  first inventor cannot acquire a good title to a patent; if he suffers the thing invented to go into public use or to be publicly sold for use before he makes application for a patent. His voluntary act or acquiescence in the public sale and use is an abandonment of his right, or rather creates a disability to comply with the terms and conditions on which alone the Secretary of State is authorized to grant him a patent.Pennock, 27 U.S. at 23–24.
Therefore, Pennock's patent was void.
Subsequent developments
The Supreme Court has repeatedly cited Pennock v. Dialogue as authority that the public interest is the principal concern under the patent law, rather than the creation of private gain. For example:
 "It is the public interest which is dominant in the patent system. Pennock v. Dialogue, 2 Pet. 1. – Mercoid Corp. v. Mid-Continent Inv. Co., 320 U.S. 661, 665 (1944).
 "As stated by Mr. Justice Story in Pennock v. Dialogue, 2 Pet. 1, 19, the promotion of the progress of science and the useful arts is the 'main object'; reward of inventors is secondary and merely a means to that end." – United States v. Masonite Corp., 316 U.S. 265, 278 (1942).
 "Since Pennock v. Dialogue, 2 Pet. 1, was decided in 1829, this Court has consistently held that the primary purpose of our patent laws is not the creation of private fortunes for the owners of patents, but is 'to promote the progress of science and the useful arts.' " – Motion Picture Patents Co. v. Universal Film Manufacturing Co., 243 U.S. 502, 511 (1917).
 Justice Brandeis and Chief Justice Stone "followed in the early tradition of those who read the Constitution to mean that the public interest in patents comes first, reward to the inventor second."  – Automatic Radio Mfg. Co. v. Hazeltine Research, Inc., 339 U.S. 827, 837 (1950) (dissenting opinion of Douglas, J).
 "The patent is a privilege 'conditioned by a public purpose.' Mercoid Corp. v. Mid-Continent Co., 320 U.S. 661, 666. The public purpose is 'to promote the progress of science and useful arts.' The exclusive right of the inventor is but the means to that end. That was early recognized by this Court. See Pennock v. Dialogue, 2 Pet. 1, 19. – Special Equip. Co. v. Coe, 324 U.S. 370, 382 (1945) ((dissenting opinion of Douglas, J).
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:United States patent case law
Category:1829 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court patent case law
"""

From "Pennoyer v. Neff" ==> """
Pennoyer v. Neff 95 U.S. 714 (1878) was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States in which the Court held that a state court can only exert personal jurisdiction over a party domiciled out-of-state if that party is served with process while physically present within the state. More importantly, the court imposed a procedural limit on quasi in rem jurisdiction over property located within the state; it would have to be "brought under the control of the court" at the time the suit commenced otherwise quasi in rem jurisdiction would remain unavailable.
The case emerged from a dispute regarding a parcel of land, which now includes portions of Forest Park near downtown Portland, Oregon, secured by settler Marcus Neff. He had received legal aid to obtain the property from unscrupulous attorney John H. Mitchell, who sued Neff in 1865 for an alleged debt related to the legal service. Mitchell won by default, and Neff's land was sold off to pay the debt. Mitchell himself bought the land, and assigned it to Sylvester Pennoyer, future governor of Oregon. Pennoyer held the land for eight years before Neff sought it back. Pennoyer lost in every action against Neff in an attempt to regain his land, including his action in Federal Court which would reach the Supreme Court. Pennoyer was extremely embittered by the process, and carried his hatred for the Supreme Court into his political career. There is speculation that the unethical Mitchell may have falsified the original lawsuit, which may have itself emerged from an illegal deal between Mitchell and Neff. In the end, Pennoyer was left without recourse due to Mitchell's faults, and Neff recovered the land. 
The legal issues of the case turned on whether the court in question had the ability to extend personal jurisdiction over a defendant who isn't present in the state. Though Neff had settled in Oregon originally, by the time of the lawsuit he had allegedly moved to California. The lower court narrowly ruled in Neff's favor, mostly on the basis of Mitchell's untrustworthiness, but the Supreme Court turned the case into a sweeping treatise on personal jurisdiction. The Supreme Court's decision laid the groundwork for the complex common law of personal jurisdiction. It has been substantially modified in subsequent decisions, especially International Shoe Co. v. Washington, but some parts remain. It is frequently taught to first year law students in the study of civil procedure.
Background
thumb|left|Sylvester Pennoyer, taken more than a decade later while Governor of Oregon.
The case included a colorful cast of characters attempting to build lives on the Oregon frontier. Marcus Neff (born 1826) had arrived in Oregon in 1848 after taking the Oregon Trail by wagon. He became one of the first men to speculate over land in Oregon. Neff sought a land grant under the Donation Law of Oregon, an act of the United States Congress enacted on September 27, 1850. The act provided an incentive for the development of land in the territories of the American West by conveying parcels of land to be used for further development. Single unmarried men, like Neff was at the time, could receive  of free land. The law required that requests for land be made by December 1, 1850. Neff appears to have missed the actual deadline to apply, as his application stated December 15, but December had been crossed out and September 15 had been put in its place (a date before the law had been passed). So began the first of numerous frauds that surrounded the case.
thumb|The approximate location of the parcel of land, along the Willamette river, in what is now downtown Portland. 
To gain title to the land, a settler had to work it for four years for their own use, and have two third parties sign affidavits that confirmed the land had been used properly and by the settler. Neff submitted one such affidavit in 1853 (too early), and another in 1856. The slow pace of frontier and government bureaucracy meant that the claim would not be fully processed for another decade. In an attempt to speed up the process and deal with the requisite paperwork, the illiterate Neff hired attorney John H. Mitchell.
alt=Black and white photo of a man|thumb|John H. Mitchell, the unscrupulous lawyer at the heart of the case. Taken sometime between 1865 and 1880.
Mitchell was a colorful character in his own right. Mitchell's real name was John Hipple, and he had come to Oregon after fleeing his 15 year old wife in Pennsylvania. He stopped in California to leave his lover whom he had run away with, and then settled in Oregon, remarrying without divorcing his first wife. Wendy Collins Purdue, Dean of Richmond Law, provides a description for Mitchell as an unethical and unskilled lawyer who used his significant charisma to find success, both in lawyering and later in his political career. Mitchell was more than willing to defraud his own clients. In one case, he acted as a guardian on behalf of a widow, wherein he moved to sell some of her land to supposedly pay for the expenses of the guardianship, turned around and bought the land himself at a cheap price and then resold it at market value for a sizeable profit. In another action, a client came to Mitchell looking for help with debt. Mitchell instead informed the creditors of the clients location, and was appointed as the debt collector. Mitchell then extorted the money out of his now victimized client.
Neff was ultimately successful in procuring property on the ancestral homeland of the Multnomah Indian tribe in Multnomah County, Oregon. Neff however failed to pay Mitchell the $300 he was allegedly owed for his services. Whether Neff actually owed Mitchell the $300 is doubtable, given the poor ethics of Mitchell. Neff reportedly paid $6.05, a sizeable sum less than claimed. Although the work was rendered from 1862 into 1863, Mitchell waited until 1865 to sue, likely waiting until Neff was out of the state. Mitchell sued for $253.15 plus legal fees (some $4,300 in 2020, adjusted for inflation).
thumb|The contested newspaper notice in the Pacific Christian Advocate. Note the summons authorized by Judge Erasmus D. Shattuck.
Mitchell sued Neff in the Circuit Court of Multnomah County for the outstanding debt. Neff was supposedly not in Oregon at the time, and Mitchell ran a notice in a newspaper to notify Neff, thus giving service of process by publication. The effectiveness of this service was likely low, as it was run in the Pacific Christian Advocate, a niche religious publication. Whether Mitchell went to any effort at all to determine Neff's actual location is also doubtable. Mitchell claimed that Neff was in California. This was true at some point, as Neff did move to San Joaquin, California. However, Neff's own affidavit in another case regarding the same parcel (McGuire v. Neff) indicated that Neff may have been living in Oregon until 1870. Due to Mitchell's ineffective service, Neff did not appear in court to contest the matter, and thus Mitchell won the lawsuit by default judgment. Given that Mitchell asserted Neff was not physically in the state, he could not be sued in personam (a judgement which may follow a defendant across state lines and is attached to his person). So to recoup his fee, Mitchell instead sought action in rem (in property): the piece of land he had helped Neff obtain, worth an alleged $15,000 (about $440,000 in 2020, adjusted for inflation). Though the lower court judgement was issued in February of 1866, Mitchell waited until July 22, 1866 to seek execution of the judgement. This likely aligned with the arrival of Neff's land patent, which had been granted in March but likely took some months to travel to the frontier.
Neff's land was put up for auction, and sold by the Sherriff for $341.60. Although the Supreme Court intimated that Sylvester Pennoyer had bought the land, it was in fact Mitchell himself who purchased the land, and then assigned it to Pennoyer a few days later. Pennoyer was an Oregon lawyer, active in land speculation and politics like Mitchell (though Mitchell was a Republican and Pennoyer a Democrat). Pennoyer ostensibly owned the property for the next eight years, used some of the land for timber, sold a portion, and paid the property taxes. Neff returned in 1874.
Neff appears to have harassed Pennoyer about the property, and Pennoyer sought to firm up his title twice. The original deed had been signed five months late and by a deputy sheriff instead, so Pennoyer had a new deed signed by the current sheriff. Then he had another deed signed by the man who had been sheriff at the time of the sale. Though Neff had been prosperous in California, the Oregon action was apparently important enough to move his entire family there for a year to get his land back. An extremely bitter series of actions followed, starting with Neff successfully having Pennoyer evicted. Pennoyer fought over the costs of the eviction, and lost again. Neff then sued Pennoyer for the damage to his land from the timbering operation, Neff won again. The only small victory for Pennoyer was that the jury awarded effectively no damages. Pennoyer counterclaimed for the property taxes he paid, he again lost. Pennoyer sought the land back in Federal Court, and again lost. He appealed this action to the Supreme Court, where he would face his final defeat.
 Lower court ruling 
alt=Black and white photo of a bearded man|thumb|Judge Matthew Deady, who wrote the lower court decision.
The decision of the United States District Court for the District of Oregon was made by Matthew Deady. His diaries have been preserved, and provide much information about his thoughts on the parties. He interacted with Mitchell and Pennoyer a fair amount, and had a negative view of each. However he held a much deeper dislike for Mitchell, whom he viewed as untrustworthy and immoral. Deady's diary entries concerning Mitchell (whom he started to refer to as Hipple) became increasingly acrimonious over the years, especially as Mitchell got deeper into politics. In 1873, Mitchell had been at the center of a corruption inquiry as part of his Senate election campaign. Mitchell characteristically escaped further investigation by bribing the Attorney General at the time, George Henry Williams. Deady's disgust at the entire affair was well chronicled in his diary, and his total lack of trust in Mitchell's character was reflected in his decision.
Deady's narrow decision in favor of Neff is described by Dean Perdue as surprisingly modern, though quite conservative in its approach. Deady focuses mostly on due process. The Due Process Clause of the United States Constitution requires that defendants to a lawsuit be properly notified, i.e. given judicial notice. In an ideal world, every defendant would be personally handed the summons of a lawsuit, but the expense and inefficiency of this method results in other options for giving notice. Mitchell, in his lawsuit, gave an affidavit that he didn't know the precise location of Neff. But Mitchell gave no detail as to what steps he had taken to ascertain this. Deady, likely motivated by Mitchell's reputation for untrustworthiness, singled out the lack of detail in the affidavit as evidence that Mitchell had in fact taken no action to diligently search for Neff. Only after a diligent search had failed should Mitchell have been allowed to publish notice in a newspaper. Deady further calls out Mitchell's choice of a regional religious newspaper as not giving appropriate notice. A newspaper not well read in Oregon, let alone outside of the state, could hardly be expected to reach Neff. Deady's narrow approach focusing on whether Mitchell had done his due diligence represented his poor view of Mitchell and the high likelihood of fraud in the case. Dean Perdue thinks that Deady's narrow, notice based approach would have also worked well at the Supreme Court, but the Supreme Court took up the case with broad issues in mind.
Opinion of the court
alt=Seated man in judges robes wearing thin spectacles|thumb|Justice Field, who authored the expansive and influential opinion for the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court ruled in favor of Neff, holding that for the trial court to have jurisdiction over the property, the property needed to be attached before the start of litigation, whereupon the trial court has quasi in rem jurisdiction. Mitchell had made the mistake of not attaching the parcel at the start of his action against Neff, instead waiting until after judgement had been rendered. The Court then laid out a broad argument for limited personal jurisdiction.
Constructive notice as opposed to actual notice is insufficient under US law to inform a person living in another state, except for cases affecting the personal status of an American plaintiff (like divorce) or cases that are in rem, in which the property sought is within the boundaries of the state and the law presumes that property is always in the possession of the owner who therefore knows what happens to the property. Thus, attachment of the property before judicial proceedings makes constructive notice sufficient.
 Dissent 
Associate Justice Ward Hunt dissented. His chief concerns were that the decision would invite litigation, upend property law, and that it impinged on state sovereignty.Pennoyer v. Neff, 95 U.S. at 736.
Subsequent developments
 Parties 
Pennoyer was extremely embittered by his multiple losses, in a case where he had effectively done nothing wrong. The fault seemed to lie with Mitchell, but Pennoyer never recovered any damages from Mitchell, likely because the property had been conveyed via quitclaim deed without warranty. Pennoyer took his anger at the case and the Supreme Court into his political career. In his inaugural address upon being elected governor of Oregon, he railed against the Supreme Court and called for the justices to all be impeached, seeing the Supreme Court as a massive governmental overreach. He held especial rage for Chief Justice John Marshall, whom he termed the head of a judicial oligarchy that had supplanted democracy. Judge Deady felt the speech made a fool of Pennoyer, and that he had expected such buffoonery from Pennoyer.
Neff had also defended the property in an 1875 action from Mary McGuire (also spelled Maguire), who had bought a portion of it from Pennoyer and sought to quiet title. McGuire lost, and with the Pennoyer decision, Neff had full ownership of his land once more. Neff vanished into obscurity after the Supreme Court case. As of the 1880 census, Neff was still living in Oregon. Neff's land is now some of the most valuable in Portland, situated in the downtown area.
Mitchell's political career took him to the Senate from 18721879, and again in 1885. The 1885 election had an unusual connection to the case: the judge of the lower court, Matthew Deady, came into possession of Mitchell's love-letters from yet another affair. Mitchell's unexpected re-election, despite publication of the affair in The Oregonian, was decried by Deady. Mitchell would later be sentenced to six months in prison for his role in the Oregon land fraud scandal. Dean Purdue cites this as the climactic fraud of Mitchell's life, and wonders how far back his frauds went, speculating that the original claim against Neff emerged from a nefarious deal between Neff and Mitchell. Though Dean Purdue acknowledges that such things cannot be known, she further guesses that the discrepancy from the small fee paid and the large fee sought could also have been the result of a bribe paid by Mitchell to an official to speed up the processing of Neff's patent, which was a common practice at the time.
 Basis for personal jurisdiction 
Many aspects of the Court's ruling in this case have subsequently been overturned for cases in which personal or in personam jurisdiction is concerned. In a long series of United States Supreme Court jurisprudence following this ruling, the Court has modified the territorial analysis without overruling its holding. Indeed, it seems the basis of a state's authority to decide the "status" of its citizens, for example, as in a divorce without having personal jurisdiction over the respondent remains undisturbed.
The doctrines governing personal jurisdiction in the United States have spawned a great deal of discourse within the Supreme Court of the United States with many cases finetuning and elaborating upon the concept, which has led to the test used today, in which the overall scope of the test for determining whether a court may exert personal jurisdiction over a party has been expanded in certain respects but narrowed in others. Nevertheless, in every case, the Supreme Court has ruled that such analyses must comport with the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
The 1945 case International Shoe Co. v. Washington mostly replaced the Pennoyer framework with the "minimum contacts" standard for personal jurisdiction.
In law schools
In law schools, Pennoyer is commonly taught in civil procedure classes. While scholars disagree as to the extent that federal legal procedure remains bound to its direct legacy, Pennoyer is a seminal sample of early jurisdictional jurisprudence.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 95
List of United States Supreme Court cases
Calder v. Jones
Hess v. Pawloski
References
 Further reading 
Borchers, Patrick J. The Death of the Constitutional Law of Personal Jurisdiction: From Pennoyer to Burnham and Back Again 24 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 19 (1990)
Tocklin, Adrian Pennoyer v. Neff: The Hidden Agenda of Stephen J. Field 28 Seton Hall Law Rev. 75 (1997)
Friedenthal, Jack H. Civil Procedure Cases and Materials Ninth Edition (2005) pp 69–73
External links
 [ Official Website of the Supreme Court of the United States]
Tocklin, Adrian Pennoyer v. Neff: The Hidden Agenda of Stephen J. Field Seton Hall Law Review Volume 28 Book 1
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States personal jurisdiction case law
Category:1878 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
"""

From "Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon" ==> """
Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon, 260 U.S. 393 (1922), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that whether a regulatory act constitutes a taking requiring compensation depends on the extent of diminution in the value of the property..
The decision thereby started the doctrine of regulatory taking. The Takings Clause originally applied only when the government physically seized or occupied property.  Prior to 1922, American courts followed a clear rule: regulation of land was not a taking.  Rather, it was simply an exercise of the government’s police power to protect the public health, safety, welfare, and morals.
Pennsylvania Coal also established the diminution-of-value test, in contrast to other tests, such as the permanent physical occupations test of Loretto v. Teleprompter Manhattan CATV Corp. (1982),. the nuisance-control measures test of Hadacheck v. Sebastian (1915),. and the total takings test of Lucas v. South Carolina Coastal Council (1992).. Additionally, the case was one of the first to address the denominator problem with regard to regulatory taking.
Parties
Plaintiff/Respondent: H.J. Mahon, owner of surface rights to parcel of land.
Defendant/Petitioner: Pennsylvania Coal Co., owner of mining rights to parcel of land.
Background
State of law
In the late 19th century, the modern regulatory state was developing and the "scope of police regulation" was broadened. Whereas police regulations that restricted private property uses were originally thought to be used mostly to avoid noxious uses, police powers were expanding. Consequently, takings without compensation increased and the flaws of the previous takings doctrine, that exercises of police power could never be takings, became more apparent along with the need for changes in the takings law.
At the time this case was decided, Mugler v. Kansas, "was the leading case standing for the proposition that an exercise of the police power could never be a taking ... even if they deprive property holders of all economic use of their property."   (page 504)
Facts of case
In an 1878 deed, the Pennsylvania Coal Co. granted to H.J. Mahon the surface rights to a parcel of land, but retained the mining rights to the land, and Mahon accepted any risk from, and waived all claim for damages resulting from, mining below the property. In 1921 the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania passed the Kohler Act, which prohibited the mining of anthracite coal in such way as to cause the subsidence of, among other things, any structure used as a human habitation.  Prior Pennsylvania law had recognized that such pillars of coal necessary to support the land surface were an estate in land (a “support estate”), separate from the rights in removable coal. Pennsylvania Coal provided notice to Mahon that it planned to mine for coal under the Mahon's habitation and Mahon brought suit to prevent Pennsylvania Coal from mining under his land pursuant to the Kohler Act.
Prior history
Mahon sued in the Court of Common Pleas to enjoin Pennsylvania Coal from conducting mining, but the court denied the injunction, holding the application of the Kohler Act to this case would be unconstitutional. The Supreme Court of Pennsylvania reversed, holding that the statute was a, "legitimate exercise of the police power" and granted an injunction. PA Coal v. Mahon, 43 Sup Ct. 412.
Legal analysis
Issues and Holdings
Issue #1: Whether the Kohler Act as applied to the property in question constitutes an exercise of the police power, requiring no compensation, or of eminent domain, requiring compensation;
-Holding #1: The Kohler Act as applied to the property in question constitutes an exercise of eminent domain, requiring compensation
Issue #2: Whether the Kohler Act in general constitutes an exercise of the police power or of eminent domain.
-Holding #2: The Kohler act in general constitutes an exercise of eminent domain.
Rule of law
The Court ruled that whether a regulatory act constitutes a taking requiring compensation depends on the extent of diminution in the value of the property.
Reasoning
The Court argued as follows: (1) The damage done by the activity prohibited by the act is a private, not a public nuisance; there is no public safety justification for the statute, as notice before mining would suffice to protect public safety.  On the other hand, the damage done by the statute is significant, insofar as it abolishes an estate in land and a binding contract.  (2) The statute, in general, purports to extinguish the mining rights to valuable properties under surfaces owned by the public and the government.  The statute makes prohibitively expensive the mining of coal in these areas, and thereby effectively destroys the right, after all owning coal is not worth anything if the coal cannot be mined.  The rights of the public to its streets and other property are rights paid for.  If the representatives of the public have been so shortsighted as not to pay for the mining rights of the land as well, there is no authority to grant those rights without compensation.  (If the land above required compensation, so therefore does the land below.)
The Court also employed a general sense of morality when it stated, "We are in danger of forgetting that a strong public desire to improve the public condition is not enough to warrant achieving the desire by a shorter cut than the constitutional way of paying for the change."  Id. at 416.
Dissenting Opinion: Brandeis, J.
Justice Brandeis, "chiefly argued for what is now called the nuisance exception: if a land use is itself noxious, dangerous, or causes a public nuisance, the legislature is free to regulate its use without compensation, even though the police power may cause great loss to the property owner."
Brandeis explained nearly every restriction upon the use of property entails a deprival of some right of the owner, but this can be justified by the police power because restrictions, "imposed to protect the public health, safety or morals from dangers threatened is not a taking."  In this case, the police power applies insofar as the Kohler Act prohibits a noxious use, the noxious use here being the subsidence of buildings.  Justice Brandeis also addresses the public/private aspect of the Kohler Act stating that, "the purpose of a restriction does not cease to be public, because incidentally some private persons may thereby receive gratuitously valuable special benefits...Furthermore, a restriction, though imposed for a public purpose, will not be lawful, unless the restriction is an appropriate means to the public end.  But to keep coal in place is surely an appropriate means of preventing subsidence of the surface; and ordinarily it is the only available means."
Result
Judgment/disposition
Supreme Court of Pennsylvania judgment reversed.
Subsequent Case History
Today, the Supreme Court quotes Justice Holmes in Mahon for the recognition of the invalidity of a government regulation that so severely burdens private property that it constitutes a taking under the Fifth Amendment. The cited cases include: Goldblatt v. Hempstead, 369 U.S. 590, 594 (1962); Penn Central Transportation Co. v. New York City, 438 U.S. 104, 127 (1978); Agins v. City of Tiburon, 447 U.S. 255 (1980); San Diego Gas & Electric Co. v. City of San Diego, 450 U.S. 621 (1981); Loretto v. Teleprompter Manhattan CATV Corp., 458 U.S. 419 (1982); Keystone Bituminous Coal Association v. DeBenedictis, 480 U.S. 470 (1987); First English Evangelical Lutheran Church v. County of Los Angeles, 482 U.S. 304 (1987); and Lucas v. South Carolina Coastal Council, 505 U.S. 1003, 1014 (1992).
Subsequent Research
In William A. Fischel's book, Regulatory Takings: Law, Economics, and Politics (1995) he explains the disparity between what was actually happening in the Scranton, PA area during the time of Mahon and how the area was portrayed within the litigation.  Fishel explains that subsidence did not happen often and the vast majority of coal companies worked hard not to allow subsidence to happen, and when it did the companies generally paid to fix the damages.  Most of the subsidence issues were cracks in foundation and the settling of parts of houses.  However, a brief submitted for the city of Scranton, "painted a picture of disaster, which has been accepted as the likely outcome of the decision in the legal literature."  William A. Fischell, Regulatory Takings: Law, Economics, and Politics 24 (1995).  However, when Fischel investigated about subsidence issues surrounding mining for anthracite coal in Pennsylvania he was, "struck by how little was written about the subsidence problem, which was in stark contrast to the picture painted for the Court in the briefs of the City of Scranton.  In their study of the anthracite saga, The Kingdom of Coal (1985), the historians Donald Miller and Richard Sharpless did not mention subsidence in the 360 pages" of their book.  Id. at 25.  In a subsequent conversation Professor Sharpless told Fischel the reason subsidence was not mentioned in the book was, "because it was not much of an issue."  Id.  When Fischel visited the Anthracite Heritage Museum near Scranton he asked the librarian to help him locate works on subsidence and, "all that was available were technical pamphlets and a few relatively recent (post 1950) newspaper clippings that illustrated some damage."  Id. at 26.  Fischel's research revealed that surface damage, "seems to have been episodic and limited; cities were not literally falling into the earth.  Nor did any of the newspaper stories raise the question of legal liability for surface support."  Id.
Justice Holmes
Justice Holmes throughout his time as a judge on the state and federal levels, "held a consistent view throughout his career that restrictions imposed through the police power could reach a point where they become takings and violate the Just Compensation Clause."  58 U. Miami L. Rev. 471 at 506.  As noted in his law review article, Professor Benjamin Barros states that because of the distinct departure the holding in this case took from Mugler v. Kansas, the prior leading case in takings jurisprudence, it was, "somewhat surprising that Holmes ignored Mugler entirely in his Mahon opinion.  However, in a letter written shortly after Mahon was decided, Holmes regretted his lack of elaboration on the basis of his decision, and suggested that his disagreement with Mugler was influential in shaping his holding in Mahon.  Id. at 504.  In fact, in a letter dated January 13, 1923 Justice Holmes stated, "I always have thought that old Harlan's decision in Mugler v. Kansas was pretty fishy."  Id.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 260
References
Selected articles
Evan B. Brandes, "Legal Theory and Property Jurisprudence of Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. and Louis D. Brandeis: An Analysis of Pennsylvania Coal Company v. Mahon," 38 Creighton Law Review 1179 (2005)
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:United States land use case law
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:1922 in United States case law
Category:Mining in Pennsylvania
Category:Coal mining law
"""

From "Pennsylvania College Cases" ==> """
The Pennsylvania College Cases, also known as Trustees of Jefferson College in Canonsburg v. Washington and Jefferson College, was a United States Supreme Court case that was decided in 1871.  Justice Nathan Clifford wrote the opinion, ruling in favor of Washington & Jefferson College.
In 1865, two colleges in Washington County, Pennsylvania, Jefferson College in Canonsburg and Washington College in Washington merged to form Washington & Jefferson College, which maintained two campuses, one in each of the towns.
That arrangement failed, and in 1869, the trustees voted to consolidate the two campuses in Washington.
Shortly thereafter, a number of Canonsburg residents and dissident trustees of Jefferson College sued, claiming that the consolidation was unconstitutional.  They argued that the original 1802 charter for Jefferson College had been illegally usurped in the process.  
Specifically, they argued that the provision in the  that it "shall not be altered or alterable by any ordinance or law of the said trustees, nor in any other manner than by an act of the legislature of the Commonwealth" prohibited such a move.  Their lawsuit went to the Pennsylvania Supreme Court. It ruled, on January 3, 1870, that the consolidation had been done in a legal manner.  The Jefferson College partisans appealed to the United States Supreme Court, saying that the consolidation had been contrary to the United States Constitution.  The court ruled otherwise, and upheld the consolidation in a December 1871 opinion written by Justice Nathan Clifford.
References
 Further reading 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
Category:1871 in United States case law
Category:Washington & Jefferson College
Category:History of Washington County, Pennsylvania
"""

From "Pennsylvania v. Finley" ==> """
Pennsylvania v. Finley, 481 U.S. 551 (1987), was a United States Supreme Court case involving the right to counsel.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 476
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
External links
Category:United States Sixth Amendment appointment of counsel case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1987 in United States case law
"""

From "Pennsylvania v. Mimms" ==> """
Pennsylvania v. Mimms, 434 U.S. 106 (1977), is a United States Supreme Court criminal law decision holding that a police officer ordering a person out of a car following a traffic stop and conducting a pat-down to check for weapons did not violate the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
 Overview 
In 1970, two police officers from the Philadelphia Police Department pulled over a vehicle driven by Harry Mimms for an expired license plate. The officers instructed Mimms to exit the vehicle; when Mimms complied, an officer noticed a bulge in his pants under his jacket, conducted a pat-down, and discovered a weapon. The officer proceeded to arrest Mimms for carrying a concealed deadly weapon and unlawfully carrying a firearm without a license, charges for which Mimms was later convicted. The conviction was reversed by the Pennsylvania Supreme Court (PSC) on March 31, 1975, which ruled that the evidence should have been suppressed as the police violated Mimms' Fourth Amendment rights against unlawful search and seizure. The United States Supreme Court in turn reversed the PSC's reversal, upholding the original conviction on the grounds that no violation of the Fourth Amendment had occurred.
 Background 
The Court in Terry v. Ohio stated, "the facts available to the officer at the moment of the seizure or the search 'warrant a man of reasonable caution in the belief' that the action taken was appropriate." Therefore, the officer had the right to arrest Mimms under the charges because he observed the bulge under the jacket.
 Conclusion 
The initial ruling favored the police officer in the Court of Common Pleas in Philadelphia. An appeal was brought up to the Pennsylvania Supreme Court, of which ruled in favor of Mimms, and then the ruling was reversed once again by the U.S. Supreme Court. In a 6-3 per curiam ruling, the U.S. Supreme Court decided against Mimms, holding that the order to exit the car was reasonable and thus did not violate the Fourth Amendment.
 Ruling 
It was considered common for police officers to ask people inside their vehicle to exit it to prevent any danger that may occur to the officer. It is also much safer to avoid danger from oncoming traffic. Asking Mimms to step out of the car raised little more inconvenience and revealed a little more than what was shown before. Therefore, the bulge that the officer noticed posed as a serious threat to the officer. Anyone with this realization may have conducted a "pat down". The Decision of Pennsylvania Supreme Court was reversed.
 Appeal of Pennsylvania 
The Petitioner of Pennsylvania sought the judgment of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania to reverse the conviction in favor of Mimms for carrying a firearm and deadly weapon without a license. The court reversed the ruling because the "revolver was seized in a manner which violated the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States." Because the Supreme Court disagreed with the following ruling, they granted the Commonwealth's petition for certiorari and the judgment of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania was reversed.
 Facts before the Supreme Court 
While on patrol in the city of Philadelphia, two officers discovered Harry Mimms on the road, driving a vehicle with an expired license plate. The two officers pulled the vehicle over to issue the ticket. One of the two officers stepped out of the car and proceeded to walk towards the vehicle whereupon he asked Mimms to exit the vehicle and show his driver's license and registration. He also asked if Mimms had a weapon in his vehicle. To assess the situation, the officer frisked and searched Mimms and discovered a loaded .38-caliber handgun. The passenger who was with Mimms was also found with a .32-caliber weapon. The officer proceeded to arrest Mimms on the charge that he was carrying a concealed deadly weapon without a license. The motion to suppress the revolver was denied, and at trial he was convicted of both counts.
The Pennsylvania Supreme Court reversed the lower court holding that the revolver should have been suppressed as it had been discovered in violation of the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments. The Pennsylvania Supreme Court saw no problem in the actions that involved pulling the car over and stated that due to the observation of the bulge under the respondent's coat that the search was permissible. However, the fact that the officer asked the defendant to exit the vehicle created a forbidden "seizure." Absent Mimms' exiting the vehicle, the officer would have had no grounds for reasonable suspicion, the necessary standard under Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968). Because the gun was discovered by the unconstitutional action, it should have been suppressed.
 Opinion 
 Majority opinion 
The Court stated "the reasonableness in all the circumstances of the particular governmental invasion of a citizens personal security [...] The reasonableness depends... on a balance between the public interest and the individual's rights to personal security free from arbitrary interference by law officers." Unlike in Terry v. Ohio, the initial "violation" of freedom was permissible because the driver was driving with an expired license plate in violation of the Pennsylvania Department of Motor Vehicles Code. The only thing to decide, besides the “pat down,” is whether the initial authorization by the officer to tell the respondent to exit the vehicle was allowed under the Fourth Amendment. Therefore, the court must focus on the violation resulting from the officer telling the respondent to exit the vehicle once it was legally stopped.
The state of Pennsylvania believes that the officer had no evidence to be suspicious of Mimms during the stop whether it was his behavior or unusual activity; nothing was evident during the patrol. The state discovered that the officer, during every routine traffic stop, ordered the drivers to exit their vehicles. The state defends the officer, saying that this practice was used to prevent anything from happening to the officer and that it could have been reasonable under those circumstances. Being in front of the officer makes it impossible to have something suspicious go unseen if the driver were to attempt something to harm the officer.
There is a huge risk for officers confronting a man seated in his vehicle on a routine traffic stop. "According to a study, approximately 30% of police shootings occurred when a police officer approached a suspect seated in an automobile." However one cannot assume that traffic violations are more dangerous than other various confrontations.
Another reason for making the action taken by the officer to ask the respondent to exit the vehicle more acceptable, was that it could prevent an accidental mishap from oncoming cars. Instead of discussing the issue while standing on the road, the officer may ask the driver to exit the car and move off to the side of the road for further discussion. Now the question at hand is whether there was an intrusion in the personal liberty of the driver after the order to get out of the vehicle. The conclusion was that it was de minimis (low level of risk). The officer has already decided that the driver is to be detained for the traffic summons, now it is whether they should converse while the driver is sitting in the car or standing alongside it. The action to step out of the car is merely for the officers’ safety and is not a serious infraction in the liberty of the driver.
The case of Terry v. Ohio stated that "the facts available to the officer at the moment of the seizure or the search ‘warrant a man of reasonable caution in the belief that the action taken was appropriate." Since the action the officer took to tell the driver to exit the vehicle was justified, then the observation of the bulge in the drivers’ jacket was thought to present danger to the officer and therefore he had "reasonable caution" to have conducted the "pat down."
The Supreme Court reversed the Ruling by the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania.
 Dissenting opinions 
Justice Thurgood Marshall wrote a dissenting opinion, stating that the "frisk" that the officer proceeded to do to Mimms could only be permissible under the Fourth Amendment if the search was the reason for the stop. The reason Mimms was pulled over was due to an expired licensed plate, which in no way has to do with carrying a concealed weapon.
Justices John Paul Stevens and William Brennan wrote a different dissent, stating that the court gave too much leeway in allowing the officers to search the defendant for any reason of concern.
 See also 
 Exclusionary rule
 Motor vehicle exception
 Terry stop
 References 
 External links 
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Legal history of Pennsylvania
Category:Philadelphia Police Department
"""

From "Pennsylvania v. Muniz" ==> """
Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 US 582 (1990), is a U.S. Supreme Court case involving the Self-incrimination Clause of the 5th Amendment and the meaning of “testimonial” under the 5th Amendment. A drunk-driving suspect, Muniz, made several incriminating statements while in police custody, and the Supreme Court held that only one of these statements was inadmissible because it was incriminating and testimonial.Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 US at 605-06. This testimonial statement was the suspect’s confused response when the police officer asked him for the date when he turned six years old.Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 US at 599. The other statements were admissible because they either counted as physical evidence for 5th Amendment purposesPennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 US at 592. or fell under the routine booking exception to Miranda v. Arizona.Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 US at 602.
 Facts of the case 
A police officer approached Muniz, who was in his car, suspecting him of driving under the influence of alcohol. The officer asked Muniz several questions and directed Muniz to perform sobriety tests, including “a ‘horizontal gaze nystagmus’ test, a ‘walk and turn’ test, and a ‘one leg stand’ test.”Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 US at 585. After Muniz admitted to drinking, the officer arrested him and took him to the booking center.
At the booking center, communications with Muniz were videotaped. The police had not yet read Miranda warnings to Muniz. The officer asked Muniz several biographical questions—“name, address, height, weight, eye color, date of birth, and current age.”Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 US at 586. “Muniz “stumbl[ed] over his address and age.” At this point,
The officer directed him to complete the sobriety tests again, and Muniz again did not perform well. Muniz declined to take a breathalyzer test. While asking questions about the test, he made some statements about being under the influence of alcohol. Then the police read Miranda warnings to Muniz, and he waived his rights. He then “admitted in response to further questioning that he had been driving while intoxicated.”
At a bench trial, “Muniz was convicted of driving under the influence of alcohol.”Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 US at 587.
Muniz argued that he should receive a new trial because “the testimony relating to the field sobriety tests and the videotape taken at the booking center” should not have been allowed at his trial, as they were incriminating and occurred before Miranda warnings were read to him.
The case reached the U.S. Supreme Court after the trial court ruled against Muniz, the Superior Court of Pennsylvania reversed the trial court decision and ordered a new trial, and the Pennsylvania Supreme Court declined to hear the case.Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 US at 587-88.
At issue in this case is whether the statements from Muniz were properly admissible at his trial.
 Main holdings 
 Muniz’s slurred speech in response to the officer’s questions is physical evidence and is nontestimonial.
 Muniz’s response to the sixth-birthday question is not admissible. His response is covered by the Self-Incrimination Clause because the incriminating inference it gives rise to—that Muniz was confused—is testimonial.Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 US at 599-600.
 The responses to the biographical questions that the officer asked Muniz before reciting Miranda warnings are “admissible because the questions fall within a “routine booking question” exception” to Miranda. (These were questions “regarding Muniz's name, address, height, weight, eye color, date of birth, and current age.)
 The Court’s opinion 
In the majority opinion, Justice Brennan started by discussing the 5th Amendment’s Self-Incrimination Clause, which says that no one “shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself.”Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 US at 588. This privilege against self-incrimination only protects a suspect from (a) being compelled to testify against himself or (b) being compelled to give the government “evidence of a testimonial nature.”Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 US at 589. A communication is testimonial when the communication itself conveys information.
In Part III of the opinion, Justice Brennan evaluated three main issues: whether Muniz’s slurred speech was testimonial, whether his answer to the sixth-birthday question was testimonial, and whether his responses to the biographical questions should have been excluded at trial because his Miranda rights had not been read to him.
In Part III-A, the Court addressed Muniz’s slurred speech. Citing Schmerber v. California, Justice Brennan noted the distinction the Court has drawn between “’testimonial’ and ‘real or physical evidence’ for purposes of the privilege against self-incrimination.” The privilege does not apply to compelling a suspect to hand over “real or physical evidence”; it only applies to compelling communications that are testimonial.Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 US at 591. The Court concluded that the slurring itself was not testimonial, so Muniz’s responses were still admissible even though the officer had not recited Miranda warnings at that point.
In Part III-B, the Court addressed Muniz’s response to the sixth-birthday question. The issue here was that a judge or jury “could infer from Muniz’s answer (that he did not know the proper date) that his mental state was confused.” The question the Court focused on was “whether the incriminating inference of mental confusion is drawn from a testimonial act or from physical evidence.”Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 US at 593. The Court did an overview of its past cases on testimonial evidence, and discussed the historical purpose of the privilege against self-incrimination. Quoting Doe v. United States (487 U.S. 201 (1988)), the Court explained that “[a]t its core, the privilege reflects our fierce “’unwillingness to subject those suspected of crime to the cruel trilemma of self-accusation, perjury or contempt.’”Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 US at 596. The decision in this case “flows from the concept’s core meaning.” The Court noted:
The Court concluded that the response to the sixth-birthday question was testimonial. Muniz “was confronted with the trilemma” when he could not “remember or calculate” the date of his sixth birthday. His only options were to incriminate himself by telling the truth (that he didn’t know the date), or to lie. Muniz’s answer to this question was testimonial, and it should not have been allowed at his trial.
In Part III-C, the Court held that Muniz’s responses to the biographical questions—“name, address, height, weight, eye color, date of birth, and current age”Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 US at 600.—were admissible because “the questions fall within a ‘routine booking question’ exception which exempts from Miranda’s coverage questions to secure the ‘biographical data necessary to complete booking or pretrial services.’”
Finally, in Part IV, the Court addressed the admissibility of Muniz’s statements during the sobriety tests and regarding the breathalyzer test. The Court concluded that both sets of statements were admissible. First, the incriminating statements during the sobriety tests “were ‘voluntary’ in the sense that they were not elicited in response to custodial interrogation.”Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 US at 604. During the sobriety tests, the officer gave Muniz instructions that “were not likely to be perceived as calling for any verbal response.”Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 US at 603. Second, Muniz’s statements regarding the breathalyzer test were admissible because they “were not prompted by an interrogation within the meaning of Miranda.”Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 US at 605. The officer only conducted “limited and focused inquiries” that were “necessarily ‘attendant to’ the legitimate police procedure.”
 Significance 
This case’s holdings on testimonial evidence could have significance for future cases dealing with new technology.
Commentators with various opinions on the routine booking exception to Miranda have called for changes or clarifications in this area of the doctrine.
 References 
Category: Miranda warning case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution
Category: Testimony
Category:1990 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Pennsylvania v. Nelson" ==> """
Pennsylvania v. Nelson, 350 U.S. 497 (1956), was a United States Supreme Court case that established a precedent for the preemption of United States Federal law over State laws. The case was argued November 15–16, 1955 and the decision was handed down April 2, 1956. The State of Pennsylvania tried to convict a man of sedition under a state law, but a Federal law existed on the same subject. The Court ruled that the Federal law, the Smith Act, overruled the state law, the Pennsylvania Sedition Act, even though the state law was created before the federal law. Nelson, who was convicted under the state law, was therefore mistried.
 Background 
The Congressional act’s real name was the Alien Registration Act of 1940, but was referred to as the Smith Act because the anti-sedition section – the one Nelson claimed he should have been tried under – was authored by Rep. Howard W. Smith of Virginia. The section on sedition read:
The State of Pennsylvania tried and convicted Steve Nelson, an acknowledged member of the Communist Party, under the Pennsylvania Sedition Act, sentencing him to twenty years in prison and a $10,000 fine as well as $13,000 for prosecution costs.Nelson, 350 U.S. at 498. 
The Smith Act was written after the Pennsylvania Sedition Act, but both were created during the Cold War, during the age of Joseph McCarthy and his House Unamerican Activities Committee; this was the time of the "Second Red Scare", when McCarthy investigated many people accused of communist activities.
Other questions on the constitutionality of the Smith Act have been raised in United States Supreme Court, during cases like U.S. v Brandt and Yates v. United States. Even though the act was amended in 1948, it was declared partially unconstitutional in the Yates decision. It has not been repealed.
The Case was argued in front of the Warren Court whose members were: Earl Warren; Hugo Black; Stanley Reed; Felix Frankfurter; William O. Douglas; Harold Burton; Tom C. Clark; Sherman Minton; and John Marshall Harlan II.
The Constitution of the United States establishes the U.S. Constitution, Federal Statutes, and U.S. Treaties as "the supreme law of the land". This power, found in Article VI, Clause 2 is known as the Supremacy Clause. The text reads:
This means that when federal and state authorities come into conflict, the federal law prevails. This is known as preemption: "a situation where a legitimate exercise of national authority supersedes any conflicting action by a state government."Mason, Alpheus T., Stephenson, Donald G., "American Constitutional Law" Pearson Prentice Hall Publishing, Upper Saddle River, NJ. 2009. p. 731  The Court had to decide whether or not the Pennsylvania law could work concurrently with the Smith Act of the Federal Government.
 Opinion of the Court 
Petitioner Steve Nelson was convicted under the Pennsylvania Sedition Act, but claimed that the national statute, the Smith Act, preempted his conviction, and the court ruled 6-3 in his favor.
The Smith Act of 1940 criminalized sedition against the United States and since the Pennsylvania Sedition Act did essentially the same thing, Chief Justice Earl Warren wrote in the opinion of the court that federal law is preeminent, giving three conditions for Federal preemption:
  The scheme of federal regulation is "so pervasive as to make reasonable the inference that congress left no room for the states to supplement itMason, Alpheus T., Stephenson, Donald G., "American Constitutional Law" Pearson Prentice Hall Publishing, Upper Saddle River, NJ. 2009. p. 140";
  The national interest is so dominant on a subject that the federal system must "be assumed to preclude enforcement of state laws on the same subject";
  There is a danger of conflict between state and federal enforcement efforts.
The presence of these three conditions meant that congress had chosen to "occupy the field" and thus the states could not regulate within it.
The U.S. Supreme Court decided that, because of this preemptive power, the Smith Act trumped the Pennsylvania statute and therefore the Pennsylvania Sedition Act was unenforceable.
Chief Justice Earl Warren wrote the opinion of the court. The first thing that he stipulates is that, "... the decision in this case does not affect the right of States to enforce their sedition laws at times when the Federal Government has not occupied the field and is not protecting the entire country from seditious conduct. ... Nor does it limit the jurisdiction of the States where the Constitution and Congress have specifically given them concurrent jurisdiction ... Neither does it limit the right of the State to protect itself at any time against sabotage or attempted violence of all kinds. Nor does it prevent the State from prosecuting where the same act constitutes both a federal offense and a state offense under the police power, as was done in Fox v. Ohio."Nelson, 350 U.S. at 500.
Warren lays out the state’s power here. In summary: When the federal government has not regulated, the states can act; When the states are granted jurisdiction by congress, the states can act; and finally a state can also act in its defense.
Warren enumerates the powers of the Federal Government next with the aforementioned three-part test. The test was derived from Hines v. Davidowitz, 312 U.S. 52, 67. And Rice v. Santa Fe Elevator Corp., 331 U.S. 218.
The first caveat, whether "the scheme of federal regulation [is] so pervasive as to make reasonable the inference that Congress left no room for the States to supplement it", is answered by Warren by noting that Congress, besides the Smith act, had issued The Internal Security Act of 1950. Warren said, " ... the conclusion is inescapable that Congress has intended to occupy the field of sedition."Nelson, 350 U.S. at 504.
The Second caveat states that Federal Statutes must "touch a field in which the federal interest is so dominant that the federal system [must] be assumed to preclude enforcement of state laws on the same subject." This means that the national interest is so great that it is necessary to have uniform legislation on the subject. Warren emphasizes that Congress made these acts to provide for the common defense, to preserve the sovereignty of the United States as an independent nation, and to guarantee to each State a republican form of government, and that these concerns are in no way a local concern. Thus there is need for uniform, national legislation.
Warren finally addressed the third caveat, that there be no conflict between state and national laws. He points out that Franklin D. Roosevelt had revealed this discrepancy in the Pennsylvania law earlier :
 Dissent 
Justice Stanley Reed wrote the dissenting opinion. Justices Harold Burton and Sherman Minton signed onto the opinion.
"The 'occupation of the field' argument has been developed by this Court for the Commerce Clause and legislation thereunder to prevent partitioning of this country by locally erected trade barriers", wrote Reed, "In those cases, this Court has ruled that state legislation is superseded when it conflicts with the comprehensive regulatory scheme and purpose of a federal plan. …" Reed says that in order for federal law to nullify a state law, "the conflict should be clear and direct before this Court reads a congressional intent to void state legislation into the federal sedition acts."Nelson, 350 U.S. at 514 (Reed, J., dissenting). Reed argues that Congress has not occupied the field with the Smith Act, and that it doesn’t need to, and by doing so is undermining state power.
Reed finishes with an emphatic declaration:
The Smith Act appears in Title 18 of the United States Code, which Title codifies the federal criminal laws. Section 3231 of that Title provides:
Nothing in this title shall be held to take away or impair the jurisdiction of the courts of the several States under the laws thereof.
That declaration springs from the federal character of our Nation. It recognizes the fact that maintenance of order and fairness rests primarily with the States. … This Court has interpreted the section to mean that States may provide concurrent legislation in the absence of explicit congressional intent to the contrary. Sexton v. California, 189 U.S. 319, 324-325. The majority's position in this case cannot be reconciled with that clear authorization of Congress.
The law stands against any advocacy of violence to change established governments. Freedom of speech allows full play to the processes of reason. The state and national legislative bodies have legislated within constitutional limits so as to allow the widest participation by the law enforcement officers of the respective governments. The individual States were not told that they are powerless to punish local acts of sedition, nominally directed against the United States. Courts should not interfere. We would reverse the judgment of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania.Nelson, 350 U.S. at 519-20 (Reed, J., dissenting).
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1956 in United States case law
"""

From "Pennsylvania v. New York" ==> """
Pennsylvania v. New York, was a case which were heard in 1972 before the U.S. Supreme Court.  The initial filing was allowed at 407 U.S. 206. and the final decision was ordered at 407 U.S. 223 (1972)..
When two states have a controversy between each other, the case is filed for original jurisdiction with the United States Supreme Court.  This is one of the very limited circumstances where the court acts as original jurisdiction, e.g. a trial court.  In all other cases the court acts as the highest level appellate court in the United States.
In this case, Western Union had issued money orders that were either never redeemed or erroneously underpaid (e.g. a money order for $500 paid as $300), and enough time had passed that the value of the money orders was considered unclaimed property.  In such a case, unclaimed money order escheats to the state.  The question of the case was, which state should get the money, the state where the money order was purchased, or the state where Western Union was incorporated?  Pennsylvania argued for the former, stating that if it were the latter, then New York (where Western Union was then incorporated) would receive a financial windfall.
As is the practice in original jurisdiction cases, the Supreme Court had a special master hear the case and make a decision.  The Special Master decided to rely on the logic of the previous decision of the U.S. Supreme Court in Texas v. New Jersey.. The court approved the decision of the Special Master.
The final decision ruled that if a money order is never redeemed or is under-redeemed, if Western Union does know who the purchaser or redeemer is, and a money order is never redeemed or is under-redeemed, the remaining money escheats to the state where that purchaser resides, subject to that state's rules for escheat of unclaimed money or property.   However, if Western Union does not know who the purchaser or the person who redeemed it is, the money escheats to the state where Western Union is incorporated (e.g. New York at that time; it later reincorporated in Delaware).
Later Congressional Legislation
Congress would weigh in on the matter two years later by passing the Disposition of Abandoned Money Orders and Traveler’s Checks Act (also known as the Federal Disposition Act or FDA), which decreed (in line with Pennsylvania's arguments) that the state where the money order was purchased should be the state to which unclaimed proceeds escheat (as most people purchase these items in the state of their residence).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 407
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Supreme Court original jurisdiction cases
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:1972 in Pennsylvania
Category:1972 in New York (state)
Category:Western Union
"""

From "Penry v. Johnson" ==> """
Penry v. Johnson, 532 U.S. 782 (2001), is a United States Supreme Court case which concerned whether instructions given to a Texas jury were constitutionally adequate to emphasize the mitigating factors in sentencing of defendants who are intellectually disabled ("retarded" in the Court's words.).  The Texas courts had determined the sentencing instructions were consistent with prior Supreme Court jurisprudence, but the Court in a divided decision reversed, finding the sentencing instructions insufficient. This was the second time Penry's case made it to the Supreme Court.
Background
In 1989, the U.S. Supreme Court held in Penry v. Lynaugh. that Johnny Paul Penry had been sentenced to death in violation of the Eighth Amendment after finding that Texas' special instruction questions did not permit the jury to consider mitigating evidence involving his mental retardation. On retrial in 1990, Penry was again found guilty of murder. The defense again put on evidence regarding Penry's mental impairments. Ultimately, a psychiatric evaluation, which stated that Penry would be dangerous to others if released, prepared at the request of Penry's former counsel, was cited. Upon submission to the jury, the trial judge instructed the jury to determine Penry's sentence by answering the same special questions in the first trial. Additionally, the trial judge gave a supplemental instruction on mitigating evidence. The court sentenced Penry to death in connection with the jury's answers to the special issues. In affirming the verdict, the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals rejected Penry's claims that the admission of language from the psychiatric evaluation violated his Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination, and that the jury instructions were constitutionally inadequate because they did not permit the jury to consider his specific mitigating evidence. Penry's petitions for state and federal habeas corpus relief failed.
Opinion of the Court
The decision of the Court, authored by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, was in two parts. Firstly, the Court was unanimous in finding that the inclusion of the psychiatric report was constitutional. O'Connor expressed "considerable doubt" that the psychiatric report "even if erroneous, had a 'substantial and injurious effect'" on the outcome of the trial. However, the Court split 6-3 on whether the supplemental jury instructions on mitigating evidence were constitutionally adequate; the majority holding they were not. "Any realistic assessment of the manner in which the supplemental instruction operated would therefore lead to the same conclusion we reached in Penry I," wrote Justice O'Connor "'A reasonable juror could well have believed that there was no vehicle for expressing the view that Penry did not deserve to be sentenced to death based upon his mitigating evidence.'" Therefore, the case was sent back to Texas for renewed sentencing. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissent as to this part of the decision, joined by then-Chief Justice William Rehnquist and Justice Scalia. Thomas explained that he disagreed with the majority "...because I believe the most recent sentencing court gave the jurors an opportunity to consider the evidence Penry presented". He concluded by attacking the standards the majority used to define proper sentencing instructions, saying the Court was sending "mixed signals to the Texas courts."532 U.S. at 809 (Thomas, J., dissenting).
Subsequently to this case, the Supreme Court held in Atkins v. Virginia that execution of persons who are mentally retarded is unconstitutional. This functionally prevented Penry from receiving the death penalty, and he would later be resentenced to life imprisonment.http://www.tdcj.state.tx.us/death_row/dr_offenders_no_longer_on_dr.html
The decision was part of a series of decisions on the death penalty, all dealing with the "national consensus" on the question.Acker, James. Death Penalty Cases, 2003., p. 2
See also
 Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996
References
External links
Category:United States sentencing case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2001 in United States case law
"""

From "Penry v. Lynaugh" ==> """
Penry v. Lynaugh, 492 U.S. 302 (1989), was a United States Supreme Court case that sanctioned the death penalty for mentally disabled offenders because the Court determined executing the mentally disabled was not "cruel and unusual punishment" under the Eighth Amendment.. However, because Texas law did not allow the jury to give adequate consideration as a mitigating factor to Johnny Paul Penry's intellectual disability at the sentencing phase of his murder trial, the Court remanded the case for further proceedings. Eventually, Penry was retried for capital murder, again sentenced to death, and again the Supreme Court ruled, in Penry v. Johnson,. that the jury was not able to adequately consider Penry's intellectual disability as a mitigating factor at the sentencing phase of the trial. Ultimately, Penry was spared the death penalty because of the Supreme Court's ruling in Atkins v. Virginia,. which, while not directly  overruling the holding in "Penry I", did give considerable negative treatment to Penry on the basis that the Eighth Amendment allowed execution of mentally disabled people.
Opinion of the Court
The Court ruled that the execution of the mentally retarded does not violate the Eighth Amendment's ban on cruel and unusual punishments.
Concurring and dissenting opinions
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 492
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
Further reading
External links
Category:Capital punishment in Texas
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1989 in United States case law
"""

From "Pepper v. United States" ==> """
Pepper v. United States, 562 U.S. 476 (2011), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States concerning whether a United States District Court properly handled the sentencing of a former methamphetamine dealer. He was originally sentenced to 24 months in prison, far shorter than what federal guidelines generally specify for crimes of that nature. Prosecutors appealed the case to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit, which remanded the case back to the United States District Court for the Northern District of Iowa, which affirmed the original sentence after testimony relating the defendant's rehabilitation. The case was appealed to the Eighth Circuit again, and was again remanded. A different District Court judge gave him a 65-month sentence. The defendant then brought the case back to the Eighth Circuit, which confirmed the later ruling, and to then to the Supreme Court. Sonia Sotomayor wrote the opinion of the court, which ruled in favor of the defendant.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 562
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Pereida v. Wilkinson" ==> """
Pereida v. Wilkinson, 592 U.S. ___ (2021),  was a United States Supreme Court (the Court) case in which the Court ruled that under the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) an alien seeking to cancel a lawful removal order bears the burden of showing that he has not been convicted of a disqualifying offense.  An alien has not carried that burden when the record shows he has been convicted under a statute limiting multiple offenses, some of which are disqualifying, and the record is ambiguous as to which crime formed the basis of his conviction.
Background
Under the INA, certain nonpermanent residents may seek to cancel an order of removal and adjust to the status of an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence by applying to the United States Attorney General through the Executive Office for Immigration Review (EOIR), a subagency of the United States Department of Justice. As part of their application, the alien must demonstrate that they (1) have been physically present in the United States for a continuous period of not less than 10 years immediately preceding the application, (2) have been a person of good moral character during such period, (3) have not been convicted of an offense that would either render them inadmissible to be admitted to the United States or deportable from the United States, and (4) establishes that removal would result in exceptional and extremely unusual hardship to the alien's qualifying relative who is a United States citizen or lawful permanent resident.
Clemente Avelino Pereida was a citizen of Mexico who entered the United States without authorization or inspection in approximately 1995. He relocated to Nebraska with his family, was gainfully employed and paid taxes, and with his wife raised three children, one a U.S. citizen and another a Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals recipient. After an arrest, he was identified as an unlawfully present alien, and placed into removal proceedings in 2009. He did not contest his removability but instead applied to cancel his removal and adjust status to a lawful permanent resident. To demonstrate the requirements for cancellation of removal meant he had to produce records of his criminal history. But given his recent arrest, he was progressing through immigration proceedings in tandem with his criminal case.
In his criminal case, state authorities charged him with attempted criminal impersonation for using a false Social Security card to seek employment at National Service Company of Iowa. The Nebraska Statute section 28-608 (2008) charged four different means in which a person could violate attempted criminal impersonation. Pereida was found guilty under the statute, he paid a fine and served no jail time for the offense.
While Pereida identified his conviction for his cancellation of removal application, he declined to offer any evidence of his conviction. The United States Department of Homeland Security produced his criminal complaint but that document did not specify which of the four means he actually violated. That was problematic because three of the means were disqualifying offenses as a crime involving moral turpitude (CIMT) that rendered him inadmissible or deportable while one (carrying a business without a license) did not. Pereida argued that such ambiguity meant that his prior conviction could not be construed as a disqualifying offense to bar eligibility for relief. The EOIR Immigration Judge presiding over his case determined that Pereida's attempted criminal impersonation conviction was a CIMT that disqualified him from cancellation of removal and ordered him removed from the United States.
Pereida appealed to the Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA).  Although the BIA found no record as to which particular means he was convicted of violating, they noted that Pereida bore the burden of proving that his conviction was not a CIMT, and dismissed his appeal.
Pereida petitioned the Eighth Circuit claiming that his conviction does not fall within the definition of CIMT and that even if his conviction qualifies as a CIMT, it falls within the petty offense exception.  The Eighth Circuit denied his petition holding that under the modified categorical approach they were unable to discern which means he was convicted. But because it was his burden to demonstrate eligibility for relief, he had the obligation to establish that his conviction was not a CIMT, and his failure to produce sufficient conviction records meant he did not carry his burden and thus was ineligible for cancellation of removal.  The Eighth Circuit noted that the absence of the necessary substantive determination of the existence of a CIMT precluded any inquiry of the petty offense exception.  Pereida petitioned for rehearing on en banc which the Eighth Circuit denied.
United States Supreme Court
Pereida petitioned for Writ of Certiorari with the United States Supreme Court that was granted on December 18, 2019. The Court heard oral arguments from the parties on October 14, 2020. Prior to the oral arguments, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg had died, while her replacement, Justice Amy Coney Barrett, had not yet been confirmed. As such, Justice Barrett did not participate in the case. Before the Court, Pereida reiterated his argument that any ambiguity about his prior conviction meant that the crime could not be a disqualifying offense under the categorical approach and therefore would not bar eligibility for relief.
On March 4, 2021, the Court issued its opinion in a 5–3 ruling affirming the Eighth Circuit's decision. Justice Neil Gorsuch wrote the majority opinion and was joined by Justices Brett Kavanaugh, Samuel Alito, Clarence Thomas, and Chief Justice John Roberts.
The Court found that the INA expressly requires individuals seeking relief from lawful removal orders to prove all aspects of their eligibility which includes proving they were not convicted of a disqualifying crime. The Court noted that Pereida agreed that he must prove three of the four statutory eligibility requirements for cancellation of removal for certain nonpermanent residents with the exception of proving the disqualifying offense. But the Court explained that there were two inquiries, factual and hypothetical. The factual inquiry was to determine which crime formed the basis of his conviction, and the hypothetical to ask whether someone could commit such crime of conviction without fraud, such as under the categorical approach. The Court found that Pereida's failure to produce any evidence as to the actual crime of conviction meant they could not proceed to tackle the hypothetical question, and thus he failed to carry his burden of proving he had not been convicted of a disqualifying crime, as required by the INA.
Justice Stephen Breyer wrote the dissenting opinion, joined by Justices Elena Kagan and Sonia Sotomayor. Breyer stated that placing the burden on the alien would require them "to introduce a wide range of documentary evidence and testimony to establish", creating a high standard of burden that many aliens may not be able to meet. Breyer continued that the burden should be on the government to prove that the crime was one of moral turpitude rather than the alien, and that in Pereida's case, this had not yet been shown by the government.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Pereira v. Sessions" ==> """
Pereira v. Sessions, Attorney General, no. 17-459, 585 U.S (2018), is a United States Supreme Court case regarding immigration. In an 8-1 majority, the Court reversed a lower court’s decision by ruling that a Notice to Appear which does not inform a noncitizen when and where to appear for a removal proceeding is not valid under 8 U.S. Code § 1229(b) and therefore does not trigger the stop-time rule which is used to calculate the ten year continuous presence requirement for non-lawful permanent residents.Johnson, Kit. (2018). Pereira v. Sessions: A Jurisdictional Surprise for Immigration Courts, p. 1 The majority opinion was authored by Justice Sonia Sotomayor while the dissent was authored by Justice Samuel Alito.
 Background  
Wescley Fonseca Pereira, a native and citizen of Brazil, was lawfully admitted to the United States in December 2000 as a temporary non-immigrant visitor. He overstayed his visa and in 2006 was arrested in Massachusetts for operating a vehicle while intoxicated. While he was detained on May 31, 2006, he was served a Notice to Appear by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) which alerted him that removal proceedings were being initiated against him since he overstayed his visa and listed consequences if he did not appear. However, the notice did not specify a time or place for the hearing. It only ordered him to appear before an Immigration Judge in Boston “on a date to be set at a time to be set."Pereira v. Sessions (2018). SupremeCourt.gov p. 6
Over a year later on August 9, 2007, DHS filed the 2006 notice with the Boston Immigration Court. The Immigration Court attempted to mail Pereira an additional notice stating that the time and date for his removal hearing was set for October 3, 2007, at 9:30AM, but it was sent to Pereira’s street address rather than the post office box he had provided to DHS and therefore it was returned undeliverable. Pereira never appeared to his hearing since he did not receive the notice and so the Immigration Court ordered that he be removed in his absence. Unaware of the removal order, Pereira remained a resident in the United States.
In 2013, after Pereira had been residing continuously in the country for over ten years, he was arrested for a minor motor vehicle violation and detained once again by DHS. Even though Pereira demonstrated that he had not received the Immigration Court’s 2007 notice which set out the specific date and time of his hearing, they re-opened the removal proceedings. Pereira then applied for cancellation of removal, “arguing that the stop-time rule” of the Immigration and Nationality Act “was not triggered by DHS’s initial 2006 notice because the document lacked information about the time and date of his removal hearing.Pereira v. Sessions (2018). SupremeCourt.gov p. 7 The Immigration Court disagreed and instead stated that the law did not require that DHS put a certain date or time on the Notice to Appear to make it effective and trigger the stop-time rule. Therefore, the Immigration Court ruled that Pereira could not meet the 10-year continuous physical-presence requirement under 8 U.S. Code § 1229(b) which made him ineligible for cancellation of removal. The Board of Immigration Appeals dismissed Pereira’s appeal. Adhering to its precedent in The Matter of Judith Elma Camarillo (2011), which stated that under the stop-time rule any period of continuous residence of a noncitizen applying for cancellation of removal is deemed to end upon the service of a Notice to Appear regardless of whether it includes a time and date for the initial hearing,The Matter of Camarillo (2011). Justice.gov. p. 5 the Board of Immigration Appeals agreed with the Immigration Court and ruled that the 2006 Notice to Appear triggered the stop-time rule and therefore that Pereira was ineligible for cancellation of removal.Pereira v. Sessions (2018). SupremeCourt.gov p. 9 Pereira’s case made it to the Supreme Court and arguments began on April 23, 2018.
 Ruling 
The Supreme Court ruled in an 8-1 majority that when a noncitizen “receives a document called a Notice to Appear, and where that document does not have a time or place listed for the removal proceedings, then it is not a valid Notice to Appear, and thus it does not ‘stop time’ for purposes of establishing the noncitizen’s continuous physical presence in the United States."Johnson, Kit. (2018). Pereira v. Sessions: A Jurisdictional Surprise for Immigration Courts, p. 15 This question about whether such a notice triggered the stop-time rule was crucial because Pereira sought cancellation of removal relief, which is only available to noncitizens who have had a continuous physical presence in the United States for 10 years.8 U.S. Code § 1229(b) Authored by Justice Sonia Sotomayor, the Court’s opinion held that “a notice that does not inform a noncitizen when and where to appear for a removal proceedings” is not valid and does not trigger the stop-time rule. The ruling followed, according to the Court, “inescapably and unambiguously” from “the plain text, the statutory context, and common sense."Pereira v. Sessions (2018). SupremeCourt.gov, p. 2
 Significance 
This ruling was important because nearly all cases filed in from 2015-2018 were initiated by Notice to Appear documents that did not include the time and place of the proceeding. Therefore, it created a path for noncitizens to make an appeal who are in a similar situation.Johnson, Kit. (2018). Pereira v. Sessions: A Jurisdictional Surprise for Immigration Courts, p. 16 However, in The Matter of German Bermudez-Cota (2018), the Board of Immigration Appeals ruled that a Notice to Appear with no time or place still vests Immigration Judge with jurisdiction over the removal proceedings as long as a Notice to Appear specifying the time and place of the hearing is sent to the noncitizen at a later date.American Immigration Council, The Catholic Legal Immigration Network, Inc. (2018). Strategies and Considerations in the Wake of Pereira v. Sessions, p.6  In a controversial move, as a response to this decision immigration courts in some instances are now scheduling hundreds of artificial removal hearings per day, such as in San Antonio, Texas to trigger the stop-time rule even though they cannot get through every hearing.Malik, Alia. (2019). "More Than 100 Show Up at San Antonio Immigration Court for Artificial Hearing Date." San Antonio Express. This case is also notable because the Supreme Court referred to individuals in removal proceedings as noncitizens and not aliens, except when quoting statues or regulations that use the term.American Immigration Council, The Catholic Legal Immigration Network, Inc. (2018). Strategies and Considerations in the Wake of Pereira v. Sessions, p.5 
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2018 in United States case law
"""

From "Pereira v. United States" ==> """
Pereira v. United States, 347 U.S. 1 (1954), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the word "knowingly" in the federal mail fraud statute, 18 U.S.C. § 1341,. should extend to all reasonably foreseeable consequences, even ones not specifically intended..Bonnie, R.J. et al.  Criminal Law, Second Edition.  Foundation Press, New York, NY: 2004, p. 187
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1954 in United States case law
Category:Mail and wire fraud case law
"""

From "Peretz v. United States" ==> """
Peretz v. United States, 501 U.S. 923 (1991), was a Supreme Court of the United States case. The Court affirmed that a defendant in a federal criminal trial on a felony charge must affirmatively object to the supervising of jury selection by a magistrate judge, ruling that it is not enough that the defendant merely acquiesce to the magistrate's involvement in his case for a court to reverse a conviction for this reason.
Background
Peretz and a co-defendant had been indicted on smuggling four kilograms of heroin into the United States. The district judge who oversaw the trial asked if there was any objection to a magistrate conducting the jury selection, and Peretz did not make an objection. The district judge conducted the actual trial. Peretz did not object to the magistrate conducting the jury selection until he reached the court of appeals. The court of appeals disagreed, reasoning that the Federal Magistrates Act required him to object specifically to the involvement of a magistrate judge in his case. Since Peretz had not objected in the district court to the magistrate's involvement in the jury selection, the Second Circuit ruled that he had waived the objection.
Opinion of the Court
In an opinion by Justice Stevens, the Court upheld Peretz's conviction.
Consent allows the magistrate to act
There exists a personal right for a litigant in federal court to insist on the involvement of a judge who has been appointed by the President and confirmed by the Senate in the manner contemplated by the Constitution.Commodity Futures Trading Commission v. Schor, . However, the Federal Magistrates Act authorizes magistrate judges to undertake "additional duties" when the parties in a case consent. For magistrates to undertake their routine tasks is a great relief to federal courts in processing their caseloads. When the parties consent, magistrates may supervise entire misdemeanor trials. "These duties [in supervising an entire trial] are comparable in responsibility and importance to presiding over voir dire at a felony trial." Thus, supervising voir dire is one of the "additional duties" Congress authorized magistrate judges to undertake.
A magistrate at voir dire does not implicate constitutional concerns
Although the involvement of an Article III judge is a personal right, it is a right that can be waived. In the course of a criminal proceeding, defendants are asked to waive many rights; the right to the involvement of an Article III judge at jury selection imposes little marginal cost on him. Furthermore, the decision to involve a magistrate in the first place rests with an Article III judge, and the parties may veto that decision. Article III judges retain "total control and jurisdiction" over the entire process, and must review the magistrate judge's decisions de novo if the parties ask. For the same reason that involving a magistrate judge does not implicate due process concerns (United States v. Raddatz), it does not implicate Article III concerns either.
Dissenting opinions
Justice Marshall's dissent
Justice Marshall disagreed that the parties' consent could vitiate the involvement of a magistrate. Congress did not, after all, specify jury selection in the Federal Magistrates Act. For Justice Marshall, the defendant's consent did not change this. Congress limited a magistrate's involvement to misdemeanors and other relatively minor roles, and jury selection is a major event in a felony trial. Furthermore, Congress did not allow an Article III judge to review the magistrate's involvement in jury selection. When the Court had previously ruled that the defendant's consent was the deciding factor in the propriety of a magistrate's involvement, it had also rested on a district judge's review of that involvement.  Because there is none with respect to jury selection, a defendant's consent was not enough for Justice Marshall to extend a magistrate's involvement any further than Congress had expressly allowed.  
Furthermore, Justice Marshall disputed that a magistrate's involvement in jury selection was consistent with Article III. The right to an Article III judge rests on his political independence and his role as a check and balance against the other two branches. The first of these is a personal right and therefore waivable. The second, however, is structural, and therefore unwaivable. Justice Marshall was willing to accede to the involvement of a magistrate if there would be de novo review in the district court. To justify a magistrate's involvement based on consent in the absence of judicial review went too far for Justice Marshall.
Justice Scalia's dissent
Because the Court's previous decision came while Peretz's case was pending in the court of appeals, Justice Scalia reasoned that the magistrate judge's involvement was plain error that affected Peretz's substantial rights. In Justice Scalia's view, the Government conceded that the Federal Magistrates Act did not authorize the magistrate's involvement in Peretz's jury selection, as Justice Marshall observed. Accordingly, Justice Scalia would have overturned Peretz's conviction.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 501
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States criminal procedure case law
Category:1991 in United States case law
"""

From "Perez v. Brownell" ==> """
Perez v. Brownell, 356 U.S. 44 (1958), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court affirmed Congress's right to revoke United States citizenship as a result of a citizen's voluntary performance of specified actions, even in the absence of any intent or desire on the person's part to lose citizenship.  Specifically, the Supreme Court upheld an act of Congress which provided for revocation of citizenship as a consequence of voting in a foreign election..
The precedent  was repudiated nine years later in Afroyim v. Rusk,. in which the Supreme Court held that the Fourteenth Amendment's Citizenship Clause guaranteed citizens' right to keep their  citizenship and overturned the same law that it had upheld in Perez.
 Background 
Clemente Martinez Perez was born in  El Paso, Texas, on March 17, 1909. He resided in the United States  until 1919 or 1920, when his parents took him to Mexico. In 1928, he was informed that he had been born in the state of Texas.
During World War II, he applied for admission and was admitted into the United States as a Mexican alien railroad worker. His application for such entry contained his recitation that he was a native-born citizen of Mexico. By 1947, however, Perez had returned to Mexico, and in that year, he applied for admission to the United States as a citizen of the United States. Upon his arrival, he was charged with failing to register under the Selective Service Laws of the United States during the war.
Under oath, Perez admitted that between 1944 and 1947, he had remained outside the United States to avoid military service and had voted in an election in Mexico in 1946.
On  May 15, 1953, he surrendered to immigration authorities in San Francisco as an alien unlawfully in the United States but claimed that he was a citizen of the United States by birth and thereby entitled to remain. The US District Court, however, found that Perez had lost his American citizenship, a decision that was affirmed by the court of appeals.
The courts held that Congress can attach loss of citizenship only as a consequence of conduct engaged in voluntarily even if there was no intent or desire to lose citizenship. The law was enacted as the Nationality Act of 1940 (54 Stat 1137, as amended).
 Decision 
In 1958, a divided Supreme Court upheld the decisions because Perez "became involved in foreign political affairs and evidenced an allegiance to another country inconsistent with American citizenship, thereby abandoning his citizenship."
Two central holdings were these:
 Subsequent developments 
The court reversed itself in 1967 with its decision in Afroyim v. Rusk. It called section 401 of the Nationality Act of 1940 unconstitutional and stated that the Fourteenth Amendment prevents Congress from taking away citizenship without the citizen's assent.
 See also 
 Nishikawa v. Dulles
References
 Further reading 
 External links 
Category:1958 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Citizenship Clause case law
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
"""

From "Perez v. Campbell" ==> """
Perez v. Campbell, 402 U.S. 637 (1971), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that Arizona's law suspending a driver's license was unconstitutional due to its conflict with the federal Bankruptcy Act under the Supremacy Clause of the Constitution.
 Background 
The plaintiffs, Mr. Adolfo and Mrs. Emma Perez, were licensed uninsured motorists in the state of Arizona. Insurance was not required under Arizona law. Mr. Perez was involved in a traffic accident and, unable to pay the associated costs, soon filed for bankruptcy. Arizona, under its financial responsibility laws, withdrew the Perez' licenses, and the couple filed suit in district court, where their claim was denied. The Perez family's appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit was denied, and they subsequently appealed to the United States Supreme Court, which granted certiorari.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice White delivered the five-justice majority opinion, which held that the Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Act interfered with the purpose of the Bankruptcy Act § 17, a purpose which included giving those exiting bankruptcy the chance for a "clear field for future effort, unhampered by ... pre-existing debt."
This decision overruled precedent in Keeler v. Department of Public Safety, 269 US 153 (1962) and Reitz v. Mealey, 314 US 33 (1941), stating that those rulings "have no authoritative effect to the extent they are inconsistent with the controlling principle that state legislation that frustrates the full effectiveness of federal law is invalidated by the Supremacy Clause.",*Court Opinion at Justia and was seen as reinforcing "the Hines test", the rule specified for identifying Supremacy Clause violations in Hines v. Davidowitz (1941).
Justice Blackmun, writing for a four-member minority, concurring in part and dissenting in part, would have upheld Keeler and Reitz, suggesting that the primary purpose of the Arizona law was not bankruptcy, but motorist responsibility.
References
External links
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Perez v. Mortgage Bankers Ass'n" ==> """
Perez v. Mortgage Bankers Association, 575 U.S. 92 (2015), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the D.C. Circuit's Paralyzed Veterans doctrine is contrary to a clear reading of the Administrative Procedure Act and "improperly imposes on agencies an obligation beyond the Act's maximum procedural requirements."
 Opinion of the Court 
Associate Justice Sonia Sotomayor authored the opinion of the Court.https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/14pdf/13-1041_0861.pdf 
Associate Justices Samuel Alito, Antonin Scalia, and Clarence Thomas authored concurring opinions.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 575
 References 
External links
 SCOTUSblog coverage
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2015 in United States case law
"""

From "Perini v. Colosimo" ==> """
redirectChambers v. Maroney#Aftermath
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1970 in United States case law
"""

From "Perkins v. Benguet Mining Co." ==> """
Perkins v. Benguet Mining Co., 342 U.S. 437 (1952), was a United States Supreme Court case which held that an Ohio state court could exercise general personal jurisdiction over a foreign corporation on the basis of that company's "continuous and systematic" contacts with the state of Ohio.. Benguet Consolidated Mining Co. was a Philippine mining corporation, owned by American John W. Hausermann, that temporarily stopped its mining operations and relocated its president to Ohio during the World War II Japanese occupation of the Philippines. The Court held that the president's use of his office in Ohio to carry on continuous business activities during this period allowed Ohio to properly assert general jurisdiction over his company.
Background
The Supreme Court case consolidated the two original suits into one. One suit had been brought by the petitioner Ms. Perkins for approximately $68,400 in dividends that she alleged were due her as a stockholder. The second suit was for $2,500,000 damages claimed as a result of the company's failure to issue to her certificates for 120,000 shares of its stock.
The trial court had sustained a motion to quash the summons in each case because the defendant was a foreign corporation and, as such, the Court did not have personal jurisdiction over it. Neither its corporate headquarters nor its principal place of business were in Ohio, and it had not applied for the required license to transact business in Ohio nor appointed an agent for service of process in state. Additionally, the claims Ms. Perkins sued upon did not arise from anything the defendant did in the state of Ohio.  The Ohio State Supreme Court affirmed the decision and the plaintiff filed another appeal in the U.S. Supreme Court.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court reversed on the basis of the defendant president's "continuous and systematic supervision of the necessarily limited wartime activities of the company"  in Ohio. It was thus not a violation of the Fourteenth Amendment due process clause for Ohio to assert general jurisdiction over the company on the plaintiff's claim, even though the claim arose from activities conducted outside the forum state and entirely distinct from those activities conducted inside the forum state.
The judgment of the Supreme Court of Ohio was vacated and the cause of action remanded for further proceedings consistent with the opinion.
This is a notable United States civil procedure case in the area of general jurisdiction. It represents one of the rare instances in which a state's exercise of general (as opposed to specific) personal jurisdiction over a non-resident was deemed to comport with the requirements of due process, due to the non-resident's extensive activities within the state.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 342
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States personal jurisdiction case law
Category:1952 in United States case law
Category:Mining in Ohio
Category:Philippines–United States relations
"""

From "Perkins v. Elg" ==> """
Perkins v. Elg, 307 U.S. 325 (1939), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States that a child born in the United States to naturalized parents on U.S. soil is a natural born citizen and that the child's natural born citizenship is not lost if the child is taken to and raised in the country of the parents' origin, provided that upon attaining the age of majority, the child elects to retain U.S. citizenship "and to return to the United States to assume its duties.".
Background
Marie Elizabeth Elg was born in the Brooklyn section of New York City in 1907 to two Swedish parents who had arrived in the United States some time prior to 1906; her father was naturalized in 1906.  In 1911, her mother took the four-year-old to Sweden; her father went to Sweden in 1922, and in 1934 made a statement before an American consul in Sweden that he had "voluntarily expatriated himself for the reason that he did not desire to retain the status of an American citizen and wished to preserve his allegiance to Sweden."
In 1929, within eight months of attaining the age of majority, Marie Elg obtained an American passport through the American consul in Sweden, and returned to the United States.  In 1935 she was notified by the U.S. Department of Labor that she was an illegal alien and was threatened with deportation.
Elg sued to establish that she was a citizen of the United States and not subject to deportation.  Frances Perkins was listed as the nominal plaintiff in the case, being the Secretary of Labor during the administration of Franklin D. Roosevelt, when the case was appealed to the Supreme Court."Court rulings on dual citizenship ", richw.org, page fetched 8 February 2010.
Decision
Chief Justice Hughes wrote for the Court:
 Elg became a citizen of the United States upon her birth in New York; the Civil Rights Act of 1866 had specifically addressed the issue of a child born in the United States to alien parents;
 When a citizen of the United States who is a minor has parents who renounce their American citizenship, the minor does not lose his American citizenship as a result, "provided that, on attaining majority he elects to retain that citizenship and to return to the United States to assume its duties";
 Some provisions of the Naturalization Convention and Protocol of 1869 between the U.S. and Sweden, which provided for the loss of U.S. citizenship by any United States citizen who chose to "expatriate" — to become a naturalized citizen of another country, live there, and lose their United States citizenship — did not apply to minors, as the minor's move out of the United States was not to be considered a voluntary act;
 The acquisition of "derivative Swedish citizenship" by a minor likewise does not force the minor to lose his American citizenship.
The Court's first holding, that Elg was a citizen upon birth within the United States, was a reaffirmation of United States v. Wong Kim Ark (1898).
The case was argued for the United States by Robert H. Jackson, who later became a Supreme Court justice.  This was the only Supreme Court case that Jackson lost in his two years as Solicitor General.Great American lawyers: an encyclopedia, Volume 1, John R. Vile, Page 391.  2001.
The case was called in 1960 a "landmark decision on expatriation".Constitutional law: cases and materials, Volume 1, Paul G. Kauper, 1960, p.669
 See also 
 Sweden v. Yamaguchi: A court case involving Sweden and American-occupied Japan
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 307
References
External links
Category:1939 in United States case law
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:Sweden–United States relations
"""

From "Permanent Mission of India v. City of New York" ==> """
Permanent Mission of India v. City of New York, 551 U.S. 193 (2007), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court construed the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act to allow a federal court to hear a lawsuit brought by the City of New York to recover unpaid property taxes levied against India and Mongolia, both of which own real estate in New York.
Background
India and Mongolia owned buildings in Manhattan. They used part of their buildings for diplomatic business, and another part to house lower-level diplomatic staff, who did not pay rent.
Under New York law, real property owned by foreign governments was exempt from taxation if it was "used exclusively" for diplomatic offices or for the quartering of diplomats "with the rank of ambassador or minister plenipotentiary" to the United Nations. If the foreign government only used part of its property for these purposes, then the remainder of the property was subject to taxation.  
The City of New York had levied taxes against India and Mongolia for the appropriate portions of their buildings, but India and Mongolia refused to pay. Eventually the unpaid taxes became tax liens. As of February 1, 2003, India's lien amounted to $16.4 million, and Mongolia's amounted to $2.1 million.  
The City brought suit in state court to enforce the liens, and India and Mongolia removed the suit to federal court. Once in federal court, India and Mongolia argued they were immune to suit under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act (FSIA).  The district court disagreed, reasoning that the FSIA did not exempt foreign governments from suits in which "rights in immovable property situated in the United States are in issue." The Second Circuit agreed with the district court, adding that the tax obligations owed by India and Mongolia qualified as "rights in immovable property." India and Mongolia asked the Supreme Court to review the case, and it agreed to do so.
Majority opinion
Under the FSIA, a foreign government is presumptively immune from suit in federal court unless a specific exception applies. This case involves the exception for "rights in immovable property situated in the United States."See . The question before the Supreme Court was whether a suit declaring the validity of a tax lien places "rights in immovable property" in issue.
A "lien" is a "charge or security or incumbrance upon property." An "incumbrance," in turn, is any "right to, or interest in, land which may subsist in another to the diminution of its value." A tax lien "inhibits one of the quintessential rights of property ownership—the right to convey that property. Thus, a suit to declare the validity of a tax lien inquestionably places "rights in immovable property" in issue.
This interpretation is consistent with the prevailing view of international law in 1976, the year FSIA was enacted. Under international law, sovereign immunity exists for inherently public acts but not with respect to private acts. Property ownership was held to not be an inherently public function.
Dissenting opinion
Justice John Paul Stevens argued that none of the exceptions to sovereign immunity under the FSIA applied to suits to enforce tax liens. Because tax liens are available to force payment in a variety of situations, such as pest control, litter removal, and emergency repairs, a "whole host of routine civil controversies could be converted into property liens and then used—as the tax lien was in this case—to pierce a foreign sovereign's traditional and statutory immunity." In this way, the tax-lien exception could swallow the rule, imposing upon those foreign governments the duty to defend against these lawsuits.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 551
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
 [  Transcript of oral argument]
  Brief of petitioners India and Mongolia
  Brief of respondent City of New York
  Amicus brief of the Solicitor General
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:Foreign Sovereign Immunity Act case law
Category:India–United States relations
Category:Mongolia–United States relations
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:Diplomatic missions in New York City
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Perpich v. Department of Defense" ==> """
Perpich v. Department of Defense, 496 U.S. 334 (1990), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court concerning the Militia Clauses of Article I, Section 8, of the United States Constitution, in which the court held that Congress may authorize members of the National Guard to be ordered to active federal duty for purposes of training outside the United States without either the consent of the governor of the affected state or the declaration of a national emergency. The plaintiff was Rudy Perpich, governor of Minnesota at the time.
In 1986, after governors George Deukmejian of California and Joseph E. Brennan of Maine refused to allow the deployment of their states' National Guard units to Central America for training, Congress passed the Montgomery Amendment, which prohibited state governors from withholding their consent. Massachusetts governor Michael Dukakis had also challenged the law, but lost in U.S. District Court in Boston in 1988.
See Also
State defense force#Federal activation
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States military case law
Category:1990 in United States case law
Category:National Guard (United States)
Category:Governor of Minnesota
Category:United States–Central American relations
"""

From "Perris v. Hexamer" ==> """
Perris v. Hexamer, 99 U.S. 674 (1879), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held a map-maker has no more an exclusive right to use the form of the characters they employ to express their ideas on a map than they have to use the typeface they use for text. Suitably, one could not use copyright to restrict the use of map symbols.https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/datesofdecisions.pdf 
 References 
External links
Category:1879 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
