"""

From "Heffernan v. City of Paterson" ==> """
Heffernan v. City of Paterson, 578 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in 2016 concerning the First Amendment rights of public employees. By a 6–2 margin, the Court held that a public employee's constitutional rights might be violated when an employer, believing that the employee was engaging in what would be protected speech, disciplines them because of that belief, even if the employee did not exercise such a constitutional right.
The case was brought after Jeffrey Heffernan, a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey, police force, went to a distribution center and picked up a lawn sign for the candidate challenging the city's incumbent mayor in the 2005 election (Heffernan's mother had wanted a sign, so he was getting one for her). While Heffernan did not support the challenger, after other officers saw him with the sign they told senior officers, including the police chief, who strongly supported the mayor. For his apparent public support of the other candidate, they demoted Heffernan to beat patrol work as a uniformed officer.
Heffernan brought suit alleging that his demotion violated his First Amendment rights. The case took a decade to reach the Supreme Court. For most of that time it was in federal district court, where it was heard by three different judges. A jury verdict in Heffernan's favor was set aside. A later summary judgment in the city's favor was overturned on appeal before being granted again in the third trial. Hereafter distinguished as Heffernan III.
Writing for a majority of the Supreme Court, Justice Stephen Breyer stated that the department's belief was all that mattered, since the Court's precedent in this area holds it is unconstitutional for a government agency to discipline an employee (who does not work under a contract that explicitly permits such discipline) for engaging in partisan political activity, as long as that activity is not disruptive to the agency's operations. Even if Heffernan was not engaging in protected speech, he wrote, the discipline against him sent a message to others to avoid exercising their rights. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion in which he was joined by Justice Samuel Alito, in which he agreed that Heffernan had been harmed, but his constitutional rights had not been violated.
Legal background
The First Amendment guarantees the rights of freedom of speech and peaceable assembly, among others. While not explicitly mentioned, the Supreme Court has held that the right to assembly includes the freedom of association, particularly political association.. These protections not only prohibit the government from passing laws which infringe upon these rights, but also from taking actions which would violate them. While the Bill of Rights—which includes the First Amendment—applied originally only to the federal government, the ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment allowed for the application of the Bill of Rights to the states under the incorporation doctrine.
In order to better protect these rights in the Reconstruction Era, Congress passed the Second Enforcement Act of 1871 at the request of President Ulysses S. Grant to better counter white supremacist organizations such as the Ku Klux Klan that were intimidating and suppressing voting by black citizens.. The act provided a remedy for those citizens who were deprived of their constitutional rights under the "color of any statute, ordinance, regulation, custom, or usage, of any State or Territory or the District of Columbia" and is currently codified at 42 U.S.C. § 1983.42 U.S.C. § 1983. With its decision in Monroe v. Pape (1961), the Court expanded the reach of section 1983 such that it is now used as a method of checking abuse by state officials who infringe upon constitutionally protected rights..
The First Amendment protects public employees from retaliation by their employer when speaking on matters of public concern.. In Pickering v. Board of Education (1968), the Court first articulated the right of public employees to be protected from dismissal for exercising their right to free speech. There, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of a teacher who was fired after writing a letter to a local newspaper critical of its handling of a recent bond issue.Pickering v. Board of Education, . Eight years later, this protection from dismissal was extended to cover partisan political ideology and affiliation in Elrod v. Burns.
But the Court has recognized that the "government as employer" has wider constitutional latitude in its decisions than the "government as sovereign".. In order to adequately delineate the limits of the government-as-employer's discretion, the Court developed a framework in Connick v. Myers (1983) known as the Connick test. It consists of two elements. The first is the threshold a plaintiff must pass to state a claim: the plaintiff must show that they were speaking on a matter of public concern. The second falls to the employer: they must show that the harm to workplace efficiency outweighs the harm caused by infringing upon the right to free speech.
In Waters v. Churchill (1994), the Court was faced with two differing accounts of the speech at issue. The question presented to the Court was whether the Connick test ought be applied to what the employer thought was said or what was actually said. The case revolved around a nurse dismissed for a conversation she had with a coworker. There was a discrepancy between what she argued was said and what her employer thought was said. Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, joined by a plurality of justices, opined that the Connick test must be applied to the speech the employer thought occurred, and on which it acted, rather than that which the finder of fact determines did occur..
Prior history
Original dispute
thumb|Downtown Paterson|alt=A cityscape of medium-height high-rises and some older buildings amid trees, seen from above through some leaves and branches
In 2005, Jeffrey Heffernan was a detective with the Paterson, New Jersey police. His supervisor and the chief of police were both appointed by the city's incumbent mayor, Jose Torres, who was being challenged by city councilman Lawrence Spagnola in that year's election. Heffernan was friendly with Spagnola, a former police chief, and informally supported his campaign. He could not vote in the election as he did not live in the city. Hereafter distinguished as Heffernan II. At the request of his sick mother, who did live in the city, Heffernan while off-duty picked up a Spagnola lawn sign for her after her previous sign was stolen. Other officers saw him at the distribution location holding a sign and talking to Spagnola campaign staff. They soon notified superiors, and the next day officials demoted Heffernan from detective to patrol officer for his perceived "overt involvement" with the Spagnola campaign..
District court
Heffernan sued the city, the mayor, and his superior officers under 42 U.S.C. §1983 in the federal District Court for New Jersey, claiming that his rights of freedom of speech as well as freedom of association had been violated.. Heffernan contended that while he had not actually engaged in any protected speech, the department acted on the belief that he had, and the department should not have demoted him on the basis of that erroneous belief.
In 2009, a jury found for Heffernan and awarded him damages from the police officials and the city. Despite the verdict, Heffernan sought a retrial because Judge Peter G. Sheridan had not allowed him to pursue the freedom of speech claim; the defense did so as well because Judge Sheridan had allowed the freedom of association claim. While considering these motions, Judge Sheridan became aware of a conflict of interest through a former law firm and set aside the verdict, setting a new date for trial before Judge Dennis M. Cavanaugh.Heffernan II, at 568 (citing the earlier 2012 decision).
Judge Cavanaugh granted summary judgment to the defendants on the freedom of speech claim based on their earlier motions, holding that Heffernan had not engaged in protected speech so his rights could not have been violated. In 2012, the Third Circuit Court of Appeals reversed Judge Cavanaugh's ruling and remanded the case to him with instructions that he was to allow Heffernan to present his freedom of association claim and consider the facts from the jury trial when reconsidering the summary-judgment motions.
Judge Kevin McNulty heard the case on remand. After considering the parties' motions for summary judgment again, he ruled in the city's favor in 2014. Heffernan, he ruled, had not engaged in any protected speech or expressive conduct. Judge McNulty also ruled that Heffernan could not prevail on claims that his perceived speech was protected, per Ambrose v. Robinson Township, a previous case on that issue in the Third Circuit, or that his actions were protected since they aided and abetted speech.Heffernan II, 570–76. Judge McNulty also rejected similar claims for freedom of association. He decided that Dye v. Office of the Racing Commission, a case in which the Sixth Circuit had held that the First Amendment reached perceived political association, was not a precedent he could rely on since Dye itself explicitly rejected Ambrose, and as a district judge he could not reject circuit precedent.Heffernan II, 579–581.
Court of Appeals
On appeal to the Third Circuit, a three-judge panel of Judge Robert Cowen, Judge Morton Ira Greenberg and Judge Thomas I. Vanaskie unanimously held for the city. In a decision issued in 2015, Judge Vanaskie, writing for the Court, reiterated Judge McNulty's finding that Heffernan's actions in picking up the sign for his mother did not constitute protected speech or association. He distinguished the case at hand from the Sixth Circuit's ruling in Dye by noting that in that case, the employers had inferred the employees' intent from their non-participation in partisan politics rather than an actual action they had taken, as had occurred in Heffernan's case.
Judge Vanaskie instead found guidance from the Supreme Court's 1994 holding in Waters v. Churchill, in which it had upheld an Illinois public hospital's dismissal of a nurse for her comments about a supervisor to a colleague, despite an ongoing factual dispute about the substance of those comments. The Court found that the hospital administration had made a reasonable attempt to investigate what the nurse had said before firing her. In that case, the Court had said explicitly that disciplining employees for things they did not actually do did not rise to the level of a constitutional violation.
Supreme Court
Following the Third Circuit's decision, Heffernan petitioned the Supreme Court for certiorari, requesting they hear the case. After the Court considered both Heffernan's petition and the city's reply, it granted the petition on the first day of the 2015 term. Both parties consented to the filing of amicus curiae briefs by uninvolved parties who believed they had a stake in the outcome of the case. The National Association of Government Employees, Becket Fund for Religious Liberty, and Thomas Jefferson Center for the Protection of Free Expression filed amicus briefs in support of Heffernan, while the New Jersey State League of Municipalities and the National Conference of State Legislatures filed briefs in support of the City of Paterson.Amicus curiae briefs in support of petitioners:
Amicus briefs in support of respondents: The United States government also filed an amicus brief in support of Heffernan, as well as a motion to appear at oral argument, which the Court granted, meaning the Solicitor General's office would be appearing at oral arguments, held on January 19, 2016.
Oral arguments
Mark Frost, arguing for petitioner Jeffrey Heffernan, was immediately met with questions from the justices: Anthony Kennedy asked for clarification on the particular right to be protected, and Antonin Scalia, Samuel Alito and Chief Justice John Roberts all questioned him about whether his rights could be infringed if he was not actually engaged in any speech. Justice Scalia (who died before the decision was announced) argued that there was "no constitutional right not to be fired for the wrong reason." (Oral Arguments).
Frost responded that the motives of the government, rather than the actions of the individual, were important in this case. Assistant to the Solicitor General Ginger Anders, arguing on behalf of the United States as amicus curiae in favor of Heffernan, continued this argument, stating that there is "a First Amendment right not to have adverse action taken against him by his employer for the unconstitutional purpose of suppressing disfavored political beliefs."
Arguing for respondents, Thomas Goldstein distinguished between political neutrality and political apathy. He argued that the First Amendment protects political neutrality, the conscious choice to not take a position, but does not protect political apathy, when a person simply does not care and makes no particular choice to be neutral. As Heffernan claimed that he had no affiliation with Spagnola, the respondents argued that Heffernan's actions constitute unprotected apathy rather than a conscious choice of neutrality.Transcript of Oral Argument  at 31, Heffernan v. City of Paterson, 578 US ___ (2016) Justice Elena Kagan questioned Goldstein as to the purpose of the First Amendment saying, "the idea has to do with why the government acted" to which he responded, "It's called an individual right, not a government wrong." Frost took a rebuttal to respond to Goldstein's distinction between political neutrality and apathy, arguing that there is little distinction as the government is acting for impermissible reasons in both cases.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|upright|right|Justice Stephen Breyer delivered the opinion of the Court.
In a 6–2 decision authored by Justice Stephen Breyer, the Court reversed the ruling of the lower court and ruled that the employer's motive is material to First Amendment challenges. Citing Waters v. Churchill, Justice Breyer wrote, 
[W]e conclude that, as in Waters, the government's reason for demoting Heffernan is what counts here. When an employer demotes an employee out of a desire to prevent the employee from engaging in political activity that the First Amendment protects, the employee is entitled to challenge that unlawful action under the First Amendment ... —even if, as here, the employer makes a factual mistake about the employee's behavior..The Court remanded the case to the Third Circuit and made clear in its opinion that, while it is impermissible to retaliate based upon perceived protected speech, the lower courts should take into consideration whether Heffernan was disciplined for violating any different and neutral policies.. The majority provided three main arguments in support of its reasoning: that their interpretation is more in line with the text of the First Amendment, that it better served the First Amendment's purpose of limiting political patronage, and that such an interpretation will not significantly burden employers.
Justice Breyer argued that unlike the Fourteenth Amendment, which focuses on the rights of the people, the First Amendment focuses on the actions of the government when it says, "Congress shall make no law ... abridging the freedom of speech." (citing U.S. Const. amend. I) (internal quotations omitted). As the text of the amendment focuses on the government's abilities to make laws, it is the government's actions and motives, not the actual actions of citizens, which are proscribed by the Amendment. While the policy at issue was not a law of Congress, the actions were still that of a government official that infringed upon rights guaranteed by the First Amendment.
The Court supported this interpretation by recognizing that the First Amendment sought to prevent government actions from discouraging protected activity. ("The constitutional harm at issue in the ordinary [free speech] case consists in large part of discouraging employees—both the employee discharged (or demoted) and his or her colleagues—from engaging in protected activities."). Citing Branti v. Finkel, the Court pointed out that precedent never required plaintiffs in political affiliation cases to show change in allegiance to be successful, and similarly extended that logic to this case: the potential chilling effect on constitutionally protected speech still exists, regardless of the factual basis of the employer's reasoning. (citing ). Because employees thinking of engaging in protected activity will be equally dissuaded by an incorrect dismissal as by a correct dismissal, both reasonings should be considered in violation of the First Amendment.
Respondents argued that finding employers liable for factual mistakes would place substantial costs upon employers.. The Court rejected this argument, saying that an employee would still need to prove the employer acted out of an improper motive. Referring to Heffernan's case and those like it, the Court said that "the employee will, if anything, find it more difficult to prove that motive, for the employee will have to point to more than his own conduct to show an employer's intent".
Dissent
thumb|right|upright|alt=A portrait of Justice Clarence Thomas|Justice Thomas authored the dissent.
Justice Clarence Thomas authored the dissent, in which Justice Samuel Alito joined. Justice Thomas argued that the previous ruling should have been upheld "because federal law does not provide a cause of action to plaintiffs whose constitutional rights have not been violated".. The dissent focused on the text of the statute Heffernan was suing under: 42 U.S.C. § 1983. The statute provides a cause of action only for those whose rights have actually been violated by the government. Because Heffernan maintained that he had not been exercising his First Amendment rights, the dissent argued that those rights could not have been violated, and that a section 1983 claim requires that the employee engage in protected activity and that the employer retaliate against that activity..
The dissent argued that, for a section 1983 claim to be valid, "harm alone is not enough; it has to be the right kind of harm.". Thomas provided an example of a law allowing police to pull over any driver without cause. This would obviously violate the Fourth Amendment rights of anyone stopped, but people stuck in traffic who were injured by the collateral damage of unconstitutional actions would not be able to sue because none of their rights was violated. Similarly, it is not enough for Heffernan to have shown injury but violation of an actual right as well. For the dissent, even if the dismissal was for the wrong reason and harm was suffered, the dismissal cannot infringe upon rights he never exercised..
Further supporting their argument, the dissent cited Monterey v. Del Monte Dunes at Monterey, Ltd. to argue that a Section 1983 claim falls under tort law, in order to draw a distinction between how attempts are handled under tort and criminal law. Under criminal law, a factually impossible attempt to commit a crime, such as trying to steal from an empty pocket or defraud someone with no money, can still be tried as an attempt. No such doctrine exists in tort law. Because Heffernan was not engaged in protected activity, the police department could only have attempted to deprive him of his right, so his suit must fail because "there are no attempted torts." citing .
Commentary
The day after oral arguments, writer Gilad Edelman criticized the Court's assumption that Heffernan never exercised his First Amendment rights, saying, "the Supreme Court may miss an opportunity to make sure that cases like his really are rare." Edelman interpreted Heffernan's actions as being well within the existing First Amendment precedent. Though Heffernan was not necessarily supporting the candidate, he was talking and associating with people connected to the candidate, actions already protected under existing precedent. Edelman suggested that, regardless of whether or not Heffernan intended to be identified as supporting the campaign, he was still punished by the city for associating.
Soon after the ruling was announced, the decision was largely praised. Jonathan Stahl, a writer at the Constitution Daily, said that "[t]he potential impact of this case on our understanding of the First Amendment is notable." Similarly, The Economist called it "good law" and a "significant development" for expanding the existing jurisprudence to perceived speech, not just actual speech.
Aftermath
Subsequent to the Supreme Court's ruling, the City of Paterson approved a $1.6 million settlement payout to Heffernan. The final payment of the settlement was due on September 30, 2017.
See also
 US labor law
 Spoils system
 2015 term opinions of the Supreme Court of the United States
 List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 578
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States First Amendment case law
Category:United States public employment case law
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:History of Paterson, New Jersey
"""

From "Heien v. North Carolina" ==> """
Heien v. North Carolina, 574 U.S. 54 (2014), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court, ruling that a police officer's reasonable mistake of law can provide the individualized suspicion required by the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution to justify a traffic stop. The Court delivered its ruling on December 15, 2014.
 Background 
On April 29, 2009, Maynor Javier Vasquez and Nicholas Heien were traveling along Interstate 77 in North Carolina.  Vasquez was driving Heien's car, and Heien was sleeping in the back seat.
While watching for "criminal indicators of drivers [and] passengers", Sergeant Matt Darisse observed Vasquez drive by and thought he appeared "nervous".  Sergeant Darisse then began following Vasquez.  Vasquez eventually slowed his car when approaching a slower-moving vehicle, and Sergeant Darisse observed the car's right rear brake light hadn't turned on.  Sergeant Darisse believed that it was a violation of North Carolina traffic law to drive a vehicle with a broken brake light, so he activated his blue lights and stopped Vasquez (observing that as he did so, the right brake light "flickered on").  Sergeant Darisse informed Vasquez and Heien that he had stopped them for a broken brake light.
During the stop, Sergeant Darisse began to suspect the vehicle might contain contraband.  His suspicion increased when Vasquez and Heien claimed, in separate questioning, that they were traveling to different ultimate destinations.  Sergeant Darisse then asked Vasquez if he could search the vehicle.  Vasquez said he should ask Heien, who said he "d[id]n't really care".  The ensuing search found cocaine.
 In lower courts 
Vasquez pleaded guilty to attempted cocaine trafficking.  Heien filed a motion to suppress the results of the search to prevent their use in court, which the trial court denied.  Heien then pleaded guilty to two counts of trafficking, while reserving his right to appeal the denial of his motion to suppress.
On appeal the North Carolina Court of Appeals reversed.  After careful analysis of the North Carolina statute governing brake lights, the Court of Appeals concluded that it required only one working "stop lamp".  Heien's left brake light was functional, so his right brake light's dysfunction did not constitute a violation.  It also concluded that separate statutory language requiring all "originally equipped rear lamps [be] in good working order" didn't apply to stop lamps.  The Court of Appeals then concluded that the stop violated the Fourth Amendment, explaining that "an officer's mistaken belief that a defendant has committed a traffic violation is not an objectively reasonable justification for a traffic stop".  The Court of Appeals then held that evidence from the search had to be suppressed under the exclusionary rule.  (While federal courts and some state courts recognized a good-faith exception to the rule for officers acting in good faith, the North Carolina Supreme Court had previously explicitly declined to recognize it.)
North Carolina appealed the decision to the North Carolina Supreme Court, challenging only the conclusion that a mistaken belief that a traffic violation had occurred provided no "objectively reasonable justification" for a traffic stop.  (North Carolina did not challenge the Court of Appeals's interpretation of the traffic statutes.)  After surveying the answers to this question provided by other circuit and state courts, the North Carolina Supreme Court concluded that the Eighth Circuit's answer — that an officer may make a mistake of law and yet still act reasonably in making a stop based solely upon that mistake — was correct, declining to adopt eight other federal circuit courts' answer.  It then concluded that Sergeant Darisse's mistake of law was objectively reasonable and that he had reasonable suspicion to stop Heien's vehicle.
Heien petitioned the Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari.  On April 21, 2014, the Supreme Court agreed to hear the case.
 Supreme Court 
The Court published its opinion on December 15, 2014, affirming the lower court by an 8-1 vote.. Chief Justice Roberts authored the majority opinion, with Justice Kagan filing a concurring opinion in which Justice Ginsburg joined, and Justice Sotomayor filing a dissenting opinion. The majority held that a police officer's reasonable mistake of law can indeed provide the individualized suspicion required by the Fourth Amendment to justify a traffic stop based upon that understanding.  In her concurring opinion, Kagan wrote that the full text of North Carolina's law "poses a quite difficult question of interpretation, and Sergeant Darisse’s judgment, although overturned, had much to recommend it". In her dissent, Sotomayor argued that the reasonableness of a search or seizure should instead be determined by evaluating "an officer's understanding of the facts against the actual state of the law."
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 574
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:2014 in United States case law
"""

From "Heimeshoff v. Hartford Life & Accident Insurance Co." ==> """
Heimeshoff v. Hartford Life & Accident Ins. Co., 571 U.S. 99 (2013), is a United States Supreme Court case.  In this case, the court considered whether the agreed-upon limitations period for filing a legal objection to long-term disability denial began when the claim was filed or the claim received a final denial.. In a unanimous decision, the court ruled the agreed-upon limitations period is neither too short nor is there a statute that prevents it from taking effect, as such the courts are bound to enforce the limitations period and its start date as written in the coverage plan.
References
External links
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:United States contract case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Hein v. Freedom From Religion Foundation" ==> """
Hein v. Freedom From Religion Foundation, 551 U.S. 587 (2007), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court which ruled that taxpayers do not have the right to challenge the constitutionality of expenditures by the executive branch of the government..
The issue was whether taxpayers have the right to challenge the existence of the White House Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives.https://www.supremecourt.gov/qp/06-00157qp.pdf  The case centered on three Supreme Court precedents: Flast v. Cohen,. Bowen v. Kendrick,. and Valley Forge Christian College v. Americans United for Separation of Church & State..
In a 5–4 vote the Supreme Court ruled that the Foundation did not have standing to sue and reversed the court of appeals.
Background
In January 2001, President George W. Bush created the White House Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives within the Executive Office of the President by an Executive Order. Later Executive Orders created centers for the Office within the Departments of Justice, Labor, Health and Human Services, Housing and Urban Development, Education, and Agriculture, as well as at the Agency for International Development.
The Freedom From Religion Foundation and three of its members (Anne Nicol Gaylor, Annie Laurie Gaylor, and Dan Barker) filed an action against the Director of the White House Office and the Directors of Centers of the Office created within the above-mentioned Federal Departments. The Foundation and its members asserted standing based solely on their status as federal taxpayers. It was noted that "Because the Foundation itself is a non-profit entity that is exempt from paying federal income taxes under 26 USC 501(c)(3), the Foundation lacks taxpayer status in its own right, and can assert it, if at all, only on behalf of its taxpaying members. See Simon v. Eastern Ky. Welfare Rights Org., 426 U.S. 26, 40 (1976)."
The Foundation and its members complaint was over "the use of money appropriated by Congress under Article I, section 8, to fund conferences that various executive branch agencies hold to promote President Bush’s 'Faith-Based and Community Initiatives.'" The Foundation held that "the defendant officials violated the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment by organizing national and regional conferences at which faith-based organizations allegedly 'are singled out as being particularly worthy of federal funding because of their religious orientation, and the belief in God is extolled as distinguishing the claimed effectiveness of faith-based social services.'" They also alleged that "the defendant officials 'engage in myriad activities, such as making public appearances and giving speeches, throughout the United States, intended to promote and advocate for funding for faith-based organizations.'" They further asserted that "Congressional appropriations [are] used to support the activities of the defendants."
The Foundation and its members sought a "declaratory judgment that the officials' activities violate the Establishment Clause, an injunction prohibiting further 'use [of] appropriations in violation of the Establishment Clause,' and 'an order requiring the defendants to establish rules, regulations, prohibitions, standards and oversight to ensure that future appropriations' comport with the Establishment Clause."
The Directors of the White House Office and its centers, moved that the complaint against them be dismissed for lack of standing.
Lower courts
District court
The motion to dismiss the complaint for lack of standing was granted by the United States District Court for the Western District of Wisconsin. The court held Establishment Clause challenge standing was limited to "exercises of congressional power under the taxing and spending clause of Article 1, § 8." They held that the action of the directors "are not 'exercises of congressional power' as required by the Flast test."
The court noted that in Bowen v. Kendrick, it was "clarified that the disbursement of federal funds by an Executive agency in the administration of a congressional program could be challenged consistent with Flast", but they pointed out that "The President established the White House OFBCI by Executive Order and funded it with general budget appropriations." They found that this meant that the Director of the office and other officials working within the program "have no congressional mandate. Rather, he acts at the President’s request and on the President’s behalf", so none of them were "charged with the administration of congressional programs." They stated that "The view that federal taxpayers as such should be permitted to bring Establishment Clause challenges to all Executive Branch actions on the grounds that those actions are funded by congressional appropriations, has never been accepted by a majority of the Supreme Court."
Dismissal of claims
The Foundation and its members had also brought suit against Rod Paige, United States Secretary of Education from 2001 to 2005. This was over a keynote speech at a White House
Conference on Faith-Based and Community Initiatives in October 2002 where Paige said "With the stroke of a pen, the President signaled that this Administration will knock down any barrier,
will do whatever it takes to get people of faith and goodwill involved in helping solve some of the problems in our society today. Now, President Bush does this because he knows first-hand that power of faith to change lives—from the inside out. And the reason he knows this is
because faith changed his life ... He grew up in church, but like most of us, he didn’t always walk the walk. Many years ago, at a particularly low point in his life, he realized that
something was missing. Fortunately for him, he bumped into the Reverend Billy Graham. And they had a long, long, long conversation. And he made a decision coming out of that conversation that changed his life. And he believes that if it can change his life, it can change the lives of others as well. And that is why he is so committed to this. So the reason we’re all here today is not because some politician needs to knock off one more thing on his ‘to do’ list. We are here because we have a President, who is true, is a true man of God. A man who prays every day. And I think together, we can really make a difference for mankind, for Americans, we can make America a better place. We can, and I enjoyed the prayer, as we began, served, getting food. He said, if the Jews could be better Jews, and if Christians could be better Christians, if all of us could just be a little better ourselves, what a difference that would make in this world, what a difference that would make." The Foundation and its members had held that this "gave the appearance of endorsing religion."
The court ruled "These statements ... are too far removed from any congressional action taken pursuant to the taxing and spending clause of Art. I, § 8, of the Constitution to satisfy the
Flast test. Defendant Paige will be dismissed".
The Foundation also voluntarily dismissed several "claims that the heads of certain federal agencies had violated the Establishment Clause by 'directly and preferentially fund[ing]' particular programs that allegedly 'integrate religion as a substantive and integral component' of their activities." They maintained their claims on two programs administered by the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Summary judgment motions
The Foundation and its members had requested a summary judgment against Emory University and MentorKids USA.
Emory University had received funds from the Department of Health and Human Services' Compassion Capital Fund Grant for its "Strong Partners Initiative". Emory divided and distributed some of this funding to other groups that met its criteria. The Foundation claimed that Emory's use of the government funds had violated the Establishment Clause by giving "preferential treatment to religious organizations in their selection of organizations for subawards under the grant." The court granted the petition to make summary judgment holding that the Foundation did have standing under Flast because the grant issued to Emory stemmed from a program Congress established in the Promoting Safe and Stable Families Amendments of 2001, Pub. L. No. 107-133. Upon review of the claims brought forward by the Foundation the court did not find that Emory's selection process favored religious organizations, and ruled that the Foundation "failed to demonstrate the existence of a genuine issue of material fact as to Emory University’s CCF grant." The court agreed with the government that as the Foundation had failed to substantiate claims against Emory there was no real dispute and so summary judgment could be, and was, made "in favor of defendants against plaintiffs affirming the Department of Health and Human Service's
Compassion Capital Fund Grant to Emory University."
The Foundation also asked for a summary judgment on whether the group MentorKids USA a recipient of a subaward from Emory had violated the Establishment Clause. Again the court cited Flast and the same Congressional act as it had above to grant the Foundation standing in this instance as well. MentorKids' stated mission was to "exalt the Lord Jesus Christ as the Son of God," they hired only Christians as mentors, and required them to give monthly reports on the progression of their mentee's "relationship with God." Upon learning of this the Department of Health and Human Service had suspended MentorKids' grant. The court acknowledged that the grant had been suspended but ruled that "Defendants must bear the heavy burden to prove that there is no reasonable expectation that the wrong will be repeated. ... Defendants have failed to meet this burden, having failed to provide sufficient assurances that the grant will not be reinstated." Because of this the court made summary judgment for the Foundation ruling that the "grant to MentorKids USA is vacated and further funding is denied as it relates to its present structure."
Appeals court
The district court's decision was appealed and heard by a panel of the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals on September 13, 2005. The Appeals court made a decision on January 13, 2006 that vacated the order of dismissal and remanded the decision. Judge Richard Posner, writing for the majority, held that "Taxpayers have standing to challenge an executive-branch program, alleged to promote religion, that is financed by a congressional appropriation, even if the program was created entirely within the executive branch, as by Presidential executive order," as long as the actions of the Executive Branch officials are financed by general appropriations.Chao, 433 F.3d at 996-97. The majority held that taxpayer standing "extends beyond programs that allocate federal funding to third parties, and includes challenges to any Executive Branch activity funded "from appropriations for the general administrative expenses, over which the President and other executive branch officials have a degree of discretionary power ... [as opposed to funding] from, say, voluntary donations by private citizens." They held that standing exists even without a statutory program enacted by Congress and even if the taxpayer is "unable to identify the appropriations that fund the [challenged activity]".Chao, 433 F.3d at 994.
The court rejected the government's position that programs created solely from the Executive branch funded through general appropriations were beyond challenge by individual taxpayers. They put forward a hypothetical saying that if "the Secretary of Homeland Security, who has unearmarked funds in his budget, decided to build a mosque and pay an Imam a salary to preach in it because the Secretary believed that federal financial assistance to Islam would reduce the likelihood of Islamist terrorism in the United States" this would surely not be allowed to stand.  They said that in "the hypothetical case of the mosque, and in the real though much less dramatic case before us, the objection is to a program for which money undoubtedly is 'appropriated,' albeit by executive officials from discretionary funds handed them by Congress, rather than by Congress directly."Chao, 433 F.3d at 995.
The court noted that the plaintiffs were challenging not "the grants but the conferences" which are "concerned in part with instructing the attendants on how to apply for government grants for their religious organizations." They held that the government's position that only the grants could be challenged, not the conferences "would be artificial because there is so much that executive officials could do to promote religion in ways forbidden by the establishment clause (which despite its wording applies to executive as well as congressional action) without making outright grants to religious organizations. For the government to operate a mosque or other place of worship would not involve a grant unless a contractor was involved."Chao, 433 F.3d at 995 (internal citation omitted).
The court dismissed the government's position that there could be no standing because the plaintiffs had not shown that their taxes were increased because general Congressional appropriations to the Executive branch were used to support the activities of the directors. They held that producing a proof that would show how many funds the plaintiffs would save if the situation was different was unnecessary in cases like this one as "the tangible harm would often be zero because if the complained-of expenditure was enjoined, the money would probably be used to defray some other public expense that would not benefit the taxpayer, rather than returned to him in the form of a lower tax rate."Chao, 433 F.3d at 990.
Dissent
Appeals court Judge Kenneth Francis Ripple wrote a dissent that said allowing such taxpayer challenges to the conduct of Executive Branch officials "so long as that conduct was financed in some manner by a congressional appropriation" reflects a "dramatic expansion of current standing doctrine."Chao, 433 F.3d at 997 (Ripple, J., dissenting). He held that the Judiciary had allowed taxpayer standing in Establishment Clause cases to prevent Congress from "support[ing] a sectarian cause through the transfer of public funds," as this was "one of the specific evils feared by those who drafted the Establishment Clause and fought for its adoption."Chao, 433 F.3d at 998 (Ripple, J., dissenting). Judge Ripple pointed to the general rule that a plaintiff had to “establish a nexus between his status as a taxpayer and the precise nature of the constitutional infringement alleged.” He held that the Foundation and its members had failed to “set forth with sufficient rigor a nexus between their status as taxpayers and an exercise of the congressional power under the Taxing and Spending Clause.” He wrote that they should not be given standing as “A lawsuit based on such undifferentiated injury — a mere disagreement with the government policy — is hardly the case and controversy within the jurisdiction of the federal courts.”
In support of his position Ripple pointed to Schlesinger v. Reservists Committee to Stop the War, which denied standing to taxpayer plaintiffs because they “did not challenge an enactment under Art. I, § 8, but rather the action of the Executive Branch”.Chao, 433 F.3d at 1000 (Ripple, J., dissenting, quoting ). He also pointed to the decision of the D.C. Circuit Court decision in District of Columbia Common Cause v. District of Columbia, which held that the "[Supreme] Court has never recognized federal taxpayer standing outside [of Flast’s] narrow facts, and it has refused to extend Flast to exercises of executive power."Chao, 433 F.3d at 1001 (Ripple, J., dissenting, quoting District of Columbia Common Cause v. District of Columbia, 858 F.2d 1, 3-4 (D.C. Cir. 1988)).
Rehearing denied
The government filed a petition for rehearing by the Appeals court but it was denied on May 3, 2006 by a vote of 7-4. Two of the judges voting against the rehearing gave their reasoning writing that "the obvious tension which has evolved in this area of jurisprudence ... can only be resolved by the Supreme Court ... [and] the needed consideration of this important issue by that tribunal would be unnecessarily delayed by our further deliberation."Chao, 447 F.3d at 988 (Flaum, C.J., concurring). The dissenting judges who voted for the case to be reheard at the Appeals level wrote that "the panel’s decision 'has serious implications for judicial governance,' and 'departs significantly from established Supreme Court precedent and creates an inter-circuit conflict ... the Supreme Court, in making an exception to usual standing rules for taxpayers has drawn a very clean line in order to avoid making the federal courts a forum for all sorts of complaints about the conduct of governmental affairs on no basis other than citizen standing.'"Chao, 447 F.3d at 991 (Ripple, J., concurring).
Supreme Court proceedings
Petition for certiorari
The government petitioned the Supreme Court to hear the case saying that the appeals court decision "transforms taxpayer standing in the Establishment Clause context from a narrow exception, designed to prevent the specific historic evil of direct legislative subsidization of religious entities, into a roving license for any 'individual citizen to challenge any action of the executive with which he disagrees, as violative of the establishment Clause.'" The petition said the ruling "cuts taxpayer standing from its constitutional and historical moorings" and contravened judicial precedents "and the
decisions of other circuits." Certiorari was granted on December 1, 2006.
Government's position
The Directors' position was argued for by a team headed by United States Solicitor General Paul Clement. They cited Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife,. saying that the Judiciary was Constitutionally limited to hear "actual 'Cases' and 'Controversies.'" For this to be so, the plaintiff must "have suffered an 'injury in fact' in the form of the 'invasion of a legally protected interest,' that is both 'concrete and particularized' and 'actual or imminent, not conjectural or hypothetical.'" They cited DaimlerChrysler Corp. v. Cuno, 126 S. Ct. 1854, 1862 (2006), saying that "Standing has been rejected in such cases because the alleged injury is not 'concrete and particularized,' but instead a grievance the taxpayer 'suffers in some indefinite way in common with people generally,' and because the injury is not 'actual or imminent,' but instead 'conjectural or hypothetical.'" On a similar note they cited Frothingham v. Mellon, 262 U.S. 447, 487 (1923) that "a federal taxpayer’s interest in the moneys of the treasury 'is shared with millions of others; is comparatively minute and indeterminable; and the effect upon future taxation, of any payment out of the funds, so remote, fluctuating and uncertain, that no basis is afforded for an appeal to the preventive powers of a court of equity.'"
The government's lawyers also cited Valley Forge Christian Coll. v. Americans United for Separation of Church & State, Inc., saying "'Proper regard for the complex nature of our constitutional structure requires' that courts not 'hospitably accept for adjudication claims of constitutional violation by other branches of government where the claimant has not suffered cognizable injury.'" They pointed out that in the Valley Forge case the plaintiffs had not been granted standing because they were challenging "not a congressional action, but a decision by [a federal agency] to transfer a parcel of federal property." The Court had ruled that "the expenditure of public funds in an allegedly unconstitutional manner is not an injury sufficient to confer standing ... [and taxpayer standing is confined to] "challenges directed only [at] exercises of congressional power." "A constitutional objection to "a particular Executive Branch action arguably authorized by [an] Act [of Congress]" will not suffice." In further support of their position that Flast was limited to acts of Congress the government also cited decisions of Appeals Court of the Second Circuit, namely In re United States Catholic Conference, 885 F.2d 1020 (1989), cert. denied, 495 U.S. 918 (1990) and Lamont v. Woods, 948 F.2d 825 (1991) (which they saw as upholding not limiting the Catholic Conference decision as the Foundation did).
In rebuttal to the Foundation's protest that the directors "engage in myriad activities, such as making public appearances and giving speeches, throughout the United States, intended to promote and advocate for funding for faith-based organizations" the government said "that
pay for the federal officials' salaries and offices, which would be appropriated whether or not the officials engaged in the conduct respondents challenge." They likened the situation to those behind the ruling of Doremus v. Board of Education, 342 U.S. 429 (1952) where standing was not granted as school teachers would receive the same salary whether they read from the Old Testament or did not. The government likened the use of funds to hold conferences for religious organizations seeking funding to the "payment of government officials' salaries when they make speeches or attend meetings, even with religious content." They held that if the Court allowed the Appeals court position to stand then taxpayers could sue over the use of taxes to fund the electricity to power the microphone and the lights during a speech where the President might express his own religious sentiments. They pointed out that "from President Washington to President Lincoln to the present day, Presidents and other Executive Branch officials have made speeches invoking religion and have met with religious leaders without constitutional incident."
The government also maintained that a secular applicant for a grant who believed that their organization was passed up because they were not religious "even apart from Flast ... would have standing to sue." They also held that while it was true that there might be "no available plaintiff to challenge the preliminary deliberative process that led to the grant, that is only because deliberations, apart from the disbursement of funds, inflict, at most, an inchoate injury."
Position of Foundation and its members
The Freedom from Religion Foundation and its members point out that even the government lawyers did not deny that the funds involved "derived from Congressional tax appropriations." They said the government was trying to "distinguish between general budget appropriations made by Congress and tax appropriations made to specific 'spending programs.'" They said such a claim of distinction "is not based upon any principle of differential responsibility or culpability by Congress in making appropriations that are allegedly misused." They held that the government was urging the Court to accept the idea of distinction because of "a belief that the executive branch should be able to use Congressional tax appropriations without accountability under the Establishment Clause."
The Foundation pointed to Bowen v. Kendrick, saying that in that case the Congress had made a program that was not in violation of the Establishment Clause but the Court allowed taxpayer standing because the Executive branch was accused of violating the Establishment Clause in its execution of the program. They said "Despite the blamelessness of Congress in Bowen, the Supreme Court further considered whether the expenditure of tax appropriations was unconstitutional 'as applied.' The defendants in Bowen argued that a challenge to expenditures 'as applied' was really a challenge to executive action, not to an exercise of Congressional authority under the Taxing and Spending Clause. The Court rejected this argument." From this the Foundation concluded that "The originating source of misused funds from tax appropriations is the critical taxpayer standing factor, rather than any decisional culpability by Congress for the actual misuse."
They argued that the Seventh Circuit Court's decision granting standing should be upheld for "to hold otherwise would countenance a distinction without a meaning – and insulate a substantial part of federal spending of taxpayer appropriations from any obligation to comply with the Establishment Clause. ... [and] would support the unprecedented proposition that entire blocks of executive spending would not be subject to the Establishment Clause, i.e., as an executive function that is merely funded by taxpayer appropriations. ...[The government's] argument would support the incongruous proposition that such spending, when pursued by the executive branch with Congressional appropriations, cannot be challenged by taxpayers objecting to the use of tax appropriations to endorse religion."
The Foundation and its members said that the government was arguing "implicitly, but incorrectly assumes that the Establishment Clause operates only as a limitation on Congress." They pointed out that the courts "have consistently recognized that the executive branch is subject to the prohibitions of the Establishment Clause. In Schrum v. City of Coweta, 449 F.3d 1132, 1140-1143 (10th Cir. 2006), the Eleventh Circuit rejected an argument that the First Amendment proscriptions do not apply to executive action. The Court recognized that the Supreme Court has assumed on countless occasions that the Free Exercise Clause applies to executive action. Similarly, in the present case, the fact that executive branch actions are challenged is not a bar to an Establishment Clause claim; taxpayer standing requires only that the executive action involve the misuse of tax money raised through a Congressional appropriation."
The Foundation said that the Appeals Court "rejected the argument that general budget appropriations may be used by executive officials to endorse religion." In support of this finding they also cited Minnesota Federation of Teachers v. Randall, 891 F.2d 1354, 1358 (8th Cir. 1989), where "the Eighth Circuit specifically rejected any notion that taxpayers only have standing where a special tax assessment was levied to pay for an expenditure that promoted religion." In Randall the court said that if such a rule was adopted "when expenditures are made from general funds, no one would be able to challenge Establishment Clause violations. We believe taxpayer standing was created to specifically permit the airing of establishment claims." The Foundation also cited Mehdi and Chankan v. United States Postal Service, 988 F. Supp. 721 (S.D.N.Y. 1997), which "involved a claim that the United States Postal Service violated the Establishment Clause by maintaining sectarian displays with federal tax appropriations. The court concluded that the plaintiffs had standing as taxpayers to challenge the government expenditures, made pursuant to Congress’ Taxing and Spending power, as violative of the Establishment Clause." They said that under the government's argument "such expenditures would not be actionable by taxpayers because they are not part of a Congressional 'spending program.'"
The Foundation said that the government's call for a distinction to "be recognized between appropriations for 'Congressional programs' and 'general budget appropriations' made to fund executive operations", was not recognized conceptually or legally. They said the government had cited "no decision that recognizes such a distinction between Congressional appropriation bills, nor is the distinction between Congressional appropriation bills, nor is the distinction provided with any conceptual plausibility." They said "The Constitution does not distinguish between Congressional appropriations made to administrative 'spending programs' and Congressional budget appropriations made to the executive branch. All appropriations require Congressional legislative action. The Congressional 'power of the purse' refers to this exclusive power of Congress to appropriate funds, which power derives from specific provisions of the Constitution, including Article I, § 8, which empowers Congress to 'pay the Debts and provide for the common Defense and general Welfare of the United States.' The Appropriations Clause, Article I, § 9, Cl. 7, further provides that 'no Money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in Consequence of Appropriations made by Law.'"
The Foundation held that the Appropriations Clause negated the government's claim that there was a distinction between Congressional programs and general budget appropriations. They cited Cincinnati Soap Co. v. United States, 301 U.S. 308, 321 (1937) "No money can be paid out of the Treasury unless it has been appropriated by an act of Congress." They said "Regardless of the nature of the payment – salaries, payments promised under contract, etc., no payment may be made from the United States Treasury unless Congress has made the funds available. As the Supreme Court stated more than a century ago: 'However much money may be in the Treasury at one time, not a dollar of it can be used in the payment of anything not previously sanctioned by a Congressional appropriation.' Reeside v. Walker, 52 U.S. 272, 291 (1850). ... the Supreme Court has consistently held that any exercise of power by a government agency 'is limited by a valid reservation of Congressional control over funds in the Treasury.' Office of Personnel Management v. Richmond, 496 U.S. 414, 425 (1990), 'Money may be paid out only through an appropriation made by law; in other words, the payment of money from the Treasury must be authorized by a statute.' Id. at 424. As a consequence, budget appropriation bills are enacted by Congress just as all other legislation. The Supreme Court described this process in Clinton v. City of New York, 524 U.S. 417, 448 (1998).
The Foundation said that the government's claim that if standing was allowed that this "opened a floodgate" of litigation into the Federal courts. They pointed out that Flast "only allows taxpayer standing to challenge misuse of Congressional appropriations that are used to endorse religion." They said that despite the Flast decision in 1968 there has been no flood, "Limiting taxpayer standing to Establishment Clause transgressions has been an effective gatekeeper. ... [the government lawyers] incorrectly claim that recognition of standing would open the courthouse doors to all generalized grievances that citizens may have with policies pursued by the government. Only misuses of appropriations in violation of the Establishment Clause confer taxpayer standing."
Oral arguments
In addition to the positions laid out above both sides expanded their statements before the Supreme Court.
Clement's remarks
Solicitor General Paul D. Clement told the Court that he believed that even if the program had been set up by Congress instead of by an Executive Order there would still not be any standing for a taxpayer to sue, "Because there has to be two things. There has to be a statute. And then there has to be an allegation that the statute creates a unique injury in the context of spending that affects taxpayers differently than anybody—than any other citizen. And if you have a situation ... where you don't have any spending that goes outside of the Government, then you might have an establishment clause problem, but it wouldn't be an establishment clause problem where the nub of the problem is the fact that money is spent."
When asked by Justice Antonin Scalia "If the congressional statute says the Government will build a church, that's okay, because then the money doesn't go outside the Government?" Clement said there would be no taxpayer standing in the case of an "internal Government church" but "Anybody who's subjected to the mass at the church probably has standing". He opined that "in the context of the internal Government church, the fact that money is being spent to establish that church is the least of your concerns. It's the fact that the Government is establishing it [in violation of the Establishment clause of the First Amendment] that's the principal concern."
Clement said that whether taxpayers would have standing if the government hired an outside party to hold the conferences for the Faith Based and Community Initiatives program would be dependent on circumstances. He opined that it would be likely that a taxpayer would have standing if the program paid for plane tickets for ministers, but when pressed by Scalia clarified that he thought if the funds were coming from the President and "he's taking it from a general appropriation that makes no indication it's to go outside the Government so one could not in any way articulate that as an as-applied challenge to the appropriations, then I suppose that there would not be standing."
When Justice Stephen Breyer asked if "Congress passes a law and it says it's a very nice thing to commemorate the Pilgrims by building a Government church at Plymouth Rock, where we will have the regular worship in the Puritan religion. Now can a taxpayer from California in your view challenge that?" Clement responded "I say no. I would say no, no." Because in his reading of Flast, "You need a congressional statute that is an exercise of the taxing and spending authority; but then you need the money to go outside the Government." Breyer than asked if "All over America, they build churches dedicated to one religion; and Congress passes a statute and says in every city, town, and hamlet, we are going to have a minister, a Government minister, a Government church, and dedicated to the proposition that this particular sect is the true sect; and they pass a statute like that, nobody could challenge it?" Clement answered "I think the bottom line is that there would not be taxpayer standing. Plenty of people could probably challenge that [as a violation of the Establishment Clause]."
Clements agreed with Chief Justice John Roberts's summary of the government's position "is simply that somebody -somebody in Oregon can't challenge the fact that they're building a church in Florida simply because the person in Florida pays taxes". Clements also answered a question from Justice Samuel Alito admitting that his argument was not designed to "make a lot of sense in an abstract sense" but "is the best that can be done within the body of precedent that the Court has handed down in this area".
Pincus' remarks
On behalf of the Foundation and its members attorney Andrew J. Pincus, co-director of the Yale Law School Supreme Court Clinic, addressed the Court. He said that there was nothing in Judicial history declaring that for standing to be allowed within Flast the money has to go outside the Government. For an example he pointed out that "the lower courts and this Court at least in part have found taxpayer standing to challenge the salaries paid to chaplains that are employed by the Government".
Chief Justice Roberts asked if under the Foundation's interpretation of Flast a taxpayer could "sue our Marshal for standing up and saying 'God save the United States and this honorable Court.' Her salary comes from Congress." Pincus said he thought standing would not apply in that situation because "We think that the limitations that are in this Court's opinions require the taxpayer to identify a discrete and identifiable non-incidental expenditure."
Justice Scalia asked if under the Appeal's court ruling standing would be given a taxpayer against the President as "It is easy to tell from time sheets and other things how much money is expended on Air Force One and on security for the President when he goes to address a religious organization, okay. And he urges the importance of religion in American life and so forth. The whole trip is about religion. That's measurable." Pincus stated that "the court of appeals said, that this Court has identified a second limitation, which is not incidental. The money has to be central—the money that's being challenged has to be central to the violation. Just as you couldn't challenge a prayer breakfast". As in Bowen there had to be "a specific action that allocated a specific amount of money". Pincus opined that no taxpayer would be given standing to sue agents of the United States Secret Service for accompanying a President on a trip for a religious purpose as they would be there "protecting him for a protection purpose. His trip is for a religious purpose. And I think our submission is that there is a distinction that can be drawn there."
Pincus opined that a distinction could be made between funds that were spent incidentally (such as gasoline for Air Force One) and non-incidental expenditures (such as funding a conference for outreach to religious organizations). Both Justices Roberts and Scalia expressed concern that if they found for the Foundation it would mean the courts would have to continually decide if taxpayers had standing by trying to determine "whether the expenditure was incidental or not". Pincus responded "the Court also said in Allen against Wright, you know, the absence of precise standards does not leave the courts at sea in applying the law of standing. Standing isn't an area, really, that is susceptible to precise definitions."
Pincus rejected the government's argument that there was no standing without involvement of a third party saying the idea that "the Government could hire a corps of chaplains and send them out to civilians and to the populace at large and that couldn't be challenged, because all it is executive pay ... makes no sense. ... if history indicates anything it's that concerns about establishment were focused just as much on the King as on the Parliament in terms of the history that the framers understood."
Government rebuttal
In his rebuttal Clement assured the Court that "if this Court recognizes that there is not taxpayer standing, that does not mean that there won't be lawsuits, that there won't be directly injured plaintiffs that can bring claims. Doremus and Schempp [v. School District of Abington Township] prove that point. But even more broadly, any time the establishment clause injury takes the form of alleged coercive conduct the individuals who are coerced are going to have standing to bring the suit."
Clements pointed out that "The property distribution plan at issue in Valley Forge took a tremendous amount of appropriated funds to run. Nobody thought that was a basis for taxpayer standing. The Bibles that were purchased and the salaries of the teachers in Doremus presumably cost at least a threepence. But that was not found enough."
He asked the Court "to focus on this word 'incidental.' ...In the context of money going to third party religious entities, nobody would say that the spending is incidental. It's the whole violation. In the context of Bible reading or anything else the Executive Branch does, the fact that money went to fund the Executive Branch to violate the establishment clause is the least of the problems. The problem is the primary conduct of the Executive Branch in violating the establishment clause, but that's not a spending injury. The funding that goes into that is incidental. I think that's the way to make sense of this Court's cases."
He asked the Court to reflect on what was being challenged in the case, "that the Executive Branch officials at the conferences spent too much time talking about faith-based groups and not enough talking about community-based groups. If that isn't intrusive on the Executive Branch, I don't know what is." Clements said that if the Court had to reverse Flast it should not be afraid to do so, "if you have to choose between the logic of Flast and the irreducible minimum requirements of Article III, I think it's an easy choice. You don't abandon the basic requirements of Article III that distinguish the Judiciary from the political branches of Government."
Supreme Court decision
Opinion
In a 5–4 vote the Supreme Court ruled that the Foundation did not have standing to sue and ordered the Appeals court finding reversed.
Alito plurality
The plurality opinion was written by Justice Alito, and was joined by Chief Justice Roberts and Justice Anthony Kennedy. Alito wrote "Flast focused on congressional action, and we must decline this invitation to extend its holding to encompass discretionary Executive Branch expenditures. ...It is significant that, in the four decades since its creation, the Flast exception has largely been confined to its facts."Hein, 551 U.S. at 609. He wrote "The link between congressional action and constitutional violation that supported taxpayer standing in Flast is missing here. ...We have never found taxpayer standing under such circumstances."Hein, 551 U.S. at 605.
Alito cited Frothingham, "The administration of any statute, likely to produce additional taxation to be imposed upon a vast number of taxpayers, the extent of whose several liability is indefinite and constantly changing, is essentially a matter of public and not of individual concern ...Because the interests of the taxpayer are, in essence, the interests of the public-at-large, deciding a constitutional claim based solely on taxpayer standing 'would be[,] not to decide a judicial controversy, but to assume a position of authority over the governmental acts of another and co-equal department, an authority which plainly we do not possess.'"Hein, 551 U.S. at 601. He also cited Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, which stated that "a plaintiff raising only a generally available grievance about government—claiming only harm to his and every citizen’s interest in proper application of the Constitution and laws, and seeking relief that no more directly and tangibly benefits him than it does the public at large—does not state an Article III case or controversy."Hein, 551 U.S. at 601 (quoting ).
Alito wrote that he was not convinced that if they ruled for the Foundation it would not open a floodgate of lawsuits, "Because almost all Executive Branch activity is ultimately funded by some congressional appropriation, extending the Flast exception to purely executive expenditures would effectively subject every federal action—be it a conference, proclamation or speech—to Establishment Clause challenge by any taxpayer in federal court."Hein, 551 U.S. at 610. In support of this he cited the Foundations own claim against the speech of Rod Paige that had been dismissed by the district court.
Alito also noted that to allow standing in this type of case "would also raise serious separation-of-powers concerns."Hein, 551 U.S. at 611. He cited Justice Powell's concurrence in United States v. Richardson: "'Relaxation of standing requirements is directly related to the expansion of judicial power,' and lowering the taxpayer standing bar to permit challenges of purely executive actions 'would significantly alter the allocation of power at the national level, with a shift away from a democratic form of government.'"Hein, 551 U.S. at 611 (quoting  (Powell, J., concurring)).
Alito stated "Respondents set out a parade of horribles that they claim could occur if Flast is not extended to discretionary Executive Branch expenditures. For example, they say, a federal agency could use its discretionary funds to build a house of worship or to hire clergy of one denomination and send them out to spread their faith. Or an agency could use its funds to make bulk purchases of Stars of David, crucifixes, or depictions of the star and crescent for use in its offices or for distribution to the employees or the general public. Of course, none of these things has happened, even though Flast has not previously been expanded in the way that respondents urge. In the unlikely event that any of these executive actions did take place, Congress could quickly step in. And respondents make no effort to show that these improbable abuses could not be challenged in federal court by plaintiffs who would possess standing based on grounds other than taxpayer standing."Hein, 551 U.S. at 614.
Alito wrote that "It is a necessary concomitant of the doctrine of stare decisis that a precedent is not always expanded to the limit of its logic. That ... is the approach we take here. We do not extend Flast, but we also do not overrule it. We leave Flast as we found it."Hein, 551 U.S. at 615.
Kennedy concurrence
Justice Kennedy wrote a concurrence where he re-emphasized the concerns over separation of powers should the Appeals court decision not have been reversed. He also stated "It must be remembered that, even where parties have no standing to sue, members of the Legislative and Executive Branches are not excused from making constitutional determinations in the regular course of their duties. Government officials must make a conscious decision to obey the Constitution whether or not their acts can be challenged in a court of law and then must conform their actions to these principled determinations."Hein, 551 U.S. at 618 (Kennedy, J., concurring).
Scalia concurrence
Justice Scalia wrote a concurrence (which was joined by Justice Clarence Thomas), where he agreed that the case had to be reversed but held that the Court had not gone far enough, "If this Court is to decide cases by rule of law rather than show of hands, we must surrender to logic and choose sides: Either Flast v. Cohen, 392 U.S. 83 (1968), should be applied to (at a minimum) all challenges to the governmental expenditure of general tax revenues in a manner alleged to violate a constitutional provision specifically limiting the taxing and spending power, or Flast should be repudiated. For me, the choice is easy. Flast is wholly irreconcilable with the Article III restrictions on federal-court jurisdiction that this Court has repeatedly confirmed are embodied in the doctrine of standing."Hein, 551 U.S. at 618 (Scalia, J., concurring). He said the problem was because "We have alternately relied on two entirely distinct conceptions of injury in fact, which for convenience I will call 'Wallet Injury' and 'Psychic Injury.' ...Psychic Injury ... has nothing to do with the plaintiff's tax liability. Instead, the injury consists of the taxpayer’s mental displeasure that money extracted from him is being spent in an unlawful manner. ...this conceptualizing of injury in fact in purely mental terms conflicts squarely with the familiar proposition that a plaintiff lacks a concrete and particularized injury when his only complaint is the generalized grievance that the law is being violated. ...We have never explained why Psychic Injury was insufficient in the cases in which standing was denied, and we have never explained why Psychic Injury, however limited, is cognizable under Article III."Hein, 551 U.S. at 619 (Scalia, J., concurring). Scalia wrote, "We had an opportunity today to erase this blot on our jurisprudence [Flast], but instead have simply smudged it."Hein, 551 U.S. at 637 (Scalia, J., concurring).
Souter Dissent
Justice Souter wrote a dissent and was joined by Justice Stevens, Justice Ginsburg, and Justice Breyer. Souter wrote that the plurality opinion "declares that Flast does not apply [in this case], but a search of that opinion for a suggestion that these taxpayers have any less stake in the outcome than the taxpayers in Flast will come up empty: the plurality makes no such finding, nor could it. Instead, the controlling opinion closes the door on these taxpayers because the Executive Branch, and not the Legislative Branch, caused their injury. I see no basis for this distinction in either logic or precedent, and respectfully dissent."Hein, 551 U.S. at 637 (Souter, J., dissenting). Souter continued, "We held in Flast, and repeated just last Term, that the "'injury' alleged in Establishment Clause challenges to federal spending" is "the very 'extract[ion] and spen[ding]' of 'tax money' in aid of religion."Hein, 551 U.S. at 638 (Souter, J., dissenting, quoting ). "Since the founding of our country, there have been popular uprisings against procuring taxpayer funds to support church leaders, which was one of the hallmarks of an 'established' religion".Hein, 551 U.S. at 638 (Souter, J., dissenting, quoting ). Souter drew the conclusion that "[t]he right of conscience and the expenditure of an identifiable three pence raised by taxes for the support of a religious cause are therefore not to be split off from one another."Hein, 551 U.S. at 638 (Souter, J., dissenting). In response to Scalia's concurrence, Souter invoked Madison's work (see above) and wrote "The three pence implicates the conscience, and the injury from Government expenditures on religion is not accurately classified with the 'Psychic Injury' that results whenever a congressional appropriation or executive expenditure raises hackles of disagreement with the policy supported ... Justice Stewart recognized this in his concurring opinion in Flast, when he said that "every taxpayer can claim a personal constitutional right not to be taxed for the support of a religious institution,” and thus distinguished the case from one in which a taxpayer sought only to air a generalized grievance in federal court."Hein, 551 U.S. at 639 (Souter, J., dissenting, quoting Flast, 392 U.S. at 114).
Souter went over the qualifications for standing set by previous precedents, and concluded that they were all met in this case,  "there is no dispute that taxpayer money in identifiable amounts is funding conferences, and these are alleged to have the purpose of promoting religion. Cf. Doremus v. Board of Ed. of Hawthorne, 342 U. S. 429, 434 (1952) . The taxpayers therefore seek not to 'extend' Flast ... but merely to apply it. When executive agencies spend identifiable sums of tax money for religious purposes, no less than when Congress authorizes the same thing, taxpayers suffer injury. And once we recognize the injury as sufficient for Article III, there can be no serious question about the other elements of the standing enquiry: the injury is indisputably 'traceable' to the spending, and 'likely to be redressed by' an injunction prohibiting it. Allen v. Wright, 468 U. S. 737, 751 (1984)".Hein, 551 U.S. at 639 (Souter, J., dissenting). He also noted that "There will not always be competitors for the funds who would make better plaintiffs (and indeed there appears to be no such competitor here), so after accepting the importance of the injury there is no reason to refuse standing as a prudential matter."Hein, 551 U.S. at 643 n. 5 (Souter, J., dissenting).
Souter held that removing Executive branch actions concerning Establishment Clause questions from Judicial review was dangerous. He said the majority opinion "points to the separation of powers to explain its distinction between legislative and executive spending decisions ... but there is no difference on that point of view between a Judicial Branch review of an executive decision and a judicial evaluation of a congressional one. We owe respect to each of the other branches, no more to the former than to the latter, and no one has suggested that the Establishment Clause lacks applicability to executive uses of money. It would surely violate the Establishment Clause for the Department of Health and Human Services to draw on a general appropriation to build a chapel for weekly church services (no less than if a statute required it), and for good reason: if the Executive could accomplish through the exercise of discretion exactly what Congress cannot do through legislation, Establishment Clause protection would melt away."Hein, 551 U.S. at 639-40 (Souter, J., dissenting).
Souter disagreed with the majority's reading of Bowen, saying in that case "we already had found the statute valid on its face before we turned to the taxpayers' as-applied challenge ... so the case cannot be read to hold that taxpayers have standing only to claim that congressional action, but not its implementation, violates the Establishment Clause." Therefore, after Bowen, the majority opinion's "distinction between a 'congressional mandate' on the one hand and 'executive discretion' on the other ... is at once arbitrary and hard to manage: if the statute itself is constitutional, all complaints must be about the exercise of 'executive discretion,' so there is no line to be drawn between Bowen and the case before us today."Hein, 551 U.S. at 641 (Souter, J., dissenting).
The Justice stated that "While Flast standing to assert the right of conscience is in a class by itself, it would be a mistake to think that case is unique in recognizing standing in a plaintiff without injury to flesh or purse. Cognizable harm takes account of the nature of the interest protected, which is the reason that 'the constitutional component of standing doctrine incorporates concepts concededly not susceptible of precise definition,' leaving it impossible 'to make application of the constitutional standing requirement a mechanical exercise.'"Hein, 551 U.S. at 641-42 (Souter, J., dissenting, quoting ). As a proof of this he asked, what of cases where a person was "being forced to compete on an uneven playing field based on race (without showing that an economic loss resulted), or living in a racially gerrymandered electoral district? These injuries are no more concrete than seeing one’s tax dollars spent on religion, but we have recognized each one as enough for standing."Hein, 551 U.S. at 642 (Souter, J., dissenting).
Souter stated "The judgment of sufficient injury takes account of the Madisonian relationship of tax money and conscience, but it equally reflects the Founders’ pragmatic 'conviction that individual religious liberty could be achieved best under a government which was stripped of all power to tax, to support, or otherwise to assist any or all religions,' Everson v. Board of Ed. of Ewing, 330 U.S. 1, 11 (1947), and the realization continuing to the modern day that favoritism for religion 'sends the ... message to ... nonadherents "that they are outsiders, not full members of the political community,"'" McCreary County v. American Civil Liberties Union of Ky., 545 U.S. 844, 860 (2005)."Hein, 551 U.S. at 643 (Souter, J., dissenting).
The Justice also agreed that the outcome of Valley Forge Christian College v. Americans United for Separation of Church and State, Inc. was based on the Property Clause of Article IV, §3 and so was not a viable precedent in this case.Hein, 551 U.S. at 641 n. 2 (Souter, J., dissenting). Souter noted that the majority expressed their fear that a great many Executive branch actions would be open to lawsuit if they ruled for the Foundation, he said "that does not mean taxpayers will prevail in such suits. If these claims are frivolous on the merits, I fail to see the harm in dismissing them for failure to state a claim instead of for lack of jurisdiction. To the degree the claims are meritorious, fear that there will be many of them does not provide a compelling reason, much less a reason grounded in Article III, to keep them from being heard."Hein, 551 U.S. at 640 n. 1 (Souter, J., dissenting).
Reactions to the decision
President George W. Bush expressed his pleasure at the majority's ruling, saying "Today's Supreme Court decision marks a substantial victory for efforts by Americans to more effectively aid our neighbors in need of help. The Faith-Based and Community Initiative can remain focused on strengthening America's armies of compassion and expanding their good works.  Similar efforts by governors and mayors in states and cities all across the country can also continue to advance. ...This ruling is a win for the thousands of community and faith-based nonprofits all across the country that have partnered with government at all levels to serve their neighbors. Most importantly, it is a win for the many whose lives have been lifted by the caring touch and compassionate hearts of these organizations."
Former Head of the White House Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives Jim Towey called the decision "good news for addicts and the homeless and others seeking effective social services. It's also a repudiation of the kind of secular extremism that ruled the public square for decades."
Jay Sekulow of the American Center for Law and Justice said of the decision "This is a very significant victory that sends a powerful message that atheists and others antagonistic to religion do not get an automatic free pass to bring Establishment Clause lawsuits. ...This decision will have serious ramifications for separationist attempts to claim special privileges to sue as taxpayers without showing that a law or government activity actually injured them in any way. ...By rejecting a claim to special treatment for atheists and other separationists, the high court took an important step toward restoring equity to the legal system with respect to federal challenges in the Establishment Clause arena." The ACLJ concluded that the "decision continues the trend to rebuff efforts to build upon the questionable Flast precedent."
The Rev. Barry W. Lynn of the Americans United for Separation of Church and State expressed his disappointment saying "This is a disappointing decision that blocks the courthouse door for Americans with legitimate church-state grievances. Taxpayers should be allowed to challenge public funding of religion, whether the money is allocated by Congress or the White House. However, it is important to note that this ruling applies to only a few situations. Most church-state lawsuits, including those that challenge congressional appropriations for faith-based programs, will not be affected." Lynn called Justice Alito's statement that "Congress could quickly step in" if the Executive went too far as "quite incredible because the damage is done when the president acts. We have the courts to do precisely this, rein in the president or the Congress."
Ralph G. Neas, president of People For the American Way Foundation, said the decision marked "a bad day for the First Amendment. The Supreme Court just put a big dent in the wall of separation between church and state."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 551
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:United States standing case law
Category:Atheism in the United States
Category:Religious controversies in the United States
Category:Presidency of George W. Bush
Category:2007 in religion
"""

From "Helicopteros Nacionales de Colombia, S. A. v. Hall" ==> """
Helicopteros Nacionales de Colombia, S. A. v. Hall, 466 U.S. 408 (1984), was an American case decided by the United States Supreme Court, holding that purchases in the United States by an out-of-state corporation did not establish general personal jurisdiction.
Helicopteros Nacionales de Colombia, a Colombian corporation, purchased a majority of its helicopters and training for said helicopters in Texas. They provide helicopter transport for oil and construction companies in South America. The incident in question happened on Jan 26, 1976 when a helicopter crashed killing four Americans. In the contract, which was negotiated in Houston, that the plaintiffs had with the defendants there was a choice of location clause which stated that all controversies would be submitted to Peruvian courts..
The Court concluded that Texas did not have jurisdiction over Helicopteros. While they did engage in business-related activates, these activities did not rise to the level of "continuous and systematic" contacts for the courts to have general jurisdiction.
 References   
 External links 
 Case Brief for Helicopteros Nacionales de Colombia, S.A. v. Hall at Lawnix.com
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:United States personal jurisdiction case law
"""

From "Helix Energy Solutions Group, Inc. v. Hewitt" ==> """
Helix Energy Solutions Group, Inc. v. Hewitt, 598 U.S. 39 (2023), was a United States Supreme Court case related to the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938.
 Background 
Michael Hewitt was a toolpusher (a supervisor) on oil rigs for Helix Energy Solutions Group from 2014 to 2017. He was paid over $200,000 each year he worked for the company, at a flat daily rate. Hewitt was fired from the company in 2017, and the reasons are in dispute. He then filed a collective action under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) against Helix, asserting he was entitled to overtime pay. Various FLSA regulations exempt employees from overtime if they (1) perform managerial duties, (2) earn $100,000 or more each year, and (3) receive a weekly salary of $455 or higher on a salary basis. Hewitt fulfilled the first two conditions, but not the third, as he was paid daily. The United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas rejected Hewitt's claim, but the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit reversed in a 2–1 opinion. The court later granted rehearing en banc and again reversed, this time in a 12–6 vote.
Helix filed a petition for a writ of certiorari.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case on May 2, 2022. Oral arguments were held on October 12, 2022. On February 22, 2023, the Supreme Court affirmed the Fifth Circuit in a 6–3 decision.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2023 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States labor case law
"""

From "Heller v. New York" ==> """
Heller v. New York, 413 U.S. 483 (1973), was a United States Supreme Court decision which upheld that states could make laws limiting the distribution of obscene material, provided that these laws were consistent with the Miller test for obscene material established by the Supreme Court in Miller v. California, 413 U.S. 15 (1973).Miller v. California. The Oyez Project at IIT Chicago-Kent College of Law. 28 February 2017. <https://www.oyez.org/cases/1970-1979/1971/1971_70_73> Heller was initially convicted for showing a sexually explicit film in the movie theater which he owned, under New York Penal Law § 235.0 which stated that and individual “is guilty of obscenity when, knowing its content and character, he 1. Promotes, or possesses with intent to promote, any obscene material; or 2. Produces, presents or directs an obscene performance or participates in a portion thereof which is obscene or which contributes to its obscenity.".
Heller appealed this ruling to the supreme court, claiming that his first amendment rights had been violated due to the broad nature of New York's obscenity laws. The defendant also claimed that his 14th amendment rights had been violated due to the fact the film was seized prior to him receiving a hearing of any kind. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of Heller in a 5–4 decision, with the majority decision delivered by Justice Burger.Heller v. New York. The Oyez Project at IIT Chicago-Kent College of Law. 28 February 2017. The Court found the procedure by which the film was seized to be constitutional but ruled in favor of Heller in order to afford New York a chance to bring their obscenity laws in line with the guidelines established by the Supreme Court in Miller v. California]]. The dissenting opinions were written by Justices William O. Douglas and William J. Brennan Jr., the latter of which was joined by Justices Potter Stewart and Thurgood Marshall. These dissenting opinions argued that the obscenity laws that Heller was convicted under were themselves unconstitutional and thus the seizure of the film was unconstitutional. This case was one of several cases that the Burger court ruled on concerning obscenity laws in the early 1970s.
Background
Heller was the manager of the New Andy Warhol Garrick movie theater in Greenwich Village, New York city. On July 29, 1969, the Andy Warhol film Blue Movie was displayed, a film which depicts a couple engaged in sexually explicit acts and discussing various subjects ranging from athletes foot the Vietnam War. Three police officers saw part of this screening of the film and based on their observations an assistant district attorney requested that a judge of the New York criminal court see the film. On July 31, 1969 a judge accompanied by a police inspector saw the film and deemed that the film was “obscene as I saw it then under the definition of obscene, that is [in] . . . section 235.00 of the Penal Law."."Heller v. New York." Findlaw. N.p., n.d. Web. 28 Feb. 2017. <https://caselaw.findlaw.com/us-supreme-court/413/483.html> The judge thus issued John Doe warrants for the arrest of the not only the theater manager, but also the projectionist and ticket tacker. The judge and police inspector both stated that they did not recall seeing any signs that limited admission to film to only adults. The theater manager as well as the ticket taker and projectionists were arrested and the film seized. There was no pretrial claim that the copy of the film seized as evidence was the only copy.
The case came to trial in the New York City Criminal Court on September 16, 1969, before 3 judges. Heller provided several “experts” to testify that the film “had social, literary, and artistic importance” and also testified that in addition to signs restricting the admittance of anyone under 17 the staff had been instructed to not allow in those under 18."Heller v. New York 413 U.S. 483 (1973)." Justia Law. N.p., n.d. Web. 28 Feb. 2017. <https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/413/483/> Heller argued that the seizure of the film violated his 14th amendment right and that the New York state obscenity laws under which the film was seized violated the first amendment because they were vague and more broad than necessary. Heller also argued that films shown exclusively to consenting adults in private are free speech protected by the constitution.
The defendant was found guilty by the New York City Criminal Court, a decision that was upheld on appeal by both the Supreme Court of the State of New York and the New York Court of Appeals."Heller v. New York 413 U.S. 483 (1973)." Justia Law. N.p., n.d. Web. 28 Feb. 2017. <https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/413/483/> The Court of appeals cited the Supreme Court's ruling in Lee Art Theatre v. Virginia its decision, which stated that a judge could not issue a warrant for the seizure of a film based only the word of an officer."Lee Art Theatre v. Virginia." Findlaw. N.p., n.d. Web. 28 Feb. 2017. <https://caselaw.findlaw.com/us-supreme-court/392/636.html>. The Court of appeals felt that because the judge had in fact gone to see the film himself he had sufficient grounds to constitutionally issue a warrant for seizure of the film even without a formal hearing.
Majority opinion
The majority opinion was delivered by Justice Berger and joined by justices White, Powell, Blackmun and Rehnquist. It held that the procedure by which the film was seized and the seizing of the film were constitutional and violated neither the first or fourteenth amendment. Burger held that Heller's assertion that films show only to consenting adults in private was protected was incorrect as the court ruled Paris Adult Theatre I v. Slaton 413 U.S. 49 (1973). that the privacy granted in the home does not necessarily extend to the theatre and that even consenting adults can be subject to governmental restrictions for the “legitimate state interests at stake in stemming the tide of commercialized obscenity"."Paris Adult Theatre I v. Slaton." Oyez, https://www.oyez.org/cases/1972/71-1051. Accessed 27 Feb. 2017.
Furthermore, the New York Court of Appeals applied correctly the precedent set in Lee Art Theatre v. Virginia, which ruled that as long as the judge's procedure prior to issuing the warrant was "designed to focus searchingly on the question of obscenity”, the judge did not have to even see the film himself."Lee Art Theatre v. Virginia." Findlaw. N.p., n.d. Web. 28 Feb. 2017. <https://caselaw.findlaw.com/us-supreme-court/392/636.html>. By doing so the Judge had made every effort to determine the question of obscenity for himself. Also the protection of seizure set forth in Quantity of Books v. Kansas 378 U.S. 205 (1964), only applied to obscene materials being seized for the expressed purpose of being destroyed."A Quantity of Books Et Al. v. Kansas." Supreme Court of the United States, n.d. Web. 28 Feb. 2017. <https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=4128631328237057795&hl=en&as_sdt=6,33&as_vis=1>.
As long as there was another copy of the film was available, the seizure for the purpose of evidence was okay, and if there was no other copy as long as the defendant could be allowed to make another pending a judicial decision it would still be constitutional. Since the record failed to show there were no other copies and there was no pretrial motion to make more copies the State was allowed to seize the film. However, the case was remanded in order to afford the New York Court of Appeals to make changes to the underlying definition of obscenity according to the guidelines laid out by the court in the recently decided Miller v. California.
Dissenting opinion
There were two dissenting opinions in this case. Justice Douglas dissented on the grounds that he would have preferred to outright reverse the decision as he felt as though the underlying obscenity law for which Heller was charged was unconstitutional and violated the first amendment. Justice Douglas referenced his dissenting opinion in United States v. 12 200-ft. Reels of Film, in which he stated that “I know of no constitutional way by which a book, tract, paper, postcard, or film may be made contraband because of its contents”,“I know of no constitutional way by which a book, tract, paper, postcard, or film may be made contraband because of its contents” as well as his dissenting opinion in Miller v. California in which he argued that the court should not try to define obscenity by itself as there are no constitutional guidelines for what should be considered obscene."Miller v. California." LII / Legal Information Institute. N.p., n.d. Web. 26 Mar. 2017. <https://www.law.cornell.edu/supremecourt/text/413/15#writing-USSC_CR_0413_0015_ZD>.
Justice Brennan dissented as well, joined by justices Stewart and Marshall, arguing that the obscenity law was too broad to be considered constitutional and thus there could be no grounds to seize the film. Justice Brennan also referenced his dissent in Paris Adult Theatre I v. Slaton in which he stated that the difficulty in precisely defining material as obscene is what makes it impossible to outright ban obscenity."Paris Adult Theatre I v. Slaton." LII / Legal Information Institute. N.p., n.d. Web. 26 Mar. 2017. <https://www.law.cornell.edu/supremecourt/text/413/49#writing-USSC_CR_0413_0049_ZD1>.
Subsequent developments
During the time period between when the court agreed to hear Heller v. New York they ruled on Miller v. California, a ruling which established that states could make obscenity laws, provided they follow the guidelines of the Miller test. The Miller test contained 3 parts and became the standard for determining whether material was obscene. The 3 parts were:
Whether "the average person, applying contemporary community standards", would find that the work, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest,
Whether the work depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct or excretory functions specifically defined by applicable state law,
Whether the work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value."Miller v. California." Oyez, https://www.oyez.org/cases/1971/70-73. Accessed 28 Feb. 2017.
The Court also asked for the New York Court of Appeals to make sure that their definition of obscenity was concurrent with standard set in Miller v. California. The New York Court of Appeals later confirmed in a 5–4 decision that New York Penal Law § 235.0 was constitutional as it was already written, even after considering the new obsceneity definition put forth in Miller v. California.Meyer, Bernard S., Burton C. Agata, and Seth H. Agata. "The History of the New York Court of Appeals." Google Books. Columbia University Press, n.d. Web. 28 Feb. 2017. <https://books.google.com/books?id=6MbmkgJp9okC&pg=PA297&lpg=PA297&dq=heller%2Bv%2Bnew%2Byork%2B1973&source=bl&ots=pg_7Z75_Mm&sig=X4lYor0bldD7dnD7nisfwINbH1w&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwje2s69gLDSAhXHYiYKHYlYC9cQ6AEIQzAG#v=onepage&q=heller%20v%20new%20york%201973&f=false>.
Heller set the precedent that a judge who had seen a movie considered to be obscene could issue a warrant for its seizure without having to hold a hearing on whether or not the content was truly obscene, as long as there were other copies of the film were available, and in the case that no other copies existed, as long as the defendant was allowed to make copies prior to a formal hearing. This was an expansion on the precedent set in Lee Art Theatre v. Virginia that a judge must determine probable cause of something being obscene, by more explicitly saying that a judge having seen a film himself was sufficient grounds for the judge issuing a warrant to seize a film based on obscenity charges. This precedent was cited in New York v. P. J. Video, Inc., 475 U.S. 868 (1986), another obscenity case in which films were seized on charges of being obscene. In this case the owners of a video store tried to claim that there was a higher standard for determining probable cause in obscenity cases than an investigator simply watching the film. The supreme court ruled against PJ Video, citing there decision in Heller v. New York that an official watching the film themselves was sufficient probable cause for the seizure of a film."New York v. P. J. Video, Inc. 475 U.S. 868 (1986)." Justia Law. N.p., n.d. Web. 29 Mar. 2017. <https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/475/868/case.html>.
This case is an interesting example of one section of free speech where American courts and European courts agree to an extent, as shown in the landmark case Handyside v United Kingdom (5493/72), where the seizure of materials deemed to be obscene was by the government was found to be permissible by the European Court of Human Rights, much like it was in this case and in New York v. Heller and New York v. P.j. Video. In Handyside v United Kingdom, Handyside had books seized for being obscene, not completely unlike Heller's film which was seized, although some key differences appear in the 2 cases, such as the intended audiences of each. However, the fact remains that in both these cases the government was able to seize material due to it being obscene, while both attempting to prevent, to an extent, the over labeling of materials as obscene."Handyside v. the United Kingdom." Handyside v. the United Kingdom · Article 19. N.p., n.d. Web. 29 Mar. 2017. <https://www.article19.org/resources.php/resource/2444/en/handyside-v.-the-united-kingdom>.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 413
 Miller test
References
External links
Category:1973 in United States case law
Category:United States obscenity case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Helvering v. Bruun" ==> """
Helvering v. Bruun, 309 U.S. 461 (1940), was an income tax case before the Supreme Court of the United States. It is notable (and thus appears frequently in law school casebooks) for holding that under section 22(a) of the Revenue Act of 1932, a landlord realizes a taxable gain when he repossesses property, the value of which has increased because the property was improved by a tenant..
Facts
A landlord repossessed land from a tenant who had defaulted in the eighteenth year of a 99-year lease. During the course of the lease, the tenant had torn down an old building (in which the landlord's adjusted basis was now $12,811.43) and had built a new one (whose value was now $64,245.68). The lease had specified that the landlord was not required to compensate the tenant for these improvements.
The government argued that upon repossession, the landlord realized a gain of $51,434.25. The landlord argued that there was no realization of the property because no transaction had occurred, and because the improvement of the property that created the gain was not "severable" from the landlord's original capital.
Holding
The court held for the government: under the Revenue Act of 1932, the value of the improvements was realized by the taxpayer as income in the year in which the forfeiture occurred.
The improvements, the Court observed, were received by the taxpayer "as a result of a business transaction," namely, the leasing of the taxpayer's land. It was not necessary to the recognition of gain that the improvements be severable from the land. All that had to be shown was that the taxpayer had acquired valuable assets from his lease in exchange for the use of his property. The medium of exchange—whether cash or in kind, and whether separately disposable or "affixed"—was immaterial as far as the realization criterion was concerned. In effect, the improvements represented rent, or rather a payment in lieu of rent, which was taxable to the landlord regardless of the form in which it was received.
"Severance" is not necessary for realization:
It is not necessary to recognition of taxable gain that he should be able to sever the improvement begetting the gain from his original capital. If that were necessary, no income could arise from the exchange of property, whereas such gain has always been recognized as realized taxable gain.
The Court added that, while not all economic gain is "realized" for taxation purposes, realization does not require that the economic gain be in "cash derived from the sale of an asset". Realization can also arise from property exchange; relief of indebtedness; or other transactions yielding profit—e.g. by receiving an asset with enhanced value in a transaction, even where severance does not occur (i.e. even where "the gain is a portion of the value of property received by the taxpayer in the transaction").
Subsequent legislation
Congress nullified the effect of section 22 of the Revenue Act of 1932 (as interpreted by the Court in Bruun) by enacting the Revenue Act of 1942, section 115 of which included an amendment of section 22 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1939.Section 115, Revenue Act of 1942, 56 Stat. 798, 812 (Oct. 21, 1942). The effect of that amendment to the 1939 Code was carried forward in sections 109 and 1019 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (now the Internal Revenue Code of 1986). Section 109 excludes, from a lessor's income, the value of leasehold improvements realized on termination of a lease. Section 1019 denies the lessor a step-up in basis for the income so excluded. These provisions overrule the proposition announced in Bruun, that repossession of an asset with an enhanced value from a transaction with another party results in recognition of gross income.
The aim of the Revenue Act of 1942 was to relieve lessors—suddenly confronted with large tax obligations—of the need to raise cash in a hurry, at a time when the real estate market was scraping bottom. An inadvertent side effect of the means chosen—permitting current income to be deferred to later period—was to reduce the lessor's tax obligation absolutely, by postponing his realization of any improvements to the sale of the property.
Academic commentary
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 309
 Cottage Savings Ass'n v. Commissioner
 References 
Further reading
External links
Category:1940 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
"""

From "Helvering v. Davis" ==> """
Helvering v. Davis, 301 U.S. 619 (1937), was a decision by the U.S. Supreme Court that held that Social Security was constitutionally permissible as an exercise of the federal power to spend for the general welfare and so did not contravene the Tenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution.. 
The Court's 7–2 decision defended the constitutionality of the old-age benefit program of the Social Security Act of 1935 by requiring only welfare spending to be for the common benefit, as distinguished from some mere local purpose. It affirmed a District Court decree that held that the tax upon employees was not properly at issue and that the tax upon employers was constitutional.
Facts
A shareholder of the Edison Electric Illuminating Company brought a derivative action to restrain the company from making payments and deductions required by the Social Security Act of 1935 on the grounds that it was unconstitutional. He sought an injunction and a declaration that the Act was void.
Decision
The Supreme Court's decision in the case was written by Justice Benjamin N. Cardozo and supported the right of Congress to interpret the "general welfare" clause in the Constitution.
Joining the decision was Justice Harlan Stone, who during the drafting of the legislation had advised Secretary Frances Perkins that the constitutionality of Social Security could be based upon "The taxing power of the Federal Government, my dear; the taxing power is sufficient for everything you want and need."
See also
 Helvering vs. Davis - Supreme Court Opinion
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 301
 United States v. Butler (1936)
 Steward Machine Company v. Davis (1937)
 Flemming v. Nestor (1960)
Further reading
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:Taxing and Spending Clause case law
Category:1937 in United States case law
Category:Social Security lawsuits
Category:Constitutional challenges to the New Deal
"""

From "Helvering v. Horst" ==> """
Helvering v. Horst, 311 U.S. 112 (1940), is an opinion of the United States Supreme Court which further developed the “fruit-and-tree” metaphor established in Lucas v. Earl.. Horst is the leading case that applies the assignment of income doctrine to income from property.
Facts
In 1934 and 1935, Paul Horst, the owner of negotiable bonds, detached negotiable interest coupons prior to their due date and gave them as a gift to his son.  His son thus collected the interest coupons at maturity. A coupon bond holder owns two independent and separable rights: (1) the right to receive at maturity the principal amount of the bond, and (2) the right to receive interim payments of interest on the investment of the amounts specified by the coupons.
Issue
The issue before the Court was whether the gift of interest coupons, during the donor’s taxable year, detached from the bonds, is considered as the realization of income taxable to the donor, or if the gift of the coupons effectively diverts the payments of interest to the donee.
Holding
The Court held that Paul Horst was liable for income tax on the interest payments received by his son.
Rationale
The Court reasoned that the power to dispose of income is the equivalent of ownership. Because he was able to separate the interest coupons from the bonds and procure payment of the interest to his son, Paul Horst enjoyed the economic benefits of the income. The court stated “[t]he taxpayer has equally enjoyed the fruits of his labor or investment and obtained the satisfaction of his desires whether he collects and uses the income . . . or whether he disposes of his right to collect it. . . .” The taxpayer cannot attribute the fruit (the interest coupon) to a different tree from that on which it grew (the bond itself). If Horst had given both the bond and the interest coupons to his son, the interest would have been taxable to his son.
Real world impact
Horst has important implications for taxpayers trying to shift their tax burden to another. A taxpayer who is normally taxable only on the receipt of interest payments cannot escape taxation by giving away his right to such income. Furthermore, when assigning income from property to another person  (particularly a family member) in the form of a gift, the courts will usually see it as a way to avoid tax and thus consider it “fruit.”  Only in an arms-length sale do the courts see the “tree” itself being moved.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 311
Salvatore v. Commissioner
Lucas v. Earl
Blair v. Commissioner
Teschner v. Commissioner
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1940 in United States case law
"""

From "Hemphill v. New York" ==> """
Hemphill v. New York, , was a decision by the United States Supreme Court involving the application of Confrontation Clause of the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution. In its decision, the Court ruled on when a criminal defendant who opens the door to otherwise inadmissible evidence also opens the door to evidence that would otherwise be excluded by the Confrontation Clause.
Prior History
In 2012, the New York Court of Appeals ruled in People v. Reid, , on whether a defendant can open the door to testimony that would otherwise be inadmissible under the Confrontation Clause. In its decision, the court agreed with the consensus of several other United States Courts of Appeals that it is possible for a defendant to open the door to evidence that would otherwise be barred by the Confrontation Clause. It argued that if such evidence were inadmissible regardless of the defendant's questions at trial, then a defendant could mislead a jury by selectively recounting potentially exculpatory details from a testimonial out-of-court statement, while neglecting to other details from this statement that would tend to explain and contextualize the portions that had been introduced. The court also noted that their ruling was consistent with  its jurisprudence regarding the admissibility of statements collected in violation of Miranda v. Arizona. Such statements are admissible if a defendant opens the door by presenting conflicting testimony at trial. Quoting Harris v. New York, , it said:
Background
In April 2006, two men became involved in a fight with a group of other people on a street in the Bronx. During the fight, a stray 9-millimeter bullet struck and killed a 2-year-old child seated in a passing car. With the help of eyewitnesses, police identified Nicholas Morris as the shooter and Ronnell Gillam as another participant in the fight.
Police searched Morris's apartment and found one 9-millimeter cartridge and several .357 revolver rounds. He was subsequently arrested. Although Gilliam initially identified Morris as the shooter, he later recanted this statement and indicated that Morris's cousin, Darrell Hemphill, was the shooter. Disregarding this recantation, the police charged Morris with the murder of the child and the possession of a 9-millimeter handgun. However, the prosecution ended in a mistrial.
After the mistrial, the police offered Morris a plea deal: the murder charge would be dismissed if Morris would plea guilty to guilty to the possession of a .357 revolver at the scene of the shooting - despite the fact that a 9-millimeter handgun had already been established as the murder weapon. As such, the prosecution lacked sufficient evidence to prove Morris's possession of the .357 revolver, so Morris supplied this evidence through his own allocution.
Years after the trial, Hemphill was indicted for the murder of the child after his DNA was found on a blue sweater found in Morris's apartment shortly after the murder. During his trial, Hemphill elicited undisputed testimony from a prosecution witness stating that police had found 9-millimeter rounds from Morris's apartment, thus implicating Morris as the culprit. Morris was unable to testify at Hemphill's trial because he was out of the country at the time. So, in order to rebut Hemphill's implication that Morris was the culprit, the prosecution sought to admit parts of the transcript of Morris's plea allocution, in which he admitted to possession of the .357 revolver, not the 9-millimeter handgun that Hemphill's questions misleadingly implicated Morris in possessing. 
Hemphill's counsel sought to exclude Morris's allocution transcript from evidence, citing that Morris's out-of-court statements had not been subject to cross-examination. Despite this, the court ruled that Hemphill's arguments and evidence at trial had opened the door to this otherwise inadmissible evidence, in order to allow the prosecution to correct the misleading impression that Hemphill had created.
The jury found Hemphill guilty. Later, both the New York Appellate Division and the Court of Appeals affirmed Hemphill's conviction.
Supreme Court Opinions
In an 8-1 decision authored by Justice Sotomayor, the court held that a criminal defendant does not waive his right to confront adverse witnesses simply by making an argument based on testimonial out-of-court statements such as plea allocutions. Justice Alito authored a concurring opinion in which he addresses the conditions under which a defendant will have waived his right to confront adverse witnesses. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion in which he disputes the Court's jurisdiction to hear the case.
Sotomayor's Majority Opinion
The Confrontation Clause of the Sixth Amendment provides criminal defendants the right to confront all adverse witnesses against him. In the opinion, the Court drew on the historical examination of the confrontation right that was seen in past cases, such as Crawford v. Washington, which stated that “the principal evil at which the Confrontation Clause was directed was the civil-law mode of criminal procedure,”
which allowed the “use of ex parte examinations as evidence against
the accused”. The Court in Crawford reasoned that, since the text of the Confrontation Clause did not allow the possibility of open-ended exceptions to the rule as determined by the courts, the Clause should be read as including only the exceptions that would have been present at the time it was written. To that point, the Crawford court argued that the Framers would not have allowed such out-of-court testimony to be admissible, unless the witness was unable to testify at trial and the defendant had a prior opportunity to cross-examine the witness.
Regarding the New York Court of Appeals decision in People v. Reid, the opinion rejects the appellate court's notion that the "door-opening" rule established in Reid is an exception to the Confrontation Clause. Rather, it asserts that it is merely a "procedural rule" dictating the manner in which a defendant may assert his confrontation right, and that it does not limit the scope of the right itself. The opinion rejects the notion that it was the responsibility of a judge to determine whether Hemphill's assertion of Morris's responsibility for the shooting was reliable, credible, or even that it had the opportunity to mislead the jury. It also rejected the notion that it was the responsibility of a judge to determine whether the admission of Morris's allocution was necessary in order to correct this misleading assertion.
The opinion rejects the State's assertion that the rule in Reid is necessary for courts to carry out their primary duty - to ascertain facts - by preventing the introduction of misleading evidence. While this task is important, the Court has never allowed this consideration to override the protections afforded to criminal defendants by the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Lastly, the opinion contends with the assertion that a reversal of Hemphill's conviction would leave prosecutors without recourse to protect against the abuse of the confrontation right. Quoting Holmes v. South Carolina, the Court notes that “well-established rules” of evidence “permit trial judges to
exclude evidence if its probative value is outweighed by certain other
factors such as unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or potential to
mislead the jury”.
 Alito's Concurring Opinion
Alito's opinion begins with establishing the two modes by which a federally guaranteed constitutional right may be waived, either expressly or implicitly. Regarding the former, he states, quoting Johnson v. Zerbst, , that waiver consists in the "intentional relinquishment or abandonment of a known right or privilege". Regarding the latter, quoting Berghuis v. Thompkins, , he states that implied waiver can be established through “‘a course of conduct’” even “absent formal or express statements of waiver”.
Alito then addresses past cases in which a defendant's conduct has constituted an implied waiver of his Sixth Amendment right to confront adverse witnesses. As in Melendez-Diaz v. Massachusetts, , implied waiver may be found in a defendant's "failure to object to the offending evidence". As in Illinois v. Allen, , implied waiver may also be found in a defendant's “conducting himself in a manner so disorderly, disruptive, and disrespectful of the court that his trial cannot be carried on with him in the courtroom”.
Alito notes that the issue with the appellate court's rule in Reid is that its application in the case was predicated on neither an express nor an implicit waiver of the right to confront adverse witnesses. He does say, however, that there are instances where a defendant's introduction of evidence may amount to an implicit waiver of the right to object to the introduction of the prosecution's evidence that would otherwise be barred by the Confrontation Clause. One such instance relates to the doctrine of completeness. Federal Rules of Evidence # states:
He argues that this analysis is analogous to logic regarding the Fifth Amendment's privilege against self-incrimination. Precedent makes clear that defendants who waive their Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination by testifying in their own defense cannot invoke that same privilege to avoid being cross-examined. In this example, such a defendant purposefully elects which details to disclose in his testimony, and so he cannot reasonably claim a constitutional immunity from being cross-examined on matters that he himself has put before a jury, and has thus deemed disputable. Alito argues that the right to confront adverse witnesses should be analyzed no differently, stating that a defendant's deliberate choice to place portions of statements of an unavailable declarant before the trier of fact (knowing that the declarant is unavailable for cross-examination) implicitly commits him to the trier of fact's examination of the entirety of what the declarant has to say on the subject. 
 Thomas's Dissenting Opinion  
Thomas's dissent disputes the Supreme Court's jurisdiction over this case. Citing , he indicated that the court may review final judgments from, in this case, the New York Court of Appeals only where a federal right "is specifically set up or claimed" in that court. Since Hemphill did not raise his Sixth Amendment claim in the New York Court of Appeals, Thomas claims that the Supreme Court lacks jurisdiction here to review the lower court's decision.
 References 
 External Links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Confrontation Clause case law
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Henderson v. United States (1950)" ==> """
Henderson v. United States, 339 U.S. 816 (1950), was a landmark United States Supreme Court decision in the jurisprudence of the United States that abolished segregation in railroad dining cars with an 8-0 ruling.Henderson v. United States, .
The decision
On May 17, 1942, Elmer W. Henderson, an African-American passenger, was travelling first-class on the Southern Railway from Washington to Atlanta en route to Birmingham in the course of his duties as an employee of the United States. 
At about 5:30 pm, while the train was in Virginia, the first call to dinner was announced and he went promptly to the dining car. Under practices then in effect, the two end tables nearest the kitchen were to be reserved initially for African Americans with curtains drawn between them and the rest of the car. If the other tables were occupied before any African-American passengers presented themselves at the diner then those two tables were made available for white passengers. 
As the tables were partly occupied by white passengers (with at least one seat at them unoccupied) the dining-car steward declined to seat the passenger in the dining car, offering instead to serve him at his Pullman seat. The passenger declined and the steward agreed to send him word when space was available. No word was sent and he was not served, although he twice returned to the diner before it was detached at 9 pm.
The passenger filed a complaint with the Interstate Commerce Commission in October 1942, alleging this conduct violated provisions of the Interstate Commerce Act. While the Commission acknowledged that he had been subjected to undue and unreasonable prejudice and disadvantage, it dismissed the occurrence as a casual incident brought about by the bad judgment of an employee and refused to enter an order as to future practices. 
The United States District Court for the District of Maryland disagreed; the railroad's general practice, as evidenced by its stated policies in effect on August 6, 1942, was in violation of the Interstate Commerce Act. 
The US Supreme Court did not rule on the constitutionality of "separate but equal" in this instance but did find that the railroad had failed to provide the passenger with the same level of service provided to a white passenger with the same class of ticket, a violation of principles already established in Mitchell v. United States (1941).Mitchell v. United States, .
Analysis
The Court refused to rule on the separate but equal doctrine, but the mandate of the Court eliminated the reserved tables and the curtain.
See also
Southern Railway Co. v. United States
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 339
References
Further reading
 Barnes, Catherine A. Journey from Jim Crow: The Desegregation of Southern Transit, Columbia University Press, 1983.
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:United States racial desegregation case law
Category:1950 in United States case law
Category:Southern Railway (U.S.)
Category:African-American history between emancipation and the civil rights movement
Category:Railway litigation in 1950
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:Civil rights movement case law
"""

From "Henderson v. United States (2013)" ==> """
Henderson v. United States, 568 U.S. 266 (2013), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held regardless of whether a legal question was settled or unsettled at the time of trial, an error is "plain" within the meaning of Rule 52(b) of Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure so long as the error was plain at the time of appellate review..
 Background 
Armarcion D. Henderson pleaded guilty to possessing a firearm while being a felon; a federal violation. The sentencing guideline range was 33–41 months, but the judge sentenced Henderson to 60 months to ensure that he had the opportunity to enroll in the Bureau of Prisons drug program. Henderson's counsel did not object to the sentence, but, on appeal, Henderson claimed that the District Court plainly erred in increasing his sentence solely for rehabilitative purposes. Eight days after sentencing, Henderson filed a motion to correct the sentence. The district court denied the motion.
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit affirmed, holding that Henderson did not preserve the error for correction under the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, so the court reviewed the decision for "plain error". Henderson did not show plain error because the error was not clear under current law at the time of trial. The court of appeals denied a petition for rehearing.
While the appeal was pending, this Court decided in Tapia v. United States that it is an error for a court to "impose or lengthen a prison sentence to enable an offender to complete a treatment program or otherwise to promote rehabilitation.". While this meant that the District Court's sentence was erroneous, the Fifth Circuit determined that Rule 52(b) did not give it authority to correct the error. In doing so, it concluded that an error is "plain" under the rule only if it was clear under current law at the time of trial, but that, in this case, Circuit law was unsettled until Tapia was decided.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Breyer delivered the majority opinion of the Court in a 6–3 decision. A federal court of appeals normally will not correct a legal error made in criminal trial court proceedings unless the defendant first brought the error to the trial court's attention.See . But Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 52(b), creating an exception to the normal rule, says that "[a] plain error that affects substantial rights may be considered even though it was not brought to the [trial] court’s attention." The Rule does not say explicitly, however, as of just what time the error must be "plain". Must the lower court ruling be plainly erroneous as of the time the lower court made the error? Or can an error still count as "plain" if the erroneous nature of that ruling is not "plain" until the time of appellate review? The case before us concerns a District Court's decision on a substantive legal question that was unsettled at the time the trial court acted, thus foreclosing the possibility that any error could have been "plain" then. Before the case was final and at the time of direct appellate review, however, the question had become settled in the defendant's favor, making the trial court's error "plain"—but not until that later time. In our view, as long as the error was plain as of that later time—the time of appellate review— the error is "plain" within the meaning of the Rule. And the Court of Appeals "may...conside[r]" the error even though it was "not brought to the [trial] court's attention".
Justice Scalia wrote a dissenting opinion in which he argued that an issue of law that is unsettled at the time of the trial cannot be considered "plain error" for the purposes of appellate review. An error can only be plain if it should have been obvious to the court and the prosecution at the time of the trial. Justices Thomas and Alito joined in the dissent.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2013 in United States case law
"""

From "Henderson v. United States (2015)" ==> """
Henderson v. United States, 575 U.S. 622 (2015), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held a court-ordered transfer of a felon's lawfully owned firearms from government custody to a third party is not barred by §922(g) if the court is satisfied that the recipient will not give the felon control over the firearms, so that he could either use them or direct their use.
Background
Former United States Border Patrol agent Tony Henderson was arrested for distributing marijuana and as a condition of bail had to turn his nineteen firearms over to the federal government. After Henderson was convicted and could no longer legally possess firearms, he sought to have the government release them to a friend whom he was selling the weapons to, or in lieu of that, his wife, so she could make the transfer. The government refused, stating that this gave Henderson constructive possession and violated the law.Richard M. Re, Opinion analysis: An equitable result in Henderson v. United States,  (May. 18, 2015, 12:12 PM).
Henderson then asked for the District Court to order the release of the firearms and it denied his motion. The Eleventh Circuit affirmed, and Henderson appealed it to the Supreme Court.Re.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Elena Kagan delivered the opinion for a unanimous court. Kagan noted that federal courts have equitable authority to order a federal law enforcement agency to return property belonging to the owner or the owner's designee. She then noted that § 922(g) did not prohibit a felon from transferring a firearm and that this was separate from possessing the firearm. A court may seek assurances that the transferee will not allow the felon to regain possession of the firearms, but may not generally prohibit the owner from transferring the weapons to another person.Re.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2015 in United States case law
"""

From "Henry Schein, Inc. v. Archer & White Sales, Inc." ==> """
Henry Schein, Inc. v. Archer & White Sales, Inc., 586 U.S. ___ (2019), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States on January 8, 2019. The case decided the question of whether a court may disregard a valid delegation of arbitrability—a contract provision stating that an arbitrator should decide whether a dispute is subject to arbitration—when the argument in favor of arbitration is "wholly groundless.", 138 S. Ct. 2678 (2019). In a unanimous (9-0) opinion written by Justice Brett Kavanaugh, the court sided with petitioner Henry Schein, Inc., holding that the "wholly groundless" exception to arbitrability violates the Federal Arbitration Act (9 U.S.C. § 1 et seq.), and therefore a valid delegation of arbitrability should be honored even if a court believes the argument for arbitration to be "wholly groundless." It was Justice Kavanaugh's first Supreme Court opinion.
 Background 
In the decades preceding this case, the U.S. Supreme Court issued a number decisions that were widely seen as favoring the use of arbitration through an expansive reading of the Federal Arbitration Act (9 U.S.C. § 1 et seq.).See also ; ; ; ; . By the end of the twentieth century, arbitration, once disfavored by courts as an inferior form of dispute resolution, had become commonplace. Arbitration agreements and awards are now routinely honored by federal courts.Allison Brooke Overby, Arbitrability of Disputes Under the Federal Arbitration Act, 71 Iowa L. Rev. 1137, 1140 (1986). Disputes about arbitration are still common in United States courts, however, for two primary reasons: First, the right to a jury trial is fundamental in the United States, so courts need confirmation that individuals have freely agreed to relinquish that right before compelling arbitration.The Seventh Amendment to the United States Constitution reads: "In Suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be preserved, and no fact tried by a jury, shall be otherwise re-examined in any Court of the United States, than according to the rules of the common law." Second, arbitration is believed by many to favor large organizations and "repeat players" who can force their counterparts (sometimes consumers or employees) into arbitration agreements through their superior bargaining power. These concerns, along with other disagreements about whether parties had agreed arbitrate certain issues, have given rise to court decisions outlining fine-grained distinctions about which disputes are subject to arbitration. Henry Schein, Inc. v. Archer & White Sales, Inc. further clarified these questions by eliminating one possible exception to the Supreme Court's previous arbitrability decisions. 
 Facts 
Archer & White Sales, a small dental distribution business, entered into a contract with Pelton & Crane a Danaher company] to buy Pelton and Crane dental equipment.  Their sales contract included the following language: "Any dispute arising under or related to this Agreement (except for actions seeking injunctive relief...), shall be resolved by binding arbitration in accordance with the arbitration rules of the American Arbitration Association [(AAA)]." Eventually, the business relationship deteriorated, and Archer & White sued Danaher and Henry Schein for violations of antitrust law. Henry Schein moved to compel arbitration based on the arbitration clause in the sales contract, even though they were not a signatory to the Pelton and Crane contract,invoking the Federal Arbitration Act. Archer & White argued that their dispute was not subject to arbitration because one of the remedies sought was injunctive relief. 
 Legal issues 
 Delegation of Arbitrability 
Henry Schein argued, based on the language in the contract, that the parties agreed to have the arbitrator decide whether the dispute should be decided through arbitration. The contract contained an agreement to arbitrate under the rules of AAA, and the AAA rules contain a "competence-competence" clause, allowing an arbitral tribunal to decide arbitrability. Thus, by agreeing to the AAA rules, the parties had agreed to delegate the question of arbitrability to the arbitrator. Archer & White responded that this was not a clear delegation of authority because their arbitration clause included "cut-outs"—specific types of claims that they did not agree to subject to arbitration.Brief of Respondent Archer & White Sales, Inc., Henry Schein, Inc. v. Archer & White Sales, Inc.,139 S. Ct. 524  The Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals had previously held that very similar provisions incorporating the AAA rules were clear delegations of arbitrability, and it had even held that similar cut-outs did not defeat the effect of these provisions. In this case, however, the Fifth Circuit believed that the intersection of the particular cut-outs at issue and grounds for the underlying dispute made the question of delegation difficult. Finding that the case could be resolved through an exception, they declined to answer the question of whether the delegation was valid.
 Wholly Groundless Exception 
Archer & White advanced an alternative argument that even if the delegation was valid, the argument for arbitration was "wholly groundless." The Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals, along with the Sixth Circuit and the Federal Circuit, had previously held that even if parties clearly delegate arbitrability to an arbitrator, a court can decide refuse to let the case go to arbitration if the argument for arbitration is "wholly groundless." The trial court ruled for Archer & White on the "wholly groundless" exception, finding that no reasonable arbitrator could find this case subject to arbitration, and therefore the question of whether the parties delegated the arbitrability decision to an arbitrator was irrelevant. The Fifth Circuit affirmed that decision. 
Henry Schein appealed the ruling to the United States Supreme Court, arguing that the "wholly groundless" exception violates the Federal Arbitration Act. Since the Fifth Circuit declined to rule on whether the delegation of arbitrability was valid, only ruling on the "wholly groundless" exception was appealed to the Supreme Court.Petition for Writ of Certiorari, Henry Schein Inc., et al. v. Archer & White Sales, Inc., https://www.supremecourt.gov/DocketPDF/17/17-1272/38293/20180309094624854_Danaher%20cert%20petition.pdf
 Decision of the Court 
The Supreme Court heard oral argument on the case on October 29, 2018. At oral argument, some of the justices  expressed concern at the suggestion by counsel for Henry Schein that a dispute should be sent to an arbitrator when it was clear that the arbitrator lacked jurisdiction on the dispute. But even more concern was shown for the position of Archer & White that a judge could simply skip the step of determining whether the parties delegated arbitrability by making a "wholly groundless" determination about the merits of arbitrability. Commentators  predicted that the Court would strike down the "wholly groundless" exception.
The opinion in the case was released on January 8, 2019. It was a unanimous (9-0) opinion written by Justice Brett Kavanaugh, his first opinion from the Supreme Court bench. The opinion was based on a series of previous Supreme Court decisions. In Rent-A-Center v. Jackson, 561 U.S. 63, the Court held that parties could agree to delegate decisions on specific issues to arbitrators, and that courts must respect those delegations.. In AT&T Technologies, Inc. v. Commc'n Workers of Am., 475 U.S. 643, the Court explicitly noted that parties could delegate arbitrability, but held that the arbitrability determination should typically be made by a court.. In the AT&T case, the Court wrote: "...the question of arbitrability...is undeniably an issue for judicial determination. Unless the parties clearly and unmistakably provide otherwise, the question of whether the parties agreed to arbitrate is to be decided by the court, not the arbitrator." In First Options of Chicago, Inc. v. Kaplan, 514 U.S. 938, the Court again held that parties could delegate arbitrability, and reinforced the "clear and unmistakable" standard..
thumb|The slip opinion for Henry Schein, Inc. v. Archer & White Sales, Inc.
In Henry Schein, the Supreme Court reiterated these previous decisions, holding that courts must respect clear and unmistakable delegations of arbitrability to an arbitrator, and may not circumvent those delegations by weighing the merits of the arbitrability question itself. It pointed to relevant language in the AT&T case, stating, "We have held that a court may not 'rule on the potential merits of the underlying' claim that is assigned by contract to an arbitrator, 'even if it appears to the court to be frivolous.'Henry Schein, Inc. v. Archer & White Sales, Inc., 139 S. Ct. 524, at page 5, citing AT&T Technologies, Inc. v. Communications Workers, 475 U. S. 643, 649–650 (1986). Reaffirming these cases, the Court struck down the Fifth Circuit's "wholly groundless" exception to the delegation of arbitrability to an arbitrator.
 Implications and Subsequent Cases 
Henry Schein clarified a split in the federal courts of appeals about the arbitrability of disputes. Only the courts of appeals for the Fifth, Sixth, and Federal Circuits had previously recognized the "wholly groundless" exception to an otherwise valid delegation of arbitrability. These appellate courts believed it would be wasteful and absurd to send a dispute to an arbitrator only to have the arbitrator send the parties back to court because they lack jurisdiction. The Supreme Court resolved this split by eliminating this exception. In Henry Schein, the Court stressed that courts must first determine who is authorized to determine arbitrability, as outlined by AT&T and First Options. Courts may not skip that step by "peeking" at the merits of the arbitrability question and deciding that the claim in favor of arbitration is "wholly groundless." 
 Subsequent Cases 
In the months following the decision, Henry Schein was cited by several courts as strengthening the right of parties to delegate arbitrability to an arbitrator.See, e.g., De Angelis v. Icon Entm't Grp., Inc., No. 2:17-cv-00927, 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 33578, at *11 (S.D. Ohio Mar. 4, 2019);  The narrow holding in Henry Schein gave rise to some confusion; some observers surmised the Court had determined the arbitration clause incorporating AAA rules to be a valid delegation of arbitrability. At least one federal case (Charlie's Project, LLC v. T2B, LLC) cited Henry Schein as supporting this conclusion, comparing the Henry Schein clause with its AAA incorporation in Henry Schein to the AAA arbitration clause case at hand in concluding that it was a clear delegation of arbitrability to the arbitrator. In Henry Schein, however, the Court explicitly stated, "We express no view about whether the contract at issue in this case in fact delegated the arbitrability question to an arbitrator." The question of whether these general adoptions of arbitration rules qualified as valid delegations of arbitrability was not addressed by the Supreme Court.
 Unanswered Questions 
Some commentators have noted the Court's failure in Henry Schein to answer these broader question about when a delegation clause is "clear and unmistakeable." Arbitration clauses often incorporate the rules of an arbitration organization (like AAA), and those rules generally include a competence-competence clause.Amicus curiae brief of Professor George A. Bermann, Henry Schein, Inc. v. Archer & White Sales, Inc., No. 17-1272. Whether these types of clauses qualify as "clear and unmistakeable" delegations of authority under First Options is hotly contested. Many lower federal courts have found such clauses to be valid delegations under AT&T and First Options, but the American Law Institute (ALI) has voiced their opinion that they do not qualify as such.Amicus curiae brief of Professor George A. Bermann, Henry Schein, Inc. v. Archer & White Sales, Inc., No. 17-1272, at page 2 ("Although a majority of courts have found the incorporation of rules containing such a provision to satisfy First Options’ “clear and unmistakable” evidence test, the ALI’s Restatement of the U.S. Law of International Commercial and Investor-State Arbitration has concluded, after extended debate, that these cases were incorrectly decided."). The ALI argues that although these types of clauses grant jurisdictional authority to an arbitrator, they do not exclude or disclaim the authority of courts to rule on the question, and therefore courts may still rule on arbitrability. In the Henry Schein case, this question was addressed by the district court and the Fifth Circuit, but the Fifth Circuit ultimately declined to make a final ruling on the question and the issue was not addressed by the Supreme Court. Given the prevalence of these clauses in arbitration agreements, arbitration experts anticipate that the Supreme Court will eventually address the question they left unanswered in Henry Schein.
 Improper Certiorari 
In Henry Schein, Inc. v. Archer and White Sales, Inc., 592 U.S. ___ (2021), the Court dismissed certiorari as improvidently granted.
 References 
 Further reading 
 Legal Commentary 
Ronald Mann, "Opinion analysis: Kavanaugh’s first opinion rejects vague exception limiting enforcement of arbitration agreements," SCOTUSBlog, January 9, 2019.
Adrienne Scheffey and Robert Friedman, "Supreme Court Eliminates the 'Wholly Groundless' Exception to Arbitration Agreements, Reinforcing the Force of Delegation Provisions," January 14, 2019 
Steven K. Davidson, Michael J. Baratz, Jared R. Butcher, Molly Bruder Fox, "US Supreme Court's Decision in Henry Schein Inc. v. Archer and White Sales Inc. is Not as Clear as Everyone Says," February 5, 2019
External links
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States arbitration case law
"""

From "Henry v. A.B. Dick Co." ==> """
Henry v. A.B. Dick Co., 224 U.S. 1 (1912), was a 1912 decision of the United States Supreme Court that upheld patent licensing restrictions such as tie-ins on the basis of the so-called inherency doctrine—the theory that it was the inherent right of a patent owner, because he could lawfully refuse to license his patent at all, to exercise the "lesser" right to license it on any terms and conditions he chose.. In 1917, the Supreme Court overruled the A.B. Dick case in Motion Picture Patents Co. v. Universal Film Mfg. Co.,.
Background
300px|thumb|right|Patented Rotary Mimeograph machine of A.B. Dick Co.
A.B. Dick owned a patent on a mimeograph machine, which was designed to print multiple paper copies of papers by exuding ink through apertures in a stencil onto paper sheets. Dick sold one of the patented machines to Miss Christina B. Skou. A plate had been fastened to the machine, reading that the machine was "sold by the A.B. Dick Company with the license restriction that it may be used only with the stencil, paper, ink, and other supplies made by A. B. Dick." Sidney Henry then sold to Miss Skou a can of ink suitable for use upon the mimeograph machine, with knowledge of the license agreement, and with the expectation that she would use the ink with the machine.224 U.S. at 11-12, 26.
A.B. Dick then sued Henry in the circuit court for the Southern District of New York, which ruled in favor of Dick.A.B. Dick Co. v. Henry, 149 Fed. 424 (C.C.S.D.N.Y. 1907). The Second Circuit certified to the Supreme Court the question whether the conduct constituted patent infringement.
Ruling of Supreme Court
The Court ruled (4-3) that Henry's conduct was contributory infringement, in a decision written by Justice Lurton, joined by Justices McKenna, Holmes, and Van Devanter. Chief Justice Edward White, joined by Justices Hughes and Lamar, dissented. (Two justices were unavailable: Justice Harlan had died and Justice Day was absent.).	
Majority opinion
thumb|Justice Lurton
Justice Lurton noted preliminarily that Henry could not be guilty of contributory infringement unless Skou was guilty of direct infringement in using Henry's ink. "It is not denied that she accepted the machine with notice of the conditions under which the patentee consented to its use. Nor is it denied that thereby she agreed not to use the machine otherwise."224 U.S. at 12. The only issue was whether breach of the agreement to use only Dick's ink was patent infringement. Henry argued that the exhaustion doctrine prevented such a post-sale restriction from being enforceable. "He cannot make a sale with the condition attached that the article shall be used or disposed of in a certain manner, leaving the title, however, in the purchaser in case of a breach of the condition."224 U.S. at 18.
The majority said that principle applied only to unconditional sales. This machine was sold subject to the condition that it must be used only with Dick's ink. "But if the right of use be confined by specific restriction, the use not permitted is necessarily reserved to the patentee. 
If that reserved control of use of the machine be violated, the patent is thereby invaded. This right to sever ownership and use is deducible from the nature of a patent monopoly, and is recognized in the cases."224 U. S. at 24-25.
The Court dismissed Henry's arguments that holding the licensing restrictions permissible would lead to great harm to the public:
For the purpose of testing the consequence of a ruling which will support the lawfulness of a sale of a patented machine for use only its connection with supplies necessary for its operation, bought from the patentee, many fanciful suggestions of conditions which might be imposed by a patentee have been pressed upon us. Thus, it is said that a patentee of a coffee pot might sell on condition that it be used only with coffee bought from him, or, if the article be a circular saw, that it might be sold on condition that it be used only in sawing logs procured from him. These and other illustrations are used to indicate that this method of marketing a patented article may be carried to such an extent as to inconvenience the public and involve innocent people in unwitting infringements.
But these illustrations all fail of their purpose, because the public is always free to take or refuse the patented article on the terms imposed. If they be too onerous or not in keeping with the benefits, the patented article will not find a market.224 U.S. at 34.
The majority capped this argument by pointing out that under U.S. law the inventor may decline to exploit his patented invention and yet he can refuse to let others use it during the life of the patent, because that is his inherent right under our patent system:
This larger right embraces the lesser of permitting others to use upon such terms as the patentee chooses to prescribe. It must not be forgotten that we are dealing with a constitutional and statutory monopoly.
. . . And if it be that the ingenuity of patentees in devising ways in which to reap the benefit of their discoveries requires to be restrained, Congress alone has the power to determine what restraints shall be imposed. As the law now stands, it contains none, and the duty which rests upon this and upon every other court is to expound the law as it is written. Arguments based upon suggestions of public policy not recognized in the patent laws are not relevant. The field to which we are invited by such arguments is legislative, not judicial.224 U.S. at 35 (emphasis supplied).
Dissenting opinion 
thumb|140px|right|Chief Justice White
Chief Justice White expressed his "forebodings as to the evil consequences to result from the application of the construction now given to the patent statute" if Congress failed "to amend the statute so as to avoid such evils."223 U.S at 50. He strongly objected to the doctrine "that a patentee, in selling the machine covered by his patent, has power by contract to extend the patent so as to cause it to embrace things which it does not include; in other words, to exercise legislative power of a far-reaching and dangerous character.224 U.S. at 51-52. This occurs, he said, because "the ruling now made in effect is that the patentee has the power, by contract, to extend his patent rights so as to bring within the claims of his patent things which are not embraced therein, thus virtually legislating by causing the patent laws to cover subjects to which, without the exercise of the right of contract, they could not reach."224 U.S. at 53.
White then listed a catalog of dangerous results of the ruling:
Take a patentee selling a patented engine. He will now have the right by contract to bring under the patent laws all contracts for coal or electrical energy used to afford power to work the machine, or even the lubricants employed in its operation. 
Take a patented carpenter's plane. The power now exists in the patentee by contract to validly confine a carpenter purchasing one of the planes to the use of lumber sawed from trees grown on the land of a particular person, or sawed by a particular mill. 
Take a patented cooking utensil. The power is now recognized in the patentee to bind by contract one who buys the utensil to use in connection with it no other food supply but that sold or made by the patentee. 
Take the invention of a patented window frame. It is now the law that the seller of the frame may stipulate that no other material shall be used in a house in which the window frames are placed except such as may be bought from the patentee and seller of the frame. 
Take an illustration which goes home to everyone—a patented sewing machine. It is now established that, by putting on the machine, in addition to the notice of patent required by law, a notice called a license restriction, the right is acquired, as against the whole world, to control the purchase by users of the machine of thread, needles, and oil lubricants or other materials convenient or necessary for operation of the machine.224 U.S. at 55.
White explained that these evils were not imaginary but were already becoming prevalent, as a result of the widespread following that had attached to the Sixth Circuit's decision in the Button-Fastener case:The Button-Fastener case, 77 Fed. 288 (6th Cir. 1896), was authored by Judge Lurton, as he then was, who was now a Supreme Court Justice and was the author of the majority opinion in this case. Neither majority nor dissenting opinion alludes to that fact, but both opinions cite that case.
The illustrations might be multiplied indefinitely. That they are not imaginary is now a matter of common knowledge, for, as the result of a case the Button-Fastener case decided some years ago by one of the circuit courts of appeal, which has been followed by cases in other circuit courts of appeal, to which reference will hereafter be made, what prior to the first of those decisions on a sale of a patented article was designated a condition of sale, governed by the general principles of law, has come in practice to be denominated a license restriction. ... As the transformation has come about in practice since the decisions in question, the conclusion is that it is attributable as an effect caused by the doctrine of those cases. And, as I have previously stated, it is a matter of common knowledge that the change has been frequently resorted to for the purpose of bringing numerous articles of common use within the monopoly of a patent when otherwise they would not have been embraced therein, thereby tending to subject the whole of society to a widespread and irksome monopolistic control.224 U.S. at 55-56.
White argued that this legal development was contrary to the exhaustion doctrine on which many earlier Supreme Court cases had been based, including Adams v. Burke.224 U.S. at 56-68. White maintained that the Button-Fastener case and the court of appeals decisions following it were all wrongly decided and should be overruled. "[T]he Button-Fastener case and the confusion which has followed the application of the ruling made in that case was but the consequence of failing to observe the difference between the rights of a patentee which were protected by the patent and those which arose from contract, and therefore were subject alone to the general law."224 U.S. at 69.
Subsequent developments
The American Bar Ass'n's Intellectual Property Handbook asserts that the A.B. Dick decision "spurred congressional action" to pass section 3 of the Clayton Act in 1914, which prohibited tie-ins of patented or unpatented products when the effect was to substantially lessen competition in a market.,  71–72 (2007).
Two Supreme Court decisions failed to follow or distinguish A.B. Dick in 1912 and 1913 but did not overrule it.See id. at 72.
The A.B., Dick case was overruled in 1917 in Motion Picture Patents Co. v. Universal Film Mfg. Co., The A.B. Dick case's reasoning that a sale on condition (i.e., the product was sold subject to a restriction on its use) was not within the exhaustion doctrine was revived in the Federal Circuit in Mallinckrodt, Inc. v. Medipart, Inc. That case apparently was overruled sub silentio in Quanta Computer, Inc. v. LG Electronics, Inc.. However, an en banc decision of the Federal Circuit refused to overrule Mallinckrodt and instead reaffirmed it. A certiorari petition is now pending in that case.Lexmark Int'l, Inc. v. Impression Prods., Inc..
Commentary
In 1917, when the Motion Picture Patents case overruled A.B., Dick and the Button-Fastener case, a commentator remarked:
It by no means follows that because a patentee may withhold the use of the patented article entirely he may license its use with any conditions he chooses. It may be better that the public should not enjoy the article at all than that it should be used under restrictions obnoxious to public policy.Comment, Restraint of Trade: Common Law: Patents, 5  425, 428 (1917).
In 2011, Professor Vincent Chiapetta explained this point in greater detail. He concluded that the inherency doctrine ignores the issue of whether the benefits of increased usage of the patented invention under a restrictive license exceed the harms resulting from the restriction. A proper legal analysis, Chiapetta argues, must balance benefits against harms.Vincent Chiapetta, Living with Patents: Insights from Patent Misuse, 15  1, 26-27 (2011(,
The A.B. Dick case has been called "the high-water mark of judicial deference toward patentees.",  71 (2007).
References  
External links
Category:United States misuse law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:1912 in United States case law
"""

From "Henson v. Santander Consumer USA Inc." ==> """
Henson v. Santander Consumer USA Inc., 582 U.S. ___ (2017), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States which held that a company is not a "debt collector" under the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act (FDCPA) if it purchased that debt and then attempts to collect from the debtor. It was Justice Neil Gorsuch's first written opinion since joining the Court in April 2017.SCOTUSblog: Henson v. Santander Consumer USA Inc.
Background
CitiFinancial loaned money to several individuals seeking to purchase automobiles. When the loans went unpaid, CitiFinancial repossessed and sold them to Santander Consumer USA, and told the individuals they owed the difference between the purchase price and the amount of money for which CitiFinancial sold the debt. Santander attempted to collect the debts. A suit was brought against Santander alleging a violation of the FDCPA. Santander claimed it was not a "debt collector" under the terms of the act because it was seeking to collect on debts that it had purchased, rather than attempting to collect as a third-party.Oyez: Henson v. Santander Consumer USA Inc. The District Court and Fourth Circuit ruled in Santander's favor.
The Court considered whether a company that regularly attempts to collect debts it purchased after the debts had fallen into default is a "debt collector" subject to the FDCPA.No. 16-349 Henson v. Santander Consumer USA: Question Presented
Opinion of the Court
Justice Neil Gorsuch, writing his first opinion, ruled against the borrowers, holding that Santander in this case is not a debt collector under the FDCPA.. When the act was enacted, regulations were put on institutions that collected other companies' debts, but the act left unaddressed businesses collecting their own debts. Gorsuch hinted that Congress could revisit the law, writing, "[i]t's hardly unknown for new business models to emerge in response to regulation, and for regulation in turn to address new business models. Constant competition between constable and quarry, regulator and regulated, can come as no surprise in our changing world. But neither should the proper role of the judiciary in that process — to apply, not amend, the work of the People’s representatives."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 582
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Banco Santander
Category:2017 in United States case law
Category:Debt collection
"""

From "Hepburn v. Griswold" ==> """
Hepburn v. Griswold, 75 U.S. (8 Wall.) 603 (1870), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Chief Justice of the United States, Salmon P. Chase, speaking for the Court, declared certain parts of the Legal Tender Acts to be unconstitutional. Specifically, making United States Notes legal tender was unconstitutional.
The lawsuit originated when one Mrs. Hepburn attempted to pay a debt to Henry Griswold on a promissory note, which was made five days prior to the issuance of United States Notes that the case questioned.  Griswold sued Hepburn in the Louisville Chancery Court on the note and refused Hepburn's tender of United States Notes to satisfy his claim. She then tendered the notes into the Chancery Court, which declared her debt satisfied.
The Court of Errors of Kentucky reversed the chancery court's judgment, and Hepburn appealed to the Supreme Court, which affirmed the judgment of the Court of Errors.
thumb|alt=The Chase Court in 1868.|The Chase Court.
The Supreme Court found that the US federal government was authorized to coin money, but that power was distinct from the power to make paper legal tender, which was not authorized under the US Constitution. It also found that the treatment of notes as legal tender represented an impairment to enforcing the obligations of contracts. The Constitution prohibits the several states from impairing the obligations of contracts. The Court found no similar constraint upon the federal government, but it held that such an impairment would violate the spirit of the Constitution.
The dissenting opinion argued that the government was threatened by the war and that making the notes legal tender provided the government with the necessary supplies to continue to fight the war.
The majority opinion affirmed that the government holds the power to wage war but that making notes legal tender was not a necessary consequence of that power. It continued that making United States Notes legal tender was unnecessary to fighting a war. All that the federal government needed to do was to make them "receivable for government dues". That argument is similar to the theory of chartalism.
The majority opinion was explicitly overruled by Knox v. Lee and other Legal Tender Cases, , in which Chase dissented.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 75
 West v. Barnes: an early Supreme Court case on banknotes
Further reading
External links
 Summary of Hepburn v. Griswold at Teogatha Law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:1870 in United States case law
Category:Banknotes of the United States
Category:History of Louisville, Kentucky
"""

From "Herbert v. Shanley Co." ==> """
Herbert v. Shanley Co., 242 U.S. 591 (1917), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held hotels and restaurants that perform music must compensate composers, even if the venue is not separately charging patrons to hear the music..
The decision legitimized ASCAP, a group founded to collect license fees from businesses that wanted to play performance recordings by its members.
Because this case determined that playing music at the restaurants was an indirect way of profiting from the copyrighted music, it raised the question of what sort of indirect use would be too indirect to constitute infringement. Broadly speaking, this question was not anticipated by the Copyright Act and judges considered this a thorny problem. Nevertheless, courts made decisions indicating that commercial radio broadcasts and uses in advertising were sufficiently direct.
 References 
External links
Category:1917 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "Hernandez v. Commissioner" ==> """
Hernandez v. Commissioner, 490 U.S. 680 (1989), is a decision of the United States Supreme Court.  relating to the Internal Revenue Code § 170 charitable contribution deduction.TaxAlmanac - Internal Revenue Code:Sec. 170. Charitable, etc., contributions and gifts 
 Facts 
The Church of Scientology, founded by L. Ron Hubbard, teaches that an immortal spiritual being exists inside everyone. The Church uses the "auditing" practice to help interested people become aware of this spiritual being.  The Church uses the "training" courses to help participants to become auditors.  The Church charges for those services due to the belief that, any time a person receives something, that person must pay something back in return.Hernandez, 490 U.S. at 685.  The income generated by those services constitutes the Church's primary source of income.
The taxpayers made payments to branch churches in exchange for auditing or training services.  The taxpayers tried to deduct these payments on their Federal Income Tax returns under the charitable contribution deduction.
 Issue 
Whether taxpayers may deduct payments to the Church of Scientology for auditing and training as a charitable contribution under IRC §170?
 Holding 
The payments for auditing or training sessions do not satisfy the "contribution[s] or gift[s]" inquiry necessary for deductibility under IRC §170 because it amounted to a quid pro quo for the taxpayer. In other words, the taxpayer received a benefit in consideration for his contribution.
 Reasoning 
Justice Thurgood Marshall began the majority opinion with a discussion of the legislative history of the "contribution or gift" limitation as described in IRC §170(c). When the tax bill was enacted in 1954, Congress distinguished between unrequited payments and payments made in return for goods and services.  Specifically, the gift characterization was deemed to only apply "if there were no expectation of any quid pro quo..."Hernandez, 490 U.S. at 690.  In later decisions, the quid pro quo analysis was expanded to also apply to charitable contributions..
Hernandez and other taxpayers argued that the quid pro quo determination did not apply to this situation because the benefit they were receiving through the auditing and training was purely religious. The Court emphasized that IRC §170(c) clearly states that donations to religious organizations are only deductible if they are contributions or gifts, regardless of the expectations underlying the payments.  The Court hesitated to broaden the scope of the deduction to any payments designed to achieve a religious benefit, since that could open the door to deductions such as those for parochial school tuition or payments to church-affiliated hospitals.  The Court noted that refraining from characterizing the services provided by religious institutions prevented the government - the IRS and court system - from effectively monitoring the practices of a church.
 Dissent 
Justice O'Connor and Justice Scalia disagreed with the majority opinion. The opinion noted that there have been no instances where the IRS has previously denied deductibility on a quid pro quo basis even though the benefit was entirely spiritual or religious. Because of the difficulty in putting a dollar value on intangible religious benefits, the Government had, up until this case, chosen to ignore the quid pro quo argument and allow these deductions.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 490
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 Scientology and the legal system
References
Further reading
External links
Category:Scientology litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1989 in United States case law
"""

From "Hernandez v. New York" ==> """
Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352 (1991), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court, which held that a prosecutor may dismiss jurors who are bilingual in Spanish and English from juries that will consider Spanish-language testimony.
Peremptory challenges are used to remove jurors thought to be undesirable for virtually any reason by either side in a court case. However, in Batson v. Kentucky (1986), the Supreme Court ruled that peremptory challenges may not be used to remove jurors because of their race. In Hernandez, the Supreme Court had to decide whether the peremptory exclusion of two Hispanic jurors was tantamount to exclusion because of race—and therefore violated the Equal Protection Clause of the United States Constitution.The case is recognized as expanding a Batson challenge to a peremptory strike based on a juror's ethnicity.U.S. v. Fuentes-Montijo, 68 F.3d 352, 354-55 (9th Cir. 1995)
 Procedural history of the case 
Dinosio Hernandez was convicted by a jury of attempted murder on January 30, 1987, in New York Supreme Court.People v. Hernandez, 140 A.D.2d 543 (N.Y. App. Div. 1988). He appealed his conviction, claiming that under the U.S. Supreme Court's recent decision under Batson v. Kentucky,Batson v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79 (1986). the prosecutor unconstitutionally used peremptory strikes against jury panel members who had Hispanic last names. On appeal, the court found that because the prosecutor had only challenged the three potential jurors with Hispanic surnames.Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352, 358 (1991). However, the appellate court found the prosecutor has a nondiscriminatory reason for the challenge because the stricken jurors either had a relative prosecuted by the district attorney's office or spoke Spanish and may not accept the translated testimony as final.
Hernandez proceeded with his Batson claim and appealed to the New York Court of Appeals.People v. Hernandez, 75 N.Y.2d 350 (N.Y. 1990) New York's highest court of appeals agreed with the appellate court that Hernandez made a prima facie case of discrimination.People v. Hernandez, 75 N.Y.2d 350, 353 (N.Y. 1990). The court did not find that striking a juror based on their language alone was reversible error as it was a "legitimate neutral ground" for the prosecutor to be concerned of the Spanish-speaking jurors fidelity to a translate court record.People v. Hernandez, 75 N.Y.2d 350, 356 (N.Y. 1990). The majority noted that the trial judge was present during the entirety of the questioning and was satisfied with the prosecutor's actions as the stricken jurors' body-language signaled doubt.
Judge Kaye authored the dissent, criticizing the majority for the diminished protections of Batson for New York and for deciding the case on federal and not state law.People v. Hernandez, 75 N.Y.2d 350, 360 (N.Y. 1990) (Kaye, J., dissenting). Rather than allow Batson's contours be defined over decades of litigation, Kaye argued that deciding the matter on state law would allow clearer protections earlier for New York residents. On the merits, Kaye believed too much deference was provided to the trial court's decision and was concerned that while the prosecutor expressed an interest in removing Spanish-speakers because of the interpreter there was no indication that any non-Latino jurors were asked if they spoke Spanish as well.People v. Hernandez, 75 N.Y.2d 350, 363 (N.Y. 1990) (Kaye, J., dissenting).
The Supreme Court granted a writ of certiorari to determine if a Latino juror struck from jury service because of their Spanish language in a court translated proceeding violated a defendant's Batson protections.People v. Hernandez, 75 N.Y.2d 350 (N.Y. 1990), cert. granted, Hernandez v. New York, 111 S. Ct. 242 (1990) (No. 89-7645).
 Arguments at the Supreme Court 
 Amicus curiae 
The Mexican American Legal Defense and Education Fund (MALDEF) filed an amicus curiae on behalf of Hernandez.Brief for the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund et. al. as Amici Curiae in Support of Petitioner, Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352 (1991) (No. 89-7645) 1990 WL 10013132. MALDEF's argument focused on the wide usage of Spanish by Hispanics and the sociolinguistic evidence that supported Hispanics as living in a world where they are constantly required to switch between Spanish and English without the ability to turn off the ability to speak either.Brief for the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund et. al. as Amici Curiae in Support of Petitioner at *6-10, Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352 (1991) (No. 89-7645) 1990 WL 10013132.  It forecast that Hispanic jurors would become an "endangered species" if they are presumed to be biased, based on a common attribute.Brief for the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund et. al. as Amici Curiae in Support of Petitioner at *16, Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352 (1991) (No. 89-7645) 1990 WL 10013132.
 Oral argument 
At oral argument, Hernandez argued that it is a per se Batson violation to discriminate on language.Transcript of Oral Argument at 4, Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352 (1991) (No. 89-7645). Hernandez believed that every bilingual juror would express the same hesitance that the striked jurors in his case would because of their language ability. The Court was concerned with line drawing issues of potential multiple dialects or languages for a given foreign country and if a prosecutor could ever use a peremptory strike against a bilingual juror.
New York argued that Hernandez's position was against Supreme Court jurisprudence for three main reasons: it uses the juror's answer as proof of a prosecutor's intent to discriminate, it prevents individualized assessment of jurors in favor of group stereotypes, and it would create no ability for prosecutors to excuse certain jurors.Transcript of Oral Argument at *26-27, Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352 (1991) (No. 89-7645).
 Plurality decision 
Justice Kennedy wrote the plurality opinion. After outlining the facts of the case and procedural history of the case, the Court moved on to the Court's jurisprudence on Batson. It reiterated Batson's three step process: first, a defendant must make a prima facie case of racial discrimination, second, if it is made the burden shifts to the prosecutor to make a race-neutral showing for the strike, and finally the trial judge make a determination if the defendant's claim stands.Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352, 358-59 (1991). Even though Hernandez did not make a prima facie showing before the prosecutor presented a race-neutral reasoning, the Court found this did not impact the analysis because it rested with the trial judge's determination.
The Court side-stepped Hernandez's argument on the correlation between Spanish-speaking ability and ethnicity because of the additional factors the prosecutor articulated in his reasoning for striking the two Latino jurors.Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352, 360-61 (1991). Kennedy argued that even assuming all bilingual speakers would hesitate it did not fail a race-neutral analysis because it does not show an intent by the prosecutor to remove all bilingual Latinos and a negative impact does not violate race neutrality.Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352, 362-63 (1991).
The trial court's decision is afforded a high level of deference under Batson, and the Court assumed that the trial judge took into account the case-specific factors in making the decision to accept the prosecutor's justification: the high concentration of Spanish speakers in the local population, Spanish as the predominant language for many in that region, the ethnic backgrounds of the parties and witnesses, and the prosecutor's swift justification. This level of deference was based on a trial judge's ability to decide credibility questions that cannot be reviewed solely through the record on the appeal.Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352, 363-66 (1991). The plurality did not find any reason that the trial judge's decision presented a clear error and was a permissible view under the evidence.
In a closing dicta discussion, the plurality cited linguistic studies noting the complexity of language and bilingual distinctions. It further counseled that excluding bilinguals is unwise and may be unconstitutional under a different set of facts. Specifically, Kennedy outlined that creating a blanket policy regardless of the case's specific facts or for particular ethnic groups in certain communities language could be treated similarly to skin color under Batson. However, this was not that case.Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352, 370-72 (1991).
 Concurrence 
Justices O'Connor and Scalia concurred in the plurality's judgement. O'Connor agreed with the plurality's deference to the trial court's decision, but believed it went too far in deciding the constitutional question.Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352, 372 (1991) (O'Connor, J., concurring). After outlining the Court's jurisprudence under Batson and Washington v. Davis, O'Connor limited the Equal Protection Clause analysis for racial discrimination to race only. "No matter how closely tied or significantly correlated to race . . . [it] does not implicate the Equal Protection Clause unless it is based on race."Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352, 375 (1991) (O'Connor, J., concurring). O'Connor reasoned that if a trial judge accepted a prosecutor's nonracial explanation, then there was nothing more for an appeals court to decide on a Batson claim.
 Dissent 
Justice Stevens dissented and Justice Marshall joined. Under Batson, Stevens argued that a prosecutor who attempts to rebut a prima facie showing of discrimination must do so with "'legitimate reasons' that are 'related to the particular case to be tried.'"Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352, 376 (1991) (Stevens, J., dissenting). Stevens found the Court erred by allowing an illegitimate explanation for the prosecutor's actions that went to the heart of Batson's protections of the Fourteenth Amendment.Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352, 377 (1991) (Stevens, J., dissenting). Further, Stevens found that the prosecutor's justification would disproportionately affect Spanish-speaking jurors, alternatives were available to address the prosecutor's concerns, and his reasoning should be viewed skeptically because he did not use a for cause challenge.Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352, 379 (1991) (Stevens, J., dissenting).
Justice Blackmun dissented in a separate statement agreeing with Justice Stevens' dissent on the prosecutor's insufficient explanation for dispelling an inference of racial animus.Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352, 375 (1991) (Blackmun, J., dissenting).
 Criticism of the decision 
The decision received immediate attention with a New York Times article that broke down the arguments and the court's reasoning. Law professors were also skeptical of the decision and its implications. Professor Juan Perea argued that the interconnection between race and language is not properly addressed and that the Supreme Court should have found the prosecutor's peremptory strikes not race-neutral.Juan F. Perea, Hernandez v. New York: Courts, Prosecutors, and the Fear of Spanish, 21 Hofstra L. Rev. 1, 3-5 (1992). Professor Deborah Ramirez highlighted that this decision could permit bilinguals to systematically be removed from juries and the pervasiveimpact that may have on Latinos.Deborah A. Ramierz, Excluded Voices: The Disenfranchisement of Ethnic Groups from Jury Service, 1993 Wis. L. Rev. 761, 762-63 (1993). Professor Alfredo Mirandé furthered this research on "bilingualism as an immutable characteristic" under Fourteenth Amendment Equal Protection Doctrine and noted lower courts had expanded the Supreme Court's reasoning to allow peremptory challenges when a juror understands a foreign language when the translation is disputed at trial.Alfredo Mirande, "Now that I Speak English, no me Dejan Hablar [I'm not Allowed to Speak']": The Implications of Hernandez v. New York, 18 Chicano-Latino L. Rev. 115, 147 n.187 (1996) (citing Pemberthy v. Beyer, 19 F.3d 857, 858 (3rd Cir. 1994)).
The Supreme Court has not revisited the question of potential discrimination towards bilingual or multilingual jurors since which has created confusion for lower courts. An examination of twenty years after Hernandez v. New York in California courts found the case's reasoning to be "an arbitrary and flawed tool" but California courts were hesitant to rule contrary.Farida Ali, Multilingual Prosepective Jurors: Assessing California Standards Twenty Years After Hernandez v. New York, 8 Nw. J.L. & Soc. Pol'y 236 (2013). This has left open the question of how the Court would rule if non-Latinos who spoke Spanish were allowed to remain in a jury while Spanish speaking Latinos were struck because of their language ability. Professor Mirandé notes that Latinos across the board are hurt, monolingual Spanish speakers are barred because they lack English while bilingual jurors are struck because they know too much Spanish. He continues that instead bilingual Spanish speakers should be wanted by the court to play an important check on court translations. Another commentator has argued the courts should embrace more bilingualism because of the benefits it provides to the legal system as the Hernandez dissent discussed.Jayesh M. Rathod, The Transformative Potential of Attorney Bilingualism, 46 Univ. Mich. J. Law Reform 863, 895-898 (2013).
 Aftermath of the decision 
Five years later, the Supreme Court cited to Hernandez v. New York as outlining the Batson steps and what met the "legitimate reason" standard for a prosecutor to strike a juror.Purkett v. Elem, 514 U.S. 765, 767-70 (1995). With the Supreme Court limiting the protections of Batson, states may be able to protect them on a state constitutional basis.Andrew McGuire, Peremptory Exclusion of Spanish-Speaking Jurors: Could Hernandez v. New York Happen Here, 23 N.M. L. Rev. 467, 472-73 (1993). Today, the case is understood to expand the Equal Protection Clause's protections of an unbiased jury to apply to ethnic origin alongside Batson's protections for race.U.S. v. Martinez-Salazar, 528 U.S. 304, 315 (2000).
In a habeas corpus case, the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit acknowledged the close connection between language and race noting Kennedy remarked how language can lead to discrimination.Pemberthy v. Beyer, 19 F.3d 857, 869-70 (3d Cir. 1994). However, it found language did not meet the same "heightened" or "strict" scrutiny that race and gender under equal protection doctrine. The Third Circuit did outline that Latino jurors could not be struck because of the theoretical use of Spanish and placed a greater burden on trial judges to be "sensitive to the potential use of language-based peremptories for discriminatory purposes."Pemberthy v. Beyer, 19 F.3d 857, 872-73 (3d Cir. 1994).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 500
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
Hernandez v. Texas (1954)
Further reading
 Montoya, M. (2000). Silence and Silencing: Their Centripetal and Centrifugal Forces in Legal Communication, Pedagogy and Discourse. Michigan Journal of Race & Law. Vol 5:847-911.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Batson challenge case law
Category:1991 in United States case law
"""

From "Hernandez v. Texas" ==> """
Hernandez v. Texas, 347 U.S. 475 (1954), was a landmark case, "the first and only Mexican-American civil-rights case heard and decided by the United States Supreme Court during the post-World War II period." In a unanimous ruling, the court held that Mexican Americans and all other nationality groups in the United States have equal protection under the 14th Amendment of the U.S. Constitution.. The ruling was written by Chief Justice Earl Warren. This was the first case in which Mexican-American lawyers had appeared before the Supreme Court.
Background
Peter Hernandez, a Mexican-American agricultural worker, was convicted for the 1951 murder of Cayetano “Joe” Espinosa, a man that he shot in cold blood at a bar in Edna, Texas. Hernandez's  pro bono legal team, including Gustavo C. García, appealed the ruling, arguing that he was being discriminated against because there were no Mexicans in the jury that convicted him. They hoped to challenge what they described as "the systematic exclusion of persons of Mexican origin from all types of jury duty in at least seventy counties in Texas." They argued that Hernandez had the right to be tried by a jury of his peers under the 14th Amendment, but at the time, the 14th Amendment was a special civil rights protection intended for Black citizens. The State of Texas denied their claim, on the grounds that Mexicans were White and the 14th Amendment did not protect White nationality groups.
Hernandez's legal team appealed, claiming that Mexican Americans, although White, were treated as a class apart and subject to social discrimination in Jackson County, where the case had been tried, and therefore were deserving of 14th Amendment protection. Their task was then to prove that Mexicans were being discriminated and were excluded from the grand jury and jury. The State of Texas never officially barred Mexicans from jury service, but Hernandez's defense lawyers demonstrated that, although numerous Mexican Americans were citizens and had otherwise qualified for jury duty in Jackson County, during the previous 25 years no Mexican Americans (or, more precisely, no one with a Hispanic surname) were among the 6,000 persons chosen to serve on juries. This resulted in Hernandez having been deprived of equal protection of the law under the Fourteenth Amendment, as juries were restricted by ethnicity.
They appealed to the United States Supreme Court through a writ of certiorari.. The legal team included García, Carlos Cadena and John J. Herrera of the League of United Latin American Citizens, and James DeAnda and Cris Alderete of the G. I. Forum, both activist groups for civil rights for Mexican Americans. These were the first Mexican-American lawyers to represent a defendant before the US Supreme Court, which heard their arguments on January 11, 1954.
Ruling
Chief Justice Earl Warren and the rest of the Supreme Court unanimously ruled in favor of Hernandez, and required he be retried by a jury composed without discrimination against Mexican Americans.
The court omitted the focus of race by declaring that other factors influence whether or not a group may need constitutional protection. To determine if discriminatory factors were present in Jackson County, the court investigated the treatment of Mexican Americans. They discovered a county-wide distinction between "white" and "Mexican" persons. At least one restaurant prominently displayed a sign that declared, "No Mexicans Served." Additionally, until a few years earlier, some Mexican American children attended segregated schools and were forced to drop out by fifth or sixth grade. These factors led the Supreme Court to their ultimate ruling that the Fourteenth Amendment protects persons beyond the racial classes of white or black, and extends protection to nationality groups of white race as well.
Influence 
The ruling was an extension of protection in the Civil Rights Movement to nationality groups within the country and an acknowledgement that, in certain times and places, groups other than blacks (African Americans) could be discriminated against. The ultimate effect of this ruling was that the protection of the 14th Amendment was ruled to cover any national or ethnic groups of the United States for which discrimination could be proved.
The oral arguments of this case have been lost. However, the United States Supreme Court docket sheet and letter from Justice Clark to Chief Justice regarding joining opinion are available online.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 347
Jury trial
References
Further reading
External links
Hernandez v. State of Texas case, University of Texas School of Law archive
A Class Apart , American Experience, PBS - A landmark civil rights case. The little-known story of the Mexican American lawyers who took Hernandez v. Texas to the Supreme Court, challenging Jim Crow-style discrimination. Aired on PBS on February 23, 2009.
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:History of Latino civil rights
Category:1954 in United States case law
Category:United States equal protection and criminal procedure case law
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
Category:Legal history of Texas
"""

From "Herrera v. Collins" ==> """
Herrera v. Collins, 506 U.S. 390 (1993), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States ruled by 6 votes to 3 that a claim of actual innocence does not entitle a petitioner to federal habeas corpus relief by way of the Eighth Amendment's ban on cruel and unusual punishment.
Background
On September 29, 1981, Texas Department of Public Safety Officer David Rucker was shot and killed along a stretch of highway a few miles north of Brownsville, Texas in the Rio Grande Valley. Rucker's body, discovered by a passerby, was lying beside his patrol car. He had been shot in the head. Around the same time, Los Fresnos police officer Enrique Carrisalez observed a speeding vehicle traveling on the same road away from where Rucker's body had been found. Carrisalez and his civilian friend, Enrique Hernandez, turned on the patrol car's flashing red lights and pursued the vehicle, which pulled over. Carrisalez took a flashlight and walked toward the car. The driver of the vehicle opened his door and exchanged words with Carrisalez before firing at least one shot at Carrisalez's chest. He died eight days later on October 7, 1981. Former U.S. Navy and Vietnam veteran Leonel Torres Herrera (September 17, 1947 – May 12, 1993) was arrested and was charged with the capital murder of both Carrisalez and Rucker.
Before he died, Carrisalez also identified Herrera as the person who shot him from a single photograph shown to him in the hospital. The license plate of the vehicle from which the gunman emerged was traced back to Herrera's live-in girlfriend, a car that local law officers knew Herrera drove on occasion. Carrisalez's civilian friend, Enrique Hernandez, testified that only one person was in the car when Carrisalez was shot.
Other evidence showed that Herrera's Social Security card had been found alongside Rucker's patrol car on the night he was killed. Splatters of blood on the car identified by Carrisalez's friend as the vehicle involved in the shootings were found to be type A blood, the same as Rucker's. Blood on Herrera's pants and wallet was likewise discovered to be type A. Last, a handwritten letter was found on Herrera when he was arrested which "strongly implied" that he had killed Rucker.
Herrera became the prime suspect in Hidalgo County - Precinct 3 Deputy Constable Ricky Lewis's murder on February 17, 1979, after law enforcement found Constable Lewis's stolen duty weapon during a search of Herrera's home. However, he was never charged with Constable Lewis's murder because he was only convicted of Officers Rucker and Carrisalez's murders.
Trial
In January 1982, Herrera was tried for the murder of Carrisalez.  At the trial, Carrisalez' partner identified Herrera as the person who shot Carrisalez.  The jury found Herrera guilty of the capital murder of Carrisalez, for which he was sentenced to death. Later that year, Herrera pleaded guilty to the murder of Rucker.
Writ of habeas corpus
Herrera filed a petition for writ of habeas corpus in federal court, claiming that new evidence demonstrated he was actually innocent of the murder of Carrisalez.  Herrera included two affidavits with his petition from Hector Villarreal, an attorney who had represented Herrera's brother, Raul Herrera, Sr., and Juan Franco Palacious, Raul Herrera's former cellmate. Both affidavits claimed that Raul Herrera, who was murdered in 1984, had told them that he had killed Rucker and Carrisalez.  Leonel Herrera claimed that the new evidence showed that he was actually innocent, and that executing an innocent person would constitute cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the Eighth Amendment.
The decision
Two questions were presented for the Supreme Court's review:
 Do the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments permit a state to execute an individual who is innocent of the crime for which he or she was convicted and sentenced to death?
What post-conviction procedures are necessary to protect against the execution of an innocent person?
Rehnquist's majority opinion
Chief Justice William Rehnquist’s majority opinion held that a claim of actual innocence based on newly discovered evidence did not state a ground for federal habeas relief.  Herrera had claimed that, because the new evidence demonstrated innocence, his execution would violate the Eighth Amendment’s ban on cruel and unusual punishment which applied to the states through the Fourteenth Amendment.  Rehnquist’s opinion noted that “[f]ew rulings would be more disruptive of our federal system than to provide for federal habeas review of freestanding claims of actual innocence.” Rehnquist’s opinion, although not explicitly holding that the Eighth Amendment does not prohibit executing an innocent person, emphasized that Herrera was not raising a constitutional violation.  In discussing what relief Herrera would be entitled to were he to succeed on his claim of “actual innocence,” Rehnquist wrote:
Were petitioner to satisfy the dissent's ‘probable innocence’ standard…the District Court would presumably be required to grant a conditional order of relief, which would in effect require the State to retry petitioner 10 years after his first trial, not because of any constitutional violation which had occurred at the first trial, but simply because of a belief that in light of petitioner's new-found evidence a jury might find him not guilty at a second trial.
Rehnquist’s opinion also held that Texas courts’ refusal to even consider Herrera’s newly discovered evidence did not violate due process and suggested that Herrera file a clemency petition with the Texas Board of Pardon and Paroles.
O'Connor's concurring opinion
Justice O'Connor wrote a concurring opinion.  Although she joined the majority opinion, in her concurring opinion, O'Connor wrote that "the execution of a legally and factually innocent person would be a constitutionally intolerable event."  Dispositive for Justice O'Connor, however, was that "[Herrera was] not innocent in any sense of the word."  O'Connor took the position that Herrera could not be "legally and factually innocent" because he "was tried before a jury of his peers, with the full panoply of protections that our Constitution affords criminal defendants. At the conclusion of that trial, the jury found [Herrera] guilty beyond a reasonable doubt."  O'Connor reiterated the majority's conclusion that the execution of an innocent person was not unconstitutional by assuming that there was no constitutional issue raised:
Consequently, the issue before us is not whether a State can execute the innocent. It is, as the Court notes, whether a fairly convicted and therefore legally guilty person is constitutionally entitled to yet another judicial proceeding in which to adjudicate his guilt anew, 10 years after conviction, notwithstanding his failure to demonstrate that constitutional error infected his trial.
O'Connor concluded by asserting that the majority did not hold that the Constitution permits the execution of an actually innocent person.
Scalia's concurring opinion
Antonin Scalia joined the majority, but added in passing that he found no basis, either in the Constitution or in case law, to conclude that executing an innocent but duly convicted defendant would violate the Eighth Amendment. He sharply criticized the dissenting justices' appeal to conscience:
If the system that has been in place for 200 years (and remains widely approved) "shocks" the dissenters' consciences … perhaps they should doubt the calibration of their consciences, or, better still, the usefulness of "conscience shocking" as a legal test.
Blackmun's dissent
Justice Blackmun, joined by Justices Stevens and Souter, dissented.  Blackmun believed that "[n]othing could be more contrary to contemporary standards of decency or more shocking to the conscience than to execute a person who is actually innocent."  Blackmun would have remanded the case to the district court for a determination as to whether a hearing should be held and to resolve the merits of Herrera's claim of actual innocence.
Chastising the majority for its circumspection, Blackmun wrote, "We really are being asked to decide whether the Constitution forbids the execution of a person who has been validly convicted and sentenced, but who, nonetheless, can prove his innocence with newly discovered evidence," and he took note of "the State of Texas' astonishing protestation to the contrary."
Blackmun argued that the majority's concern with a new trial being less reliable than the original trial missed the point.  The question was not whether a new trial would be more reliable than the first trial; it was whether, in light of the new evidence, the first trial was sufficiently reliable to allow the State to execute Herrera.  Blackmun would have held that in order to be entitled to relief, a death-sentenced inmate should have to be able to demonstrate that he is probably actually innocent; Blackmun distinguished this from the lower standard of probable reasonable doubt, which is applied to procedural default issues.
Subsequent history
Four months after the Court's ruling, Herrera was executed.  His last words were: "I am innocent, innocent, innocent. . . . I am an innocent man, and something very wrong is taking place tonight."
See also
 List of people executed in Texas, 1990–1999
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 506
References
External links
False justice
Executing the Innocent
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:Capital punishment in Texas
Category:1993 in United States case law
"""

From "Herrera v. Wyoming" ==> """
Herrera v. Wyoming, No. 17-532, 587 U.S. ___ (2019), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that Wyoming's statehood did not void the Crow Tribe's right to hunt on "unoccupied lands of the United States" under an 1868 treaty, and that the Bighorn National Forest did not automatically become "occupied" when the forest was created..
 Background 
In January 2014 Clayvin Herrera, a member of the Crow Tribe of Indians, along with several other members of his tribe, followed a group of Rocky Mountain elk from the Crow reservation in Montana into Bighorn National Forest in Wyoming. There, they shot three elk, taking them home for food. Wyoming officials cited Herrera and his companions for hunting out of season, a violation of state law.
Herrera's two companions both pleaded guilty to the poaching charges and paid the fines that Wyoming imposed.
Herrera, however, argued that their hunt was lawful, citing the Treaty of Fort Laramie, which allowed them to hunt on "unoccupied lands".
Wyoming disagreed, arguing that Herrera's claim had been invalidated by the Supreme Court 120 years prior, in Ward v. Race Horse. There, the Court held that Wyoming's admission into the Union had superseded the rights of Indians to hunt there,. because it had joined the Union "on the same footing" as the other states, giving it control over the natural resources within its border.
 Case 
The Supreme Court accepted the case to answer the question:
In a 5 to 4 decision, the split Court ruled that Wyoming's admission did not abrogate the Indians' rights.
The majority opinion was authored by Sotomayor, joined by Ginsburg, Breyer, Kagan, and Gorsuch. The dissenters were Roberts, Thomas, Alito, and Kavanaugh.
 References 
External links
 Who gets to hunt Wyoming's elk? Tribal Hunting Rights, U.S. Law and the Bannock 'War' of 1895
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court criminal cases
Category:Crow tribe
Category:Bighorn National Forest
Category:United States Native American treaty case law
Category:Native American history of Wyoming
Category:United States Native American case law
"""

From "Herring v. United States" ==> """
Herring v. United States, 555 U.S. 135 (2009), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States on January 14, 2009. The court decided that the good-faith exception to the exclusionary rule applies when a police officer makes an arrest based on an outstanding warrant in another jurisdiction, but the information regarding that warrant is later found to be incorrect because of a negligent error by that agency..
Background
The evolution of the exclusionary rule
"The Fourth Amendment contains no provision expressly precluding the use of evidence obtained in violation of its commands,". but in Weeks v. United States (1914) and Mapp v. Ohio (1961), the Supreme Court created the exclusionary rule, which generally operates to suppress – i.e. prevent the introduction at trial of – evidence obtained in violation of Constitutional rights. "Suppression of evidence, however, has always been [the court's] last resort, not [its] first impulse. The exclusionary rule generates substantial social costs, which sometimes include setting the guilty free and the dangerous at large." (quoting Leon, 468 U.S. at 907) (internal quotation marks omitted). In United States v. Leon, the Supreme Court clarified that the exclusionary rule "operates as a judicially created remedy designed to safeguard Fourth Amendment rights generally through its deterrent effect, rather than a personal constitutional right of the party aggrieved."Leon, 468 U.S. at 906 (quoting  (internal quotation marks omitted)).  Application of the rule should be sensitive to this purpose, the court said: If suppression "does not result in appreciable deterrence," the court had said, "its use ... is unwarranted."Leon, 468 U.S. at 909 (quoting  (internal quotation mark omitted)). 
Thus, for example, in Leon itself, the court concluded that the fruits of a search based on a search warrant later found defective should not be excluded because the rule's deterrent purpose "will only rarely be served by applying it in such circumstances,"Leon, 468 U.S. at 926. and in Arizona v. Evans, the court concluded that the fruits of a search based on an arrest warrant that was no longer valid, but that was still listed in the police system because of an error by the issuing court's clerk, should not be excluded because such exclusion would have no deterrent effect.See .
The beginnings of the Herring case
Bennie Herring drove to the Coffee County, Alabama, sheriff's department to check on a pickup truck that had been impounded. Mark Anderson, an investigator with the Coffee County Sheriff's Department, asked the department's warrant clerk to check for any outstanding warrants; the warrant clerk in the neighboring Dale County Sheriff's Department was contacted, and advised that there was an outstanding warrant. Within fifteen minutes, the Dale County clerk called back to warn the Coffee County sheriff's department that there had been a clerical mistake: the warrant had been recalled five months prior. But it was too late; Anderson had already arrested Herring and searched his vehicle, discovering firearms and methamphetamine.
Herring was indicted in the United States District Court for the Middle District of Alabama for violations of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1) (felon in possession of a firearm) and 21 U.S.C. § 844(a) (possession of a controlled substance, viz. methamphetamine) and invoked the exclusionary rule to have both the firearm and drug evidence suppressed. He claimed that the arrest was unlawful as a result of an invalid/recalled warrant ("failure to appear", issued by neighboring Dale County, Alabama), a motion denied by the trial court. He was convicted, and sentenced to 27 months in federal prison. The United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit affirmed, ruling—based on Leon—that the evidence was admissible because the mistake was made by the Dale County officials, not the Coffee County police. Because the error was corrected in a very short time, there was no evidence that the Dale County Sheriff's Department had problems disposing of recalled warrants, and thus no negligence could be claimed because of the lack of a pattern of disposal problems.
The Supreme Court of the United States granted certiorari on February 19, 2008. The case was argued before the Court on October 7, 2008.
Result
In a 5–4 decision hewing to Leon and Evans, the Court, speaking through Chief Justice Roberts, affirmed the trial court and the Eleventh Circuit. While noting that there had not necessarily been a constitutional violation in the case, the Court accepted for the sake of argument Herring's contention that there had been. On that stipulation, the court held that the exclusionary rule did not apply to a search that resulted from isolated and attenuated police negligence, holding that "[t]o trigger the exclusionary rule, police conduct must be sufficiently deliberate that exclusion can meaningfully deter it, and sufficiently culpable that such deterrence is worth the price paid by the justice system." Suppression was unwarranted because an error in recordkeeping—not flagrant or deliberate misconduct—led to Herring's arrest. The Court also warned that it was not "suggest[ing] that all recordkeeping errors by the police are immune from the exclusionary rule. ...  If the police have been shown to be reckless in maintaining a warrant system, or to have knowingly made false entries to lay the groundwork for future false arrests, exclusion would certainly be justified under our cases should such misconduct cause a Fourth Amendment violation." Nevertheless, in the case at bar, "the [police] conduct at issue was not so objectively culpable as to require exclusion." "[W]hen police mistakes are the result of negligence such as that described here, rather than systemic error or reckless disregard of constitutional requirements," the Chief Justice wrote, "any marginal deterrence does not 'pay its way.'" 
Justice Ginsburg dissented, joined by Justices Stevens, Souter, and Breyer. She wrote that "the exclusionary rule provides redress for Fourth Amendment violations by placing the government in the position it would have been in had there been no unconstitutional arrest and search. The rule thus strongly encourages police compliance with the Fourth Amendment in the future." The prosecution had contested the unlawful case in court because of contraband found on Herring's person and in his vehicle, but, Ginsburg wrote, narrowing the scope of the exclusionary rule would most typically hurt innocent persons who are wrongfully arrested.
Reaction
Writing shortly after the decision, SCOTUSblog author Tom Goldstein stated that the decision was of "surpassing significance"; but law professor and Fourth Amendment expert Orin Kerr suggested Goldstein was reading too much into the case, writing that Herring was best seen as "a narrow and interstitial decision, not one that is rocking the boat. ... I don't see it as suggesting a general good faith exception for police conduct ... [which is] why the dissenters didn't sound the alarm...." Around two weeks later, The New York Times''' Adam Liptak expressed concern that the decision was a step towards overruling Mapp.
Eight years later, a 2017 paper in the Journal of Criminal Law & Criminology concluded that "Herring'' invited evidence laundering by police and laid the groundwork for judicial approval of this practice", based on a case law examination of how state courts and lower federal courts had applied the Supreme Court decision since 2009.
 See also 
Fruit of the poisonous tree
Parallel construction
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 555
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Transcript of oral argument before the Supreme Court (PDF)
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:Coffee County, Alabama
"""

From "Hertz Corp. v. Friend" ==> """
Hertz Corp. v. Friend, 559 U.S. 77 (2010), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court supported the "nerve center" test for determining corporate citizenship in the context of 28 U.S.C. § 1332. Hertz Corp believed that the case brought forward could not be tried in California jurisdiction and therefore hoped a case in a California court would be thrown out.  However, the state court ruled that there was California jurisdiction that was appropriate and re-established the importance of the "place of operations" test for firms..  The Supreme Court overruled but cautioned that the corporate headquarters will not be considered the principal place of business if it is not the actual center of direction, control, and coordination, such as if it were “simply an office where the corporation holds its board meetings."
Background
In September 2007, respondents Melinda Friend and John Nhieu, both citizens of California, sued the Hertz Corporation in a California Court, seeking damages for what was claimed to be a violation of California's wage and hour laws on behalf of a number of Californians who had allegedly experienced similar damages.
Hertz petitioned to move the case to a federal court, claiming that the two parties were citizens of different states and therefore diversity-of-citizenship was relevant.  To further support this claim, Hertz provided details showing that its operations were primarily in New Jersey and that its California operations were minor and did not constitute as its principal place of business.
Initially the court ruled that California was certainly a place of major business for Hertz, since a large amount of its revenue and income came from the state, and thus declared it was liable under California jurisdiction.  However, a subsequent ruling for a case involving Best Buy declared that Best Buy was not a citizen of California, despite similar circumstances and even less overall operations in the state.  After this Hertz petitioned for a writ of Certiorari which the court granted.
Case
Hertz was responsible for proving to the court that they were, indeed, not a California citizen to be entitled to a Federal court rather than a California court.  The court therefore sought to resolve the different interpretations that the various circuit courts had given up to that point.
The difficulty of the case came in determining the scope of “principal place of business”, as the previous cases and statutes on the subject offered no concrete guidance.  Even looking at a series of historical cases, the court could not find anything conclusive.  The court could not find any compelling evidence to support either the “Nerve Center” or “Place of Operations” method and continued its deliberation.
The court eventually narrowed the two interpretations down to “nerve center” referring to the place of chief coordination of operations and “place of operations” referring to place generating the most significant revenues.  Even after this conclusive finding, the answer was still unclear.
Decision
The court decided that, although California operations were significant, they were not large enough for Hertz to be considered a California citizen; that is California was not Hertz' primary place of business generating a majority of its revenues.  Therefore, the court ruled that New Jersey was in fact the “Nerve Center” of Hertz where all its operations were headquartered, and thus it was entitled to a Federal Court through Diversity-of-Citizenship.  However, although Hertz was granted their petition successfully, the case was not over and then went on to a Federal court where the proceedings were heard and finished for the initial case.
Significance
This case established much of the protocol still used by the courts today in determining the citizenship of a corporation in diversity-of-citizenship cases.  It established a more loose code, rather than a uniform one, that examines both the “Nervous System” approach as well as the “Place of Operations” approach to reach a verdict.  This reasoning stems from the fact that all corporations are different and will have varying factors, levels of operations, and natures of headquarters that all may change its principal state of citizenship.  It is important to note that corporations can all have their own specific test to determine their citizenship.  However, it is also important to note that once a corporation has declared its citizenship to one state, it cannot make other claims in future cases of diversity-of-citizenship without severely altering either its chief place of operations or place of headquarters.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Diversity jurisdiction case law
Category:2010 in United States case law
"""

From "Hess v. Indiana" ==> """
Hess v. Indiana, 414 U.S. 105 (1973), was a United States Supreme Court case. involving the First Amendment that reaffirmed and clarified the imminent lawless action test first articulated in Brandenburg v. Ohio (1969). Hess is still cited by courts to protect speech threatening future lawless action. 
Background
The case involved an antiwar protest on the campus of Indiana University Bloomington. Between 100 and 150 protesters were in the streets. The sheriff and his deputies then proceeded to clear the streets of the protestors. As the sheriff was passing Gregory Hess, one of the members of the crowd, Hess uttered, "We'll take the fucking street later" or "We'll take the fucking street again." Hess was convicted in Indiana state court of disorderly conduct.
Decision
The Supreme Court reversed Hess's conviction because Hess' statement, at worst, "amounted to nothing more than advocacy of illegal action at some indefinite future time." In contrast to such an indefinite future time, the Court emphasized the word imminent in the "imminent lawless action" test of Brandenburg. Because the evidence did not show that Hess' speech was intended and likely to produce "imminent disorder", the state could not punish Hess' speech.Hess, 414 U.S. at 108-109.
In addition, Hess' speech was not directed at any particular person or group. As a result, "it cannot be said that he was advocating, in the normal sense, any action." For similar reasons, Hess' speech also could not be considered "fighting words" under Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire (1942).Hess, 414 U.S. at 107-109
See also
Clear and present danger
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 414
Shouting fire in a crowded theater
Abrams v. United States, 
Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 
Dennis v. United States, 
Feiner v. New York, 
Kunz v. New York, 
Masses Publishing Co. v. Patten, 244 F. 535 (S.D.N.Y. 1917)
Schenck v. United States, 
Terminiello v. Chicago, 
Whitney v. California, 
References
Further reading
External links
 Thomson Reuters blog post: TODAY IN 1973: SUPREME COURT EXPANDS FREE SPEECH IN HESS V. INDIANA
Category:1973 in United States case law
Category:Illegal speech in the United States
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Hess v. Pawloski" ==> """
Hess v. Pawloski, 274 U.S. 352 (1927), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a statute designating the Massachusetts registrar of motor vehicles as agent for purpose of service of process for out-of-state non-resident motorists complies with the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment..
Background
Hess, a Pennsylvania resident, was involved in a car accident with Pawloski, a Massachusetts resident, while driving in Worcester, Massachusetts.
At the time of the accident, a Massachusetts statute stated that a non-resident motorist implicitly consented to the appointment of the registrar of motor vehicles to act as his agent for service of process in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and that personal service served upon the registrar was to be as valid as personal service upon the defendant, so long as a copy of the process was forwarded by registered mail to the defendant at the defendant's last known address. This legal concept of "implied consent" allowed Massachusetts to exercise jurisdiction over nonresidents who were not present in the state at the time service of process was executed upon the agent as stipulated in the statute. In the Massachusetts court, Hess appeared specially to contest jurisdiction but not answer the claim against him. His motion to dismiss was denied.
On appeal, Hess argued that the Massachusetts statute at issue in the case was an unconstitutional exercise of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts's police power in light of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, and that Massachusetts could not exercise personal jurisdiction over him because
he was not a resident of the state,
he was not personally served while in Massachusetts, and
he never consented to the appointment of an agent for service of process.
Analysis
In this decision, the Court expanded the reach of personal jurisdiction beyond rule promulgated in prior Supreme Court jurisprudence, because it suggested that non-residents are subject to a court having jurisdiction at the location of an accident. Only three exceptions to territorial jurisdiction existed: cases involving marriage status; where a party has given consent (e.g. establishing a corporation); and where the party is a resident of the state. In Hess, the court relaxed the legal rules defining consent established in Pennoyer v. Neff to include nonresidents who travel through Massachusetts using the highway system.
This decision reflected an attempt by the Court to fit the problems of an increasingly more mobile and technologically advanced society in the model of Justice Field in Pennoyer.
The Court reasoned that cars are dangerous, and that states have the power to regulate their operation in order to make highways safe. Here, the implied consent was narrowly limited to proceedings related to accidents on highways in which the non-resident is involved. The difference between a formal and informal appointment of an agent isn't substantive in relation to the Due Process Clause.
Most importantly, the statute is not hostile to the non-resident, because he is put on nearly equal footing with the resident plaintiff.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 274
References
External links
 Summary of Hess v. Pawloski at Lawnix.com
Category:1927 in United States case law
Category:United States civil procedure case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:Transportation in Worcester, Massachusetts
Category:Vehicle law
"""

From "Hess v. Port Authority Trans-Hudson Corporation" ==> """
Hess v. Port Authority Trans-Hudson Corporation, , was a United States Supreme Court case regarding the nature of "arms of the state" that are entitled to sovereign immunity under the Eleventh Amendment.Christopher Shortell, Rights, Remedies, and the Impact of State Sovereign Immunity (2008), p. 20.
The Eleventh Amendment bars suits which seek either damages or injunctive relief against a state, an "arm of the state", its instrumentalities, or its agencies. In Hess, the Court considered what constitutes an "arm of the state". The case arose from a circuit split where the Second and Third Circuits issued conflicting ruling on whether the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey was entitled to sovereign immunity.
In an opinion by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, the Court held that the Port Authority is not an "arm of the state" for purposes of the Eleventh Amendment. The Court reasoned that a judgment against the Port Authority would not be paid through by the state treaty of either New York or New Jersey. 
 References 
Category:1994 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
"""

From "Hess v. Reynolds" ==> """
Hess v. Reynolds, 113 U.S. 73 (1885), was a Supreme Court case determining whether a probate case from Michigan should be moved to federal court and, if so, which federal court should hear it. The court issued a writ of error on the judgment of the Eastern District of Michigan federal court for remanding a case back to the state court and determined that was indeed the appropriate federal court to hear the case..
Background
The plaintiff, a citizen of Missouri, prosecuted his claim in the probate court of Ionia County in western Michigan, against the estate of Warren Sherwood, deceased, of which William Reynolds had been appointed administrator. The claim was resisted and was referred to commissioners appointed by the probate judge, who reported against its allowance. The issue was appealed to the circuit court of Ionia County for a trial by jury and was moved to the circuit court of Jackson County in eastern Michigan after several years delay that the plaintiff believed that due to prejudice and local influence, he would not be able to obtain justice in the state court. 
It was argued that the case could not be moved to federal court since the original state court had already issued its decision. It was also argued that the cause should have been moved to the circuit court for the Western District of Michigan, where the case was originally filed in Ionia County instead of the [[United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan
|Eastern District]] where the case was currently pending in Jackson County.
Decision
The ruling determined that since one of the parties was from a different state, that there was federal jurisdiction to hear the dispute.
The high court also found that the language of the removal statute is that suits shall be removed into the circuit court of the district where such suits are pending. Undoubtedly this means where they are pending at the time of removal. This suit was not then pending in the Western District of Michigan but in the county of Jackson, which is in the Eastern District of that state. The court’s opinion was that the case was properly removed from the circuit court of Jackson county into the circuit court of the United States for the Eastern District of Michigan and that that court erred in remanding it. 
The judgment was reversed, with instructions to proceed in the case in federal court in the Eastern District according to law.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Michigan
Category:Diversity jurisdiction case law
+
Category:Ionia County, Michigan
"""

From "Hester v. United States" ==> """
Hester v. United States, 265 U.S. 57 (1924), is a decision by the United States Supreme Court, which established the open-fields doctrine.Hester v. United States, 265 U.S. 57-59 (1924). In an opinion written by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, the Court held that "the special protection accorded by the Fourth Amendment to the people in their 'persons, houses, papers and effects', is not extended to the open fields."Hester, 265 U.S. at 59.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 265
Katz v. United States (1967)
Oliver v. United States (1984)
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1924 in United States case law
"""

From "Hickman v. Taylor" ==> """
Hickman v. Taylor, 329 U.S. 495 (1947), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court recognized the work-product doctrine, which holds that information obtained or produced by or for attorneys in anticipation of litigation may be protected from discovery under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. The Court's decision in the case was unanimous.
Parties
Plaintiff/Petitioner
Hickman, representative of one of five deceased employees on the John M. Taylor tugboat, owned and operated by Defendant.
Abraham E. Freedman, attorney for Petitioner.
Defendant
Taylor & Anderson Towing & Lighterage Co., et al., company owning tugboat in question.
Respondent
William I. Radner, of Washington, D.C., and Samuel B. Fortenbaugh, Jr., of Philadelphia, Pa., for the defendants.
Background
State of law
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 26, a relatively recent innovation at the time this case was originally filed, granted mandatory discovery of certain documents and materials when requested. (The modern Rule 26(b)(3), protecting trial preparation materials, did not become effective until 1970.)
Facts of case
Defendant's tugboat sank in Delaware River, killing five of nine crew members, including Petitioner's decedent.
Prior history
A public hearing was held on March 4, 1943, before the United States Steamboat Inspectors, at which the four survivors were examined. This testimony was recorded and made available to all interested parties. Shortly thereafter, Fortenbaugh privately interviewed the survivors and took statements from them with an eye toward the anticipated litigation; the survivors signed these statements on March 29. Fortenbaugh also interviewed other persons believed to have some information relating to the accident and in some cases he made memoranda of what they told him. At the time when Fortenbaugh secured the statements of the survivors, representatives of two of the deceased crew members had been in communication with him. Ultimately claims were presented by representatives of all five of the deceased; four of the claims, however, were settled without litigation. The fifth claimant, petitioner herein, brought suit in a federal court under the Jones Act on November 26, 1943, naming as defendants the two tug owners, individually and as partners, and the railroad. Petitioner sought to compel production of signed statements and memoranda. Respondent granted names of those who had provided statements, but refused to produce documents. The court ordered his imprisonment, but stayed the order pending appeal. Respondent appealed to the Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, and the production order was reversed.
Procedural posture
Petitioner seeks reinstatement of order to produce documents and order of imprisonment.
Legal analysis
The issue in this case was whether the district court erred in requiring the production of documents obtained or prepared by retained counsel in anticipation of litigation absent necessity or other circumstances. The respondent refused to produce documents on the ground that they were not subject to discovery, and were protected as privileged matter obtained in preparation for litigation. Respondent argued that the interrogatory constituted "an attempt to obtain indirectly counsel's private files" and therefore production of documents would amount to revealing the litigation strategy of counsel. Petitioner countered that the deposition-discovery provisions of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure were designed to enable the parties to discover true facts and compel their disclosure wherever they may be found. Because discovery is to be granted liberally, the privilege limitation must be interpreted narrowly, as prohibiting discovery in these circumstances would aid corporate defendants against individual plaintiffs by allowing corporate defendants to retain a lawyer immediately, making all subsequently collected information unavailable to plaintiff. Individuals, on the other hand, might have to wait for some time before retaining a lawyer, making information collected before the retention of counsel available to the corporate defendant.
Discussion
According to the American work-product doctrine discovery of written materials obtained or prepared by an adversary's counsel with an eye toward litigation may not be had unless party seeking discovery can establish that relevant and non-privileged facts remain hidden in an attorney's file and where production of those facts is essential to the preparation of one's case. In light of this the district court erred in requiring the production of documents obtained or prepared by retained counsel in anticipation of litigation absent necessity or other circumstances. Petitioner's argument that protection of trial preparation materials unduly benefits corporate defendants against individual plaintiffs is not persuasive as discovery may work to the disadvantage as well as to the advantage of individual plaintiffs. While discovery should be granted liberally there are limits, such as a prohibition on discovery of bad faith discovery requests or attempts to obtain privileged material. Furthermore defendant's argument that such material is protected by attorney–client privilege is faulty because statements, memoranda, and mental impressions do not fall under such privilege because those materials do not document interaction with the client. Petitioner having been granted the list of those interviewed has full ability to consult those individuals itself or to consult the public records available on the subject. Petitioner had not showed any prejudicial effect of denying discovery. It is essential that counsel who historically are officers of the court be able to work with a certain degree of privacy free from unnecessary intrusion by opposing parties and their counsel. Consequently the "work product" of the attorney inevitably reflects the mental impressions of the attorney such that if discovery were granted much less would be written and much more would be forgotten consequently leading to inefficiency, unfairness, and sharp practices which would inevitably develop in the giving of legal advice in turn damaging the legal profession and the interests of justice and discovery. In cases of necessity turning over this information may be permissible when information is embedded in the attorney work product but only when alternate methods of acquiring the method are unavailable. Whereas in this case there is no showing of necessity or unavailability of the information elsewhere.
Notable concurring and dissenting opinions
Jackson, J., concurring.
Discovery rules may not be formulated in granting special privileges to one class of litigants, plaintiff or defendant, corporate or individual, or otherwise. Discovery is intended to afford fairness in access to information, not to make one's litigation strategy available to one's adversary. While a "battle of wits" results from confidential litigation strategies, litigation without strategy would be far more demeaning to the legal profession and would not work in the interest of justice.
Result
Judgment/disposition
Circuit court reversal of production order affirmed.
Legacy and other notes
The "trial preparations material"/work-product doctrine was later codified in Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 26(b)(3). See Rule 26.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 329
External links
Category:1947 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States discovery case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
"""

From "Higgins v. Keuffel" ==> """
Higgins v. Keuffel, 140 U.S. 428 (1891), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held a label describing the contents of a container is not subject to copyright..
 References 
External links
Category:1891 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Hiibel v. Sixth Judicial District Court of Nevada" ==> """
Hiibel v. Sixth Judicial District Court of Nevada, 542 U.S. 177 (2004), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a statute requiring suspects to disclose their names during a valid Terry stop does not violate the Fourth Amendment if the statute first requires reasonable suspicion of criminal involvement, and does not violate the Fifth Amendment if there is no allegation that their names could have caused an incrimination. 
Under the rubric of Terry v. Ohio, , the minimal intrusion on a suspect's privacy, and the legitimate need of law enforcement officers to quickly dispel suspicion that an individual is engaged in criminal activity, justified requiring a suspect to disclose his or her name. The Court also held that the identification requirement did not violate Hiibel's Fifth Amendment rights since he did not articulate a reasonable belief that his name would be used to incriminate him; however, the Court left open the possibility that Fifth Amendment privilege might apply in a situation where there was an articulated reasonable belief that giving a name could be incriminating.In upholding Hiibel′s conviction, the Court noted
"In this case petitioner's refusal to disclose his name was not based on any articulated real and appreciable fear that his name would be used to incriminate him.... As best we can tell, petitioner refused to identify himself only because he thought his name was none of the officer's business."  at 190
But the Court left open the possibility of different circumstances:
"Still, a case may arise where there is a substantial allegation that furnishing identity at the time of a stop would have given the police a link in the chain of evidence needed to convict the individual of a separate offense. In that case, the court can then consider whether the privilege applies, and, if the Fifth Amendment has been violated, what remedy must follow. We need not resolve those questions here."  at 191
The Hiibel decision was narrow in that it applied only to states that have stop and identify statutes. Consequently, individuals in states without such statutes cannot be lawfully arrested solely for refusing to identify themselves during a Terry stop.
 Background of the case 
Nevada has a "stop-and-identify" law that allows police officers to detain any person they encounter "under circumstances which reasonably indicate that the person has committed, is committing or is about to commit a crime"; the person may be detained only to "ascertain his identity and the suspicious circumstances surrounding his presence abroad." In turn, the law requires the person detained to "identify himself", but does not compel the person to answer any other questions put to him by the officer. The Nevada Supreme Court has interpreted that "identify himself" to mean to merely state his name. As of April 2008, 23 other statesSee the article Stop and identify statutes for a list of states with "stop-and-identify" laws. have similar laws.
On the evening of May 21, 2000, the sheriff's department in Humboldt County, Nevada received a report that a man had assaulted a woman in a red and silver GMC truck on Grass Valley Road. The responding deputy found a truck parked on the side of the road. A man was smoking a cigarette beside the truck, and a young woman was sitting inside it. The deputy observed skid marks in the gravel behind the vehicle, leading him to believe the vehicle had come to a sudden stop.
The deputy explained to the man that there had been a report of a fight between the man and the young woman, and asked the man if he had any identification on him. The man protested that he had no reason to provide identification, and became ill-tempered when the deputy continued to press him for his identification. The man then asked the deputy what crime he was being accused of, as the deputy continued his requests for identification, stating that he was "conducting an investigation". The man persisted in his refusal to provide identification, asking instead to be handcuffed and taken to jail. The deputy continued to ask for the man's identification, stating that the man would face arrest if he did not cooperate and provide identification.From the opinion of the Nevada Supreme Court in Hiibel v.  Dist. Ct., as well as the State of Nevada's brief to the Supreme Court (Brief for Respondent, p. 4), the Court understood the statute to require only that the suspect state his name or communicate it to the officer by other means. The majority opinion noted that Hiibel was asked to provide identification, which the Court understood as a request to produce a driver's license or some other form of written identification, 11 different times; however, it did not indicate that Hiibel was ever asked simply to identify himself. Hiibel did not raise this argument until his petition for rehearing by the Supreme Court (Petition for Rehearing, p. 1).
In response, the man declared he would not cooperate because he had not committed any crime. He then turned around and was arrested by the deputy.
That man was Larry Dudley Hiibel, the petitioner in this case, and the young woman was his daughter Mimi Hiibel. Larry Hiibel was charged with "willfully resist[ing], delay[ing], or obstruct[ing] a public officer in discharging or attempting to discharge any legal duty of his office."Nev. Rev. Stat. (NRS) §171.123(3) provides that:
"The officer may detain the person pursuant to this section only to ascertain his identity and the suspicious circumstances surrounding his presence abroad. Any person so detained shall identify himself, but may not be compelled to answer any other inquiry of any peace officer."
It was determined that by refusing to identify himself, Hiibel violated NRS §199.280, which states:
"A person who, in any case or under any circumstances not otherwise specially provided for, willfully resists, delays or obstructs a public officer in discharging or attempting to discharge any legal duty of his office shall be punished ..." In the Justice Court for Union Township, Nevada, Hiibel was convicted of this charge and fined $250. He appealed to the Sixth Judicial District Court, which affirmed the conviction. He then appealed to the Nevada Supreme Court, arguing that the requirement that he identify himself to any police officer upon request violated the Fourth Amendment prohibition on unreasonable searches and seizures and his Fifth Amendment rights against self-incrimination. The Nevada Supreme Court rejected these arguments, and Hiibel asked the U.S. Supreme Court to hear the case.
 Majority opinion 
Stop-and-identify laws have their roots in early English vagrancy laws under which suspected vagrants were subject to arrest unless they gave a "good account" of themselves; this practice, in turn, derived from the common-law power of any person to arrest suspicious persons and detain them until they gave "a good account" of themselves. Modern stop-and-identify laws combine aspects of the old vagrancy laws with a guide for police officers conducting investigatory stops, such as those authorized under Terry v. Ohio, .
However, the Court has identified a constitutional difficulty with many modern vagrancy laws. In Papachristou v. Jacksonville, , the Court held that a traditional vagrancy law was void for vagueness because its "broad scope and imprecise terms denied proper notice to potential offenders and permitted police officers to exercise unfettered discretion in the enforcement of the law." In Brown v. Texas, , the Court struck down the application of Texas's stop-and-identify statute against Brown. They held that the Fourth Amendment requires reasonable suspicion to believe that an individual had committed, was committing, or was going to commit a crime before an individual can be required to identify himself, and that the presence of an individual in a known drug area cannot establish reasonable suspicion without more.The Texas statute in question was eventually replaced by the State legislature and now only requires an individual to identify himself when lawfully arrested. And in Kolender v. Lawson, , the Court struck down a California stop-and-identify law that required a suspect to provide "credible and reliable identification" upon request.The requirement of California Penal Code § 647(e) to provide "credible and reliable identification" derived not from the statutory language but from a construction of the statute given by a California appellate case, People v. Solomon (1973), 33 Cal.App.3d 429.
In Wainwright v. Stone, , the U.S. Supreme Court had held, "For the purpose of determining whether a state statute is too vague and indefinite to constitute valid legislation 'we must take the statute as though it read precisely as the highest court of the State has interpreted it. The words "credible and reliable" were vague because they "provided no standard for determining what a suspect must do to comply with [the law], resulting in virtually unrestrained power to arrest and charge persons with a violation."
"The present case begins where our prior cases left off.  Here there is no question that the initial stop was based on reasonable suspicion, satisfying the Fourth Amendment requirements noted in Brown.  Further, the petitioner has not alleged that the statute is unconstitutionally vague, as in Kolender.  Here the Nevada statute is narrower and precise."  The Nevada Supreme Court had held that the Nevada statute required only that the suspect divulge his name; presumably, he could do so without handing over any documents whatsoever.  As long as the suspect tells the officer his name, he has satisfied the dictates of the Nevada stop-and-identify law.
The narrow requirements of Nevada's stop-and-identify law meant that it did not run afoul of the Fourth Amendment.  "In the ordinary course a police officer is free to ask a person for identification without implicating the Fourth Amendment."  Since Terry, it has been clear that a police officer who reasonably suspects that a person is involved in criminal activity may detain a person long enough to dispel that suspicion.  Questions related to a person's identity are a "routine and accepted part of many Terry stops."  Knowing a person's identity may, of course, help to clear a suspect and divert the attention of the police to another suspect.  On the other hand, knowing the suspect's name may just as quickly confirm to the officer that the person is wanted for another, unrelated crime.  In cases such as this, where the police are investigating a domestic dispute, officers "need to know whom they are dealing with in order to assess the situation, the threat to their own safety, and possible danger to the potential victim."  "The request for identity has an immediate relation to the purpose, rationale, and practical demands of a Terry stop.  The threat of criminal sanction helps ensure that the request for identity does not become a legal nullity."  Balancing the intrusion into the individual's privacy against the extent to which the stop-and-identify law promotes legitimate government interests, the Court concluded that the Fourth Amendment did not prohibit Nevada from making it a crime for a person detained under conditions of Terry to refuse to disclose his name to a police officer upon request.  
Furthermore, the officer's request that Hiibel identify himself did not implicate Hiibel's Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination.  There was no "articulated real and appreciable fear that [Hiibel's] name would be used to incriminate him, or that it 'would furnish a link in the chain of evidence needed to prosecute' him."  Because Hiibel did not articulate reasonable belief that his name could be used as an incriminating piece of evidence, he could not invoke the Fifth Amendment privilege in refusing to disclose it.
 Dissenting opinions 
Justice Stevens opined that the Court's precedent required it to strike down Nevada's stop-and-identify law.  Under the Court's Terry jurisprudence, a suspect has always had the right to refuse to answer questions put to him by police officers during a Terry stop.  And the Fifth Amendment privilege had always attached during custodial interrogations because information extorted by the police during such interrogations is unavoidably testimonial.  Why else would the police ask for a person's name, if not to determine whether that person was either wanted for committing a crime or directly suspected of committing a crime?  "The officer in this case told [Hiibel] that he was conducting an investigation and needed to see some identification.  As the target of that investigation, [Hiibel], in my view, acted well within his rights when he opted to stand mute.  Accordingly, I respectfully dissent."
Justice Breyer noted that 
the Court wrote that an 'officer may ask the [Terry] detainee a moderate number of questions to determine his identity and to try to obtain information confirming or dispelling the officer's suspicions. But the detainee is not obliged to respond.' Berkemer v. McCarty,  (emphasis added).... the Court's statement in Berkemer, while technically dicta, is the kind of strong dicta that the legal community typically takes as a statement of the law. And that law has remained undisturbed for more than 20 years.  There is no good reason now to reject this generation-old statement of the law.
Justice Breyer also expressed a "slippery-slope" concern that the majority's opinion would lead to allowing the police to ask follow-up questions, such as what the person's license number is, or where a person lives, without running afoul of constitutional protections.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 542
List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Notes 
 External links 
  Decision of the Nevada Supreme Court, findlaw.com
  Information about the case from the Electronic Privacy Information Center (includes links to parties' briefs and briefs of amici curiae)
  Commentary from Duke Law School
  Multimedia files, OYEZ project
  Student commentary from the Harvard Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review
  Information about the case from the ACLU
  Student commentary from the Harvard Law Review
  Dudley Hiibel's web site
  Press release of the Criminal Justice Legal Foundation
  Commentary from Police Chief Magazine
 Google Maps Location of Confrontation on Grass Valley Road in Winnemucca, NV
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Nevada
Category:2004 in Nevada
Category:Humboldt County, Nevada
Category:Search and seizure case law
"""

From "Hill v. Colorado" ==> """
Hill v. Colorado, 530 U.S. 703 (2000), was a United States Supreme Court decision.  The Court ruled 6–3 that the First Amendment right to free speech was not violated by a Colorado law limiting protest, education, distribution of literature, or counseling within eight feet of a person entering a healthcare facility.
 Background 
In response to protesting at abortion clinics, Colorado legislated that protesters within one hundred feet of any healthcare facility may not approach within eight feet of any other person without consent for the purpose of protest, education, distribution of literature, or counseling. 
Question
Does the Colorado law potentially violate the First and Fourteenth Amendment rights of citizens outside healthcare facilities?
 Decision 
 Majority opinion 
Justice John Paul Stevens wrote the majority opinion:
 The state has a compelling interest in creating this legislation. Its interest is to protect citizens entering or exiting a medical facility from unwanted communication. The law does not prevent patients from being communicated with entirely but better allows them to better avoid situations in they wish to not listen to the message of speakers. Even though speakers have a right to persuade, that cannot extend to unwilling listeners because people also have a right "to be let alone."
 As explained in Ward v. Rock Against Racism, legislation restricting speech in addition to requiring a compelling state interest needs to be content neutral. That is specifically important in time, place, and manner legislation. It is content neutral because it does not regulate speech, just one arena for speech. No matter what message a person is trying to convey, the statute would apply. The legislation is not viewpoint-based simply because it was enacted in response to issues being raised by a certain viewpoint.
 The legislation is narrowly tailored to meet the Ward requirements. Also, as the Court explained in Ward, even if the statute is not the least restrictive policy that could satisfy the state's compelling interest, it is sufficient because it leaves open other channels of communication.
 The statute does not completely prevent demonstrators from getting their points heard. Citizens may still yell, hold signs, and convince from eight feet away. The only thing that is seriously impeded is their ability to distribute literature. However, demonstrators can still hand out leaflets to willing recipients.
 Protecting the well being of patients entering or exiting healthcare facilities is specifically targeted by this legislation because they are more likely to be emotionally and physically vulnerable.
 "Prior restraint" arguments claiming that Colorado is putting a prior restraint on constitutionally-protected speech are wrong. Prior restraint is not an issue except in government censorship cases. However, in this case, individuals can choose to deny or permit communication.
Souter's concurring opinion
Justices David Souter, Sandra Day O'Connor, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, and Stephen Breyer concurred:
  The legislation seeks to prevent unwanted approaching, not speech.
Scalia and Thomas's dissenting opinions
Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas dissented: 
 This law is not content neutral, as it is obviously being applied only to abortion clinics and anti-abortion messages.
 Protecting citizens from unwanted speech is not a compelling state interest.
 The number of places actually being covered by the statute is very large if one considers the extensive number of healthcare facilities. Therefore, speech is restricted very significantly.
 The law removes one of the few outlets in which peaceful and civil pro-life citizens could get their point across to women on abortion, but now only inappropriate bullying groups will be heard.
 The decision is in conflict with other First Amendment restriction cases. The only reason the Court now changed is that the messages are not content-neutral but are about abortion.
Kennedy's dissenting opinion
Justice Anthony Kennedy dissented:
 The legislation is definitely content based and so directly violates the First Amendment.
 See also 
 Heckler's veto
 McCullen v. Coakley (2014)
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:Void for vagueness case law
Category:2000 in Colorado
Category:Legal history of Colorado
"""

From "Hill v. McDonough" ==> """
Hill v. McDonough, 547 U.S. 573 (2006), was a United States Supreme Court case challenging the use of lethal injection as a form of execution in the state of Florida.  The Court ruled unanimously that a challenge to the method of execution as violating the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution properly raised a claim under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, which provides a cause of action for civil rights violations, rather than under the habeas corpus provisions.  Accordingly, that the prisoner had previously sought habeas relief could not bar the present challenge.
Factual background
In 1983, Clarence E. Hill was convicted of the murder of a Pensacola, Florida police officer, and subsequently sentenced to death in 1985, in the Florida Supreme Court case of Hill v. State.477 So. 2d 553 (Fla. 1985) At a resentencing hearing in 1986, Hill's death sentence was reinstated, this time being upheld by the Florida Supreme Court.Hill v. State, 515 So. 2d 176 (Fla. 1987), cert. denied, . In November 1989, a warrant for Hill's execution was signed by then Governor Robert Martinez, after which Hill sought postconviction relief in both the Florida state courts and the U.S. District Court. In 1992, Hill's relief was granted when it was ruled that the Florida Supreme Court as well as Hill's trial court had not properly reevaluated the aggravating factors warranting a death sentence when one of them was vacated. In Hill v. State,643 So. 2d 1071 (Fla. 1995) the Florida Supreme Court, having sufficiently reweighed the mitigating factors, resentenced Hill to death. Hill then sought federal habeas corpus relief, which was first denied by the U.S. District Court, then affirmed by the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals.Hill v. Moore, 175 F.3d 915 (11th Cir. 1999), cert. denied, .
Lethal injection in Florida
In January 2000, the Florida legislature amended its state statutes changing the prescribed method of execution from electrocution to lethal injection, unless the person sentenced to death affirmatively elects to be executed by electrocution.Fla. Stat. § 922.105 The precise authority by which lethal injection was to be carried out was left to the Florida Department of Corrections.
The Florida Department of Corrections does not publish its information about lethal injection, and so the only source available describing Florida's use of the lethal injection death penalty comes from Sims v. State,754 So. 2d 657 (Fla. 2000) which indicated that the lethal injection death penalty was carried out by first administering sodium thiopental, an anesthetic, then pancuronium bromide, which paralyzes the lungs, and followed lastly by potassium chloride, which inflicts cardiac arrest.
Lower court proceedings
On November 29, 2005, Florida Governor Jeb Bush signed a warrant for Hill's execution, which was to be carried out on January 24, 2006. Upon the signing of his death warrant, Hill requested information from the Department of Corrections regarding the specific methods by which lethal injection were carried out. Sims v. State permitted the Florida Department of Corrections to change its procedures for carrying out the lethal injection death penalty as it saw fit, and Hill sought to find out how those procedures had changed, if at all. The Florida Department of Corrections refused to comply with Hill's request.
Florida state courts
Because the information in Sims v. State seemed to suggest the possibility of causing great bodily harm, Hill filed, on December 15, 2005, a petition for postconviction relief in the state of Florida and requested an evidentiary hearing to investigate whether or not the state's lethal injection death penalty did, in fact, cause bodily harm. The Circuit Court for Escambia County denied Hill's motions for postconviction relief and for an evidentiary hearing. Hill then appealed to the Florida Supreme Court on January 3, 2006. On January 17, 2006, Florida's High Court affirmed.Hill v. State, No. SC06-2, __ So. 2d __, 2006 WL 91302 (Fla. Jan. 17, 2006), cert. denied, No. 05-8731, 2006 WL 160276 (Feb. 27, 2006)
U.S. District Court for the Middle District of Florida
Three days later, on January 20, Hill filed suit in the U.S. District Court for the Middle District of Florida under 42 U.S.C. 1983, challenging that Florida's lethal injection death penalty would cause great bodily harm in violation of his Eighth and Fourteenth Amendment rights. Hill requested an injunction barring his execution until his claims could be judged upon as well as a permanent injunction barring the Department of Corrections from utilizing the lethal injection death penalty. Hill did not, however, challenge his death sentence.
The next day, the U.S. District Court denied Hill's petition, contending that standing case law was clear on the matter of jurisdiction. Under Robinson v. Crosby and In re Provenzano, the District Court held that Hill's claim was the same as a petition for habeas corpus, and, as a result, was required to be dismissed because Hill had not filed a habeas petition under 28 U.S.C. 2244(b).
Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals
With Hill's execution approaching fast, Hill filed an emergency appeal to the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals, which, on the day of Hill's execution, affirmed the U.S. District Court.Hill v. Crosby,  They agreed with the lower court that Hill's suit was, in fact, a habeas corpus petition, and the District Court was right to dismiss.
Certiorari granted
The same day, Hill petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court for certiorari and requested a stay of execution. Justice Kennedy granted a temporary stay, which was followed up the next day by a granting of certiorari from the entire Court and a full stay of execution.
Parties and counsel
Petitioner
The petitioner in Hill v. McDonough is Clarence Edward Hill. In the lower courts, Hill is also the plaintiff-appellant.
Respondents
In the lower courts, the respondents in Hill v. McDonough were James V. Crosby, Jr., the Secretary of the Florida Department of Corrections, and Charlie Crist, the Attorney General of Florida.  In the lower courts, both Crosby and Crist were defendants-appellants.
Since the lower court rulings, James V. Crosby, Jr. has been replaced by James R. McDonough, the interim Secretary of the Florida Department of Corrections.
Hill has amended his suit to include McDonough and exclude Crosby. Crist remains as a respondent.
Counsel
Hill's counsel of record is D. Todd Doss of Lake City, FL. Assisting him in the appeal are Donald B. Verrilli, Jr., Ian Heath Gershengorn, and Eric Berger, all of whom are from Jenner & Block LLP. John Abatecola, a private attorney from Sunrise, FL, is also assisting.
McDonough and Crist's attorney of record is Carolyn M. Snurkowski, the Assistant Deputy Attorney General of Florida. Charlie Crist is also assisting.
Counsel Amicus Curiae
Amicus Curiae for Hill are Human Rights Advocates, Human Rights Watch, and the Minnesota Advocates for Human Rights. They are represented by Constance de La Vega, Professor of Law at the University of San Francisco, whose office is at the Frank C. Newman International Human Rights Law Clinic. Assisting is David Weissbrodt, a Regents Professor as well as a Frederickson & Byron Professor of Law at the University of Minnesota.
Amicus Curiae for McDonough and Crist are the Solicitor General’s Office, the Attorney General’s Office, and the Department of Justice. They are represented by Paul D. Clement, the United States Solicitor General. Assisting him are Assistant Attorney General Alice S. Fisher, Deputy Solicitor General Gregory G. Garre, Assistant to the Solicitor General Kannon K. Shanmugam, and Department of Justice Attorney Robert J. Erickson.
Briefs of the petitioner and respondent
In Hill's brief to the U.S. Supreme Court, two questions are presented:
Question One
1. Whether a complaint brought under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 by a death-sentenced state prisoner, who seeks to stay his execution in order to pursue a challenge to the chemicals utilized for carrying out the execution, is properly recharacterized as a habeas corpus petition under 28 U.S.C. § 2254.
Hill's brief
By invoking 42 U.S.C. 1983, Hill argues that the procedures for carrying out lethal injection as prescribed by the Florida Department of Corrections are intended to violate his Eighth Amendment right against cruel and unusual punishment. The Eleventh Circuit's dismissal of his petition, Hill argues, fails to adjudicate his Eighth Amendment claim, and, accordingly, requests the Eleventh Circuit's ruling be reversed.
Government's brief
The government contends that, because the end result of Hill's suit is to challenge a death sentence, the claim must be filed under the 28 U.S.C. 2254 habeas statute, under which such challenges are supposed to be filed. Accordingly, the government requests the Eleventh Circuit's ruling be affirmed.
Hill's rebuttal brief
Hill rebuts the government by saying that habeas claims under 28 U.S.C. 2254 are reserved for challenges for the death penalty as a whole, whereas challenges for the specific method of execution should be controlled by 42 U.S.C. 1983. Accordingly, Hill requests the Eleventh Circuit's ruling be reversed.
Question Two
2. Whether, under this Court’s decision in Nelson, a challenge to a particular protocol the State plans to use during the execution process constitutes a cognizable claim under 42 U.S.C. § 1983.
Hill's brief
Citing Nelson v. Campbell, Hill argues that, because his petition is only challenging the method by which the state of Florida intends to execute him, and not the death sentence itself, the Court is required to entertain his petition, and, accordingly, requests the Eleventh Circuit's ruling be reversed.
Government's brief
The government challenges Hill's reading of Nelson, contending that claims under 42 U.S.C. 1983 are only cognizable if a habeas challenge has been entertained. Accordingly, the government requests the Eleventh Circuit's ruling be affirmed.
Hill's rebuttal brief
Hill rebuts the government by saying that Nelson controls so long as a claim under 42 U.S.C. 1983 is specific to the method of the execution and not the sentence itself. Accordingly, Hill requests the Eleventh Circuit's ruling be reversed.
The court's decision
The Supreme Court handed down its decision on June 12, 2006.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 547
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
 Text of 42 U.S.C. §1983, courtesy of the Legal Information Institute at Cornell Law School
 Appeal from the United States District Court for the Northern District of Florida (PDF)
 Hill's Petition for a Writ of Certiorari to the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals (PDF)
 Certiorari Granted (PDF)
 Brief for the Petitioner (PDF)
 Respondent's Brief on the Merits (PDF)
 Reply Brief for Petitioner (PDF)
 Brief Amici Curiae of Human Rights Advocates, Human Rights Watch, and Minnesota Advocates for Human Rights in Support of Petitioner (PDF)
 Brief for the United States as Amicus Curiae Supporting Respondents (PDF)
 liibulletin: Hill v. McDonough
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:Capital punishment in Florida
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Hill v. Wallace" ==> """
Hill v. Wallace, 259 U.S. 44 (1922), was a U.S. Supreme Court decision overturning the legality of the Futures Trading Act of 1921.. The law, approved August 24, 1921,Futures Trading Act of 1921, , c. 86. by the U.S. Congress attempted to institute Federal regulation of grain futures contract trading by imposing a prohibitive tax on futures contracts traded on any market other than those that met the statute's requirements and were regulated by the Secretary of Agriculture. The court found it was an unconstitutional exercise of the taxing power of Congress. Congress responded to the Court's decision by passing the Grain Futures Act in September 1922 based on the Commerce Clause. The Grain Futures Act was held to be constitutional by the Court in Board of Trade of City of Chicago v. Olsen (1923)
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 259
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:United States commodity and futures case law
Category:1922 in United States case law
"""

From "Hillman v. Maretta" ==> """
Hilmann v. Maretta, 569 U.S. 483 (2013), was a United States Supreme Court decision in which the court unanimously ruled that a Virginia statute revoking beneficiary status for spouses whose marital status has changed was pre-empted by the Federal Employees’ Group Life Insurance Act (1954).
Details
Warren Hillman was a retired employee of the General Services Administration under the Federal Government of the United States. He married Judy Maretta in 1989, but they divorced in 1998. However, Hillman had designated Maretta as his federal life insurance policy beneficiary in 1996. Warren Hillman later married Jacqueline or Jackie in 2002, but died of leukemia at the age of 66 in 2008. In his will, he had "left everything" to his wife Jackie.
After Warren Hillman's death, Maretta claimed the life insurance policy and was paid $124,558.03. Jackie Hillman sued Maretta to recover the benefits under the Commonwealth of Virginia statute that revoked a divorced spouse's beneficiary in favor of a widow or widower. The Fairfax County Circuit Court decided the case in Hillman's favor, awarding her the FEGLI benefits. However, the decision was overturned by the Virginia Supreme Court, which ruled that federal insurance programs preempt state laws, citing previous U. S. Supreme Court decisions Wissner v. Wissner and Ridgeway v. Ridgeway.
Jackie Hillman then appealed to the Supreme Court, which heard the arguments on April 22, 2013, and decided on June 3. Associate Justice Sotomayor in the majority ruling affirmed the Virginia Supreme Court decision, arguing that the order of precedence set by FEGLI sought to honor a federal employee's choice of beneficiary.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2013 in United States case law
"""

From "Hills and Co. v. Hoover" ==> """
Hills and Co. v. Hoover, 220 U.S. 329 (1911), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held the owner of a copyright is restricted to a single action against another to find, seize, and seek penalties for allegedly infringing copies of a work..
 References 
External links
Category:1911 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "Hills v. Gautreaux" ==> """
Hills v. Gautreaux, 425 U.S. 284 (1976), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court.
In this case, a number of Chicago families living in housing projects were awarded Section 8 vouchers allowing them to move to the suburbs in compensation for the housing project's substandard conditions.  Carla Anderson Hills was the United States Secretary of Housing and Urban Development; the eponymous lead respondent was Dorothy Gautreaux (1927–1968). The court ruled that the department had violated the Fifth Amendment and the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
The significance of the case lies in the sociological conclusions that can be drawn from it. A number of families chose to move, while others stayed, and Northwestern University researchers studying the two populations concluded that low-income women who moved to the suburbs "clearly experienced improved employment and earnings, even though the program provided no job training or placement services."After the Projects - American RadioWorks - American Public Media, americanradioworks.publicradio.org The disparity arguably proves that concentrated poverty is self-perpetuating and simply alleviating this concentration offers an avenue for improving the quality of life of those affected by urban poverty.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 425
 Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity
 References 
External links
 Waiting for Gautreaux 2006 (Northwestern University Press, ), book by Alexander Polikoff, lead plaintiff's attorney in Gautreaux vs. Chicago Housing Authority et al.
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Hills v. Ross" ==> """
Hills et al. v. Ross, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 184 (1796), is an early United States Supreme Court case determining that the Supreme Court held:
A plea in the admiralty by one partner, in behalf of himself and his copartners, the rejoinder being signed by a proctor for all the defendants, amounts to a legal appearance of all the defendants.
Prize agents, who receive the proceeds of sales of prizes, and pay them over to the proctors without an order of the court, are responsible to the owners of the captured property for the net amounts so received by them, in case restitution is decreed.Reports of decisions in the Supreme Court of the United States: with notes, and a digest, Volume 1, (Little, Brown, and Co., 1870) pg. 241 
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 3
 Hills et al. v. Ross II
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Ellsworth Court
Category:1796 in United States case law
"""

From "Hills v. Ross II" ==> """
Hills et al. v. Ross II, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 331 (1796), is an early United States Supreme Court case.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 3
 Hills et al. v. Ross
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1796 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Ellsworth Court
"""

From "Hilton v. Guyot" ==> """
Hilton v. Guyot, 159 U.S. 113 (1895), was a United States Supreme Court case where the Court ruled that the recognition and enforceability of a foreign judgment rested on the "comity of nations," namely whether there would be any reciprocity and mutual recognition by the foreign jurisdiction from which the judgment was issued.
Hilton established the fundamental basis for the recognition and enforcement of foreign judgments in the United States,David J. Levy, International Litigation: Defending and Suing Foreign Parties in U.S. Federal Courts (American Bar Association Tort Trial and Insurance Practice Section, 2003), p. 343, 346. remaining "the most detailed exposition of any American court" on this principle.Levy, p. 343 (quoting Willis L. M. Reese, The Status in this Country of Judgments Rendered Abroad, 50 Columbia Law Review 783, 790 (1950))). It is also viewed as the quintessential statement of comity in international law,International Human Rights Litigation in U.S. Courts:, 2d rev. ed., p. 355. and is one of the earliest decisions of the U.S. Supreme Court to assert that international law is part of U.S. law.
 Background 
Hilton and Libbey, U.S. citizens conducting business in Paris, France, were sued in French court by Guyot, the administrator of a French firm, for sums allegedly owed to that firm. They appeared and litigated the merits before the French court, which rendered a judgment against them that was affirmed by a higher court and became final. Guyot sought to enforce that judgment in federal district court in New York, which held that the French judgment was enforceable without retrial on the merits. Hilton and Libbey subsequently appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
thumb|alt=The Fuller Court.|The Fuller Court.
The central question before the Court was whether a judgment had force beyond the limits of the sovereign jurisdiction from which its authority derived. In finding that there was no applicable treaty or domestic statute from which an answer could be derived, the Court determined that it was incumbent on the judiciary to ascertain the law, based on guidance from "judicial decisions, from the works of jurists and commentators, and from the acts and usages of civilized nations."
In an opinion authored by Justice Horace Gray, the Court, drawing upon both domestic and international legal sources, concluded that whether any foreign judgment was to be enforced in the U.S. rested on whether there was comity between the U.S. and the foreign jurisdiction in question. In articulating this position, the Court set forth the general standard for making this determination and for what defined international comity.
Applying this standard, the Court reasoned, after examining relevant French laws and judicial decisions, that a French court would not have recognized a foreign judgment without having first considered its merits. Therefore, based on the notion of reciprocity derived from international comity, U.S. courts should similarly examine the merits of any judgment prior to ruling on its enforcement. The judgment of the U.S. circuit court was subsequently reversed and the case remanded for retrial.
The Court's opinion is notable for drawing heavily from international legal sources, specifically the laws and practices of over a dozen nations all over the world regarding the recognition and enforcement of foreign judgments. Thus, Hilton was one of the first Supreme Court cases to apply customary international law—the prevailing practices of states—in making its determination as to non-U.S. judgments:
See also
Foreign-Country Money Judgments Recognition Act (a 1962 Uniform State Act promulgated by the Uniform Law Commissioners)
The Paquete Habana, a U.S. Supreme Court decision in 1900, also authored by Justice Gray, that ruled that international law is part of U.S. law.
Notes
External links
Category:1895 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Hinderlider v. La Plata River & Cherry Creek Ditch Co." ==> """
Hinderlider v. La Plata River & Cherry Creek Ditch Co., 304 U.S. 92 (1938), is a US Supreme Court case that said a "general common law"  or  "general federal common law"  no longer exists in the  American  legal system and is unconstitutional.   However,  federal courts retain the power to create  federal common law  in specific areas related to federal rights and interests.Erwin Chemerinsky,  Federal Jurisdiction  (5th ed. 2007),  Aspen Publishers, p. 365-366.
Facts
This dispute revolved around diverting water from the La Plata River, a tributary to the Colorado River.
Judgment
Significance
An archetypical example of such federal common law is that relating to disputes between  states  of the United States.  Hinderlider  was the first case to reaffirm the existence of federal common law for other purposes,  specifically here,  the interpretation of an  interstate compact  governing  water rights  between states.Chemerinsky, p. 385-386.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 304
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:1938 in United States case law
Category:Federal common law case law
Category:United States water case law
Category:La Plata County, Colorado
Category:Colorado River
"""

From "Hines v. Davidowitz" ==> """
Hines v. Davidowitz, 312 U.S. 52 (1941), is a case applying the law of conflict preemption. The United States Supreme Court held that a Pennsylvania state system of alien registration was superseded by a federal system (the Alien Registration Act) because it was an "obstacle to the accomplishment" of its goals.
Background
Pennsylvania passed a statute requiring aliens to register with the state, carry a state-issued identification card, and pay a small registration fee. The next year, Congress enacted a law requiring alien registration, but it did not require aliens to carry an identification card. The plaintiff conceded that there was neither explicit preemption nor field preemption. 
Opinion
The Court applied the prong of preemption doctrine which inquires whether state "law stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives of Congress.". Under the preemption doctrine, enforcement of a state alien registration law was barred by the federal Alien Registration Act.
Justice Hugo L. Black emphasized the supremacy of federal power over this area of law:Hines, 312 U.S. at 62 (internal footnotes and citations omitted.)
That the supremacy of the national power in the general field of foreign affairs, including power over immigration, naturalization and deportation, is made clear by the Constitution, was pointed out by the authors of The Federalist in 1787, and has since been given continuous recognition by this Court. When the national government by treaty or statute has established rules and regulations touching the rights, privileges, obligations or burdens of aliens as such, the treaty or statute is the supreme law of the land. No state can add to or take from the force and effect of such treaty or statute, for Article 6 of the Constitution provides that "This Constitution, and the Laws of the United States which shall be made in Pursuance thereof; and all Treaties made, or which shall be made, under the Authority of the United States, shall be the supreme Law of the Land; and the Judges in every State shall be bound thereby, any Thing in the Constitution or Laws of any State to the Contrary notwithstanding." The Federal Government, representing as it does the collective interests of the forty-eight states, is entrusted with full and exclusive responsibility for the conduct of affairs with foreign sovereignties. "For local interests the several States of the Union exist, but for national purposes, embracing our relations with foreign nations, we are but one people, one nation, one power.
In his dissent, Justice Stone noted the absence of any conflict between state and federal laws or any express congressional prohibition of state regulation.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States federal preemption law
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:1941 in United States case law
"""

From "Hirabayashi v. United States" ==> """
Hirabayashi v. United States, 320 U.S. 81 (1943), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that the application of curfews against members of a minority group were constitutional when the nation was at war with the country from which that group's ancestors originated.. The case arose out of the issuance of Executive Order 9066 following the attack on Pearl Harbor and the U.S. entry into World War II. President Franklin D. Roosevelt had authorized military commanders to secure areas from which "any or all persons may be excluded", and Japanese Americans living in the West Coast were subject to a curfew and other restrictions before being removed to internment camps. The plaintiff, Gordon Hirabayashi, was convicted of violating the curfew and had appealed to the Supreme Court. Yasui v. United States was a companion case decided the same day.. Both convictions were overturned in coram nobis proceedings in the 1980s.Hirabayashi v. United States, 627 F. Supp. 1445 (W.D. Wash. 1986); affirmed in part, reversed in part, 828 F.2d 591 (9th Cir. 1987).
Background
After the bombing of Pearl Harbor, American public opinion initially stood by the large population of Japanese Americans living on the West Coast or at least did not openly question their loyalty to the United States. Six weeks later, however, public opinion had turned against Japanese Americans, as the press and other Americans became nervous about the potential for fifth column activity. Though the administration (including President Roosevelt and FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover) dismissed rumors of Japanese American espionage on behalf of the Japanese war effort, pressure mounted upon the Administration, as the tide of public opinion turned against Japanese Americans.
On February 19, 1942, Roosevelt issued Executive Order 9066, authorizing Lieutenant General John L. DeWitt, as head of the Western Defense Command, to exclude certain persons from "military areas," regardless of their ancestry or country of citizenship. Over the course of several weeks, DeWitt issued several public proclamations that first imposed a curfew upon Japanese American citizens and resident "aliens" of Japanese descent. (The Issei, or first-generation immigrants, were prohibited from naturalized citizenship as members of an "unassimilable" race.)  Later orders confined Japanese Americans to Military Area No. 1, which included Seattle, where Hirabayashi lived. On May 3, 1942, DeWitt issued an order requiring Japanese Americans in the Seattle area to report to assigned assembly points for "evacuation" to isolated inland camps. (At the time, the terms "relocation centers," "internment camps," and "concentration camps" were used interchangeably.)
Case
The defendant, Gordon Hirabayashi, was a University of Washington student who was accused of violating the curfew and exclusion order, designated a misdemeanor by Public Law 503, a congressional statute introduced to enforce Executive Order 9066 and any subsequent military orders. Hirabayashi turned himself in for disobeying the curfew at the FBI's Seattle office on May 16, 1942 and announced that he planned to disobey the impending removal order. 
After his arrest, he was approached by an acquaintance, liberal Washington State Senator Mary Farquharson, who suggested that he make his case a test case. She organized a support committee for Hirabayashi and served as its secretary-treasurer as the committee raised funds for his legal defense.  (This support was important in advancing the case, as the ACLU refused to support Hirabayashi.)
He was held in King County Jail for five months, until his trial on October 20. The jury deliberated for just ten minutes before it returned two guilty verdicts, one for the curfew violation and another for the exclusion order, and Hirabayashi was sentenced to consecutive 30-day jail terms. (After requesting to serve his time in an outdoor labor camp rather than prison, Judge Lloyd Black handed down two 90-day sentences, to be served concurrently at the Catalina Federal Honor Camp, outside Tucson, Arizona.)
Hirabayashi's lawyers appealed the conviction, and after the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in San Francisco declined to rule on the case, it eventually landed in the Supreme Court.
The Justice Department expected a legal challenge to all of the three substantive elements of Roosevelt's and DeWitt's directives to Japanese Americans: curfew, exclusion, and internment. The administration, particularly the Department of Justice and Francis Biddle, sought out test cases that it could use to establish favorable precedent and prepared itself for a case that could challenge the entire internment policy.
The Supreme Court heard both the Hirabayashi case and Yasui v. United States during the 1942–43 term. It released the opinions as companion cases on June 21, 1943 and upheld the curfew order in both cases. (Although Hirabayashi had been convicted of two violations, the two sentences had been served concurrently and so the Justices chose to consider only the curfew, not the more controversial exclusion of Japanese American citizens.) Minoru Yasui was "released" to the Minidoka concentration camp on time served, and Hirabayashi, who had been living in Spokane, Washington since he had finished his sentence at Catalina, briefly remained free before he was sent to the McNeil Island Federal Penitentiary when he refused to comply with a draft order.
Later developments
This case has been largely overshadowed by Korematsu v. United States,. decided the following term, in which the Court directly addressed the constitutionality of the removal of Japanese Americans from the West Coast. But, though the Korematsu case (challenging the exclusion portion of Executive Order 9066) overshadowed the Hirabayashi case (challenging only the curfew portion of the order), the Court's opinion in Korematsu cited its Hirabayashi ruling, upholding the restrictions placed on Japanese Americans.
The Hirabayashi case is notable also in that the three dissenters in Korematsu, Justices Roberts, Jackson, and Murphy had either been persuaded by fellow justices to vote with the majority or, in the case of Murphy, to concur. An article by historian Sidney Fine published in Pacific Historical Review in May 1964, "Mr. Justice Murphy and the Hirabayashi Case", pp. 195–209, shows how that Justice's initial draft opinion was a vigorous dissent, but that he eventually yielded to the arguments of his fellow Justices and issued a concurrence – which, in Fine's view, "bore a striking resemblance to the dissenting opinion he had intended to issue."  In the Korematsu decision, Murphy's dissent was vehement, calling the majority opinion "legalization of racism."
In 1986 and 1987, Hirabayashi's convictions on both charges were overturned by the U.S. District Court in Seattle and the Federal Appeals Court, because evidence arose that the Solicitor General's office (led by Charles H. Fahy) had cited examples of Japanese American sabotage in its 1943–44 Supreme Court arguments, despite having researched and debunked all the rumored incidents. In 2011, the Acting Solicitor General officially confessed error in that regard. The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit issued the final decision as Hirabayashi v. United States in 1987.
In May 2012, President Obama posthumously awarded Gordon Hirabayashi the Presidential Medal of Freedom, America's highest civilian honor.
Eleven lawyers who had represented Fred Korematsu, Gordon Hirabayashi, and Minoru Yasui in successful efforts in lower federal courts to nullify their convictions for violating military curfew and exclusion orders sent a letter, dated January 13, 2014, to Solicitor General Donald Verrilli Jr. In light of the appeal proceedings before the U.S. Supreme in Hedges v. Obama, the lawyers asked Verrili to request the Supreme Court to overrule its 1943 decisions in Korematsu, Hirabayashi  and Yasui. If the Solicitor General shouldn't do this, they asked that the United States government "make clear" that the federal government "does not consider the internment decisions as valid precedent for governmental or military detention of individuals or groups without due process of law [...]."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 320
Ex parte Endo
 References 
External links
  Japanese Relocation (1943 Film – viewable for free at not-for profit The Internet Archive)
 Eric L. Muller, "Hirabayashi and the Invasion Evasion" North Carolina Law Review, vol. 88 (2010) pp. 1333–1389
 Materials relating to the case of Gordon K. Hirabayashi, 1943, The Bancroft Library
Category:1943 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:Internment of Japanese Americans
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:20th century in Seattle
Category:Race-related case law in the United States
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Hirota v. MacArthur" ==> """
Hirota v. MacArthur, 338 U.S. 197 (1948), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States, which held that "the courts of the United States have no power or authority to review, to affirm, set aside or annul the judgments and sentences imposed on these petitioners by the International Military Tribunal for the Far East and for this reason the motions for leave to file petitions for writs of habeas corpus are denied".
The appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court was made following the death sentence against Kōki Hirota and six other Japanese leaders tried for war crimes.
Legacy
In March 2008, the U.S. government cited Hirota v. MacArthur as "directly applicable" in Munaf v. Geren, 553 U.S. 674 (2008), in which it argued before the Supreme Court that U.S. federal courts lacked jurisdiction over two U.S. citizens being held by the military in Iraq and thus could not review their petitions for habeas corpus.
See also
Rasul v. Bush, 
Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, 
Munaf v. Geren, 
References
Further reading
 Aziz Huq, "The Hirota Gambit"  NYU Annual Survey of American Law, 63 (2007) pp. 63-97
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:International Military Tribunal for the Far East
Category:1948 in United States case law
Category:Douglas MacArthur
"""

From "Hocker v. Heffley" ==> """
redirectChambers v. Maroney#Aftermath
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1970 in United States case law
"""

From "Hodel v. Irving" ==> """
Hodel v. Irving, 481 U.S. 704 (1987), is a case in which the U.S. Supreme Court held that a statute ordering the escheat of fractional interests in real property which had been bequeathed to members of the Oglala Sioux tribe was an unconstitutional taking which required just compensation..
Background
Towards the end of the 19th century, Congress enacted a series of land Acts which divided the communal reservations of Indian tribes into individual allotments for Indians and unallotted lands for non-Indian settlement. This legislation was motivated both by a desire to force Indians to abandon their nomadic ways in order to "speed the Indians' assimilation into American society",481 U.S. at 706. and by pressure to free new lands for further white settlement. One of these statutes, enacted in 1889, allotted each male Sioux head of household  of land and most other individuals , with the land to be held in trust by the United States. Prior to 1910, the lands of deceased allottees passed to their heirs "according to the laws of the State or Territory" where the land was located. After 1910, allottees were permitted to dispose of their interests by will in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Secretary of the Interior, which were intended to protect Native American ownership of the allotted lands.
Unfortunately, this policy of promoting private ownership of land among the Sioux had disastrous consequences. Instead of working the land themselves, the Sioux sold, or more frequently leased, the lands to whites, and lived off the meager revenues. Worse yet, each successive generation found their parcels became splintered into multiple undivided interests in land, with many parcels having dozens (and in some cases, hundreds) of owners. Because the land was held in trust and often could not be alienated or partitioned, the fractionation problem grew steadily worse over time. Financial returns from the leased lands were divided up among so many parties that the holders of the fractionated interests would get as little as one cent from their holdings, and the administrative costs of bookkeeping and monitoring all of the fractional interests was economically unfeasible.
Congress ended the practice of land allotment in 1934, but this did little to alleviate the ownership problems which already existed, and continued to get worse with each passing generation of Sioux. In hopes of finally solving the fractionation problem, Congress passed the Indian Land Consolidation Act in 1983.The modern version of the Indian Land Consolidation Act is currently codified at Title 25, Chapter 24, U.S. Code Section 207 of the act provided that:
No undivided fractional interest in any tract of trust or restricted land within a tribe's reservation or otherwise subjected to a tribe's jurisdiction shall descedent [sic] by intestacy or devise but shall escheat to that tribe if such interest represents 2 per centum or less of the total acreage in such tract and has earned to its owner less than $100 in the preceding year before it is due to escheat.
The statute did not make any provisions for the payment of compensation to the holders of the fractional interests which were to escheat to the tribe.
Facts and procedural history
The plaintiffs in this case were three enrolled members of the Oglala Sioux tribe:  Mary Irving, Patrick Pumpkin Seed, and Eileen Bissonette. All of them were heirs or devisees of deceased tribe members. Irving lost two escheatable interests worth approximately $100, Pumpkin Seed lost 13 escheatable interests worth $1,816, and Bissonette lost $2,700 on the 26 escheatable interests in she was devised.
The plaintiffs filed suit against Donald P. Hodel, in his official capacity as Secretary of the Interior, in the United States District Court for the District of South Dakota. The District Court found for the government, holding that the plaintiffs had no vested interest in the property of the decedents prior to their deaths, and that Congress had plenary authority to abolish the power of testamentary disposition of Indian property and to alter the rules of intestate succession, and concluded that the statute was constitutional.
On appeal, the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed, holding that the statute violated the plaintiff's rights under the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment. While the Eighth Circuit agreed with the District Court that the plaintiffs did not have vested rights in the decedents' property, it concluded that their decedents had a right, derived from the original Sioux allotment statute, to control disposition of their property at death. The government sought certiorari, which was granted.
Decision
Majority opinion
Justice O'Connor, writing for the majority, first held that the plaintiffs had standing to challenge the statute. Even though they were not asserting their own property rights, the fact that their decedents had been denied the right to devise their property by will or intestacy created a sufficient injury-in-fact for the plaintiffs to bring suit.
She then moved on to the substantive issue of the case. O'Connor agreed with the government that the fractionation of ownership was a serious problem, which Congress did have the power to ameliorate.  She also agreed that the Sioux probably lost no "investment-backed expectations" under the test set forth in Penn Central Transportation Co. v. New York City (1978). However, she held that the right to will one’s property to one's heirs is one of the most important "sticks in the bundle" under Anglo-American common law, and that the total abrogation of this right constitutes a taking.
Concurring opinions
Justice Brennan and Justice Scalia each wrote a brief, single-paragraph concurring opinion, both of which analogized the rights lost by the plaintiffs in this case to those lost under the Eagle feather law.
Justice Stevens concurred in the judgment, and wrote the longest concurrence. His chief objection to the statute is that it afforded no opportunity for the plaintiffs' decedents to avoid escheat by consolidating their property through voluntary inter vivos transfers (for example, by providing a grace period before the statute came into force), thus violating their due process rights.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 481
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1987 in United States case law
"""

From "Hodges v. United States" ==> """
Hodges v. United States, 203 U.S. 1 (1906), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court limiting the power of Congress to make laws under the Thirteenth Amendment. Three white men had been convicted in the Eastern Arkansas District Court for conspiring against black sawmill workers.
The statute that was used to convict the men prohibits conspiracy to deprive American citizens of their constitutional liberties, including the right to make contracts. The Supreme Court overturned the conviction, holding that Congress did not have the right to intervene against racially-motivated interference with labor contracts.
 District Courts 
On 8 May 1903, Arkansas Attorney General William G. Whipple wrote to U.S. Attorney General Philander C. Knox to announce (and request funding for) investigation of a “white-capping” case. Whipple wrote that an “inferior class of white men feeling themselves unable to compete  with  colored  tenants  combined  to  drive  them  out  of  the  country.” Knox approved the investigation, responding that the Department of Justice was “alive  to  the  aggressive attitude of such organized bands as those to which you refer,  and determined to meet such emergencies with proper and decisive action”.Karlan, “Contracting the Thirteenth Amendment” (2005), p. 785. 
By October 1903, a grand jury had indicted two groups of White men accused of white-capping. The first case, filed as United States v. Morris, involved a group of 11 men accused of targeting sharecroppers. The second, United States v. Maples, accused 15 men of intimidating Black workers at a lumber mill in Whitehall, Arkansas. The case against them was made primarily under two statutes of the U.S. Code.Karlan, “Contracting the Thirteenth Amendment” (2005), p. 786.
§1977 gives “all persons” in the U.S. the same right to make contracts “as is enjoyed by white citizens” :
All persons within the jurisdiction of the United States shall have the same right in every state and territory to make and enforce contracts, to sue, be parties, give evidence, and to the full and equal benefit of all laws and proceedings for the security of persons and property as is enjoyed by white citizens, and shall be subject to like punishment, pains, penalties, taxes, licenses, and exactions of every kind, and to no other.
§5508, originating with the Civil Rights Act of 1866 and modified by the Enforcement Act of 1870, outlaws conspiracy to deprive citizens of their Constitutional freedoms:
SEC. 5508. If two or more persons conspire to injure, oppress, threaten, or intimidate any citizen in the free exercise or enjoyment of any right or privilege secured to him by the Constitution or laws of the United States, or because of his having so exercised the same; or if two or more persons go in disguise on the highway, or on the premises of another, with intent to prevent or hinder his free exercise or enjoyment of any right or privilege so secured, they shall be fined not more than five thousand dollars and imprisoned not more than ten years, and shall, moreover, be thereafter ineligible to any office or place of honor, profit or trust created by the Constitution or laws of the United States.   
The defendants filed demurrers arguing that these laws infringed on states' rights. These were overruled by Judge Jacob Trieber in federal district court. Trieber acknowledged that, particularly in light of the Civil Rights Cases (1883), the Fourteenth Amendment could only be invoked to redress inequality of state actors. Citing the decision of Judge Noah Swayne in U. S. v. Rhodes (1866), Trieber invoked the Thirteenth Amendment and held that the right to make contracts was a “fundamental” right.Karlan, “Contracting the Thirteenth Amendment” (2005), pp. 787–789.
The state could obtain no conviction in Morris, unable to produce solid evidence even though, in Whipple's words, “the jurors, as well as the Court, were convinced we had indicted the right men”. Of the 15 accused in Maples, the jury convicted 3: William Clampit, Wash McKinney, and Reuben Hodges.Karlan, “Contracting the Thirteenth Amendment” (2005), pp. 789–790. The three men convicted in Morris appealed their case (now Hodges v. United States), which the Supreme Court accepted in March 1904.
 Supreme Court 
Lawyers for Clampit, McKinney, and Hodges argued that the intended effect of the Thirteenth Amendment had been completed with emancipation and furthermore that no federally recognized right to make contracts existed at the time of its adoption. The Department of Justice, now led by Attorney General William Henry Moody, defended the statutes.Fiss, “History of the Supreme Court” (2006), p. 379. Moody acknowledged the “state actor” limitation to the Fourteenth Amendment and focused, like Trieber, on the Thirteenth Amendment.Fiss, “History of the Supreme Court” (2006), p. 380. Moody argued that the Thirteenth Amendment guarantees “practical freedom”—including the right to make a contract, work, and be compensated.Karlan,“Contracting the Thirteenth Amendment” (2005), pp. 790–792
Oral arguments
In oral arguments, Justice David Josiah Brewer asked whether all Black workers enjoyed special protections because of the Thirteenth Amendment. Moody responded that Black and White workers enjoyed the same rights and that the Thirteenth Amendment only applied if workers were targeted because they were Black. In fact, Moody argued that any type of racial hatred might be included. Justice William R. Day replied: “This amendment everybody supposed was intended to protect the colored race. Other races were never thought of at all.” To which said Moody:Bernstein, “Thoughts on Hodges” (2005), p. 813–814. 
I can easily rest this case upon the fact that the persons injured were of the colored race, and therefore peculiarly within the protection of the thirteenth amendment. But I have not been able to satisfy my mind that this amendment makes a permanent distinction between negroes and persons of  other races. Its benefits extend to all persons of all races.
Moody stated later in the arguments: “Concerted action against another person, on account of his race, to deprive them of one of the essential rights to freedom, the right to labor, is a violation of the thirteenth amendment.”Bernstein, “Thoughts on Hodges” (2005), p. 816. 
Brewer raised questions about this position based on the precedent it might set for labor law. He asked: 
One of another race – against any person of another race – wouldn’t the action of labor organizations in forbidding any person to labor unless he was a member of their organizations be depriving him of liberty? […]
Take the case of an Irishman who strikes an Italian  working on the railroad. A body of  Irish say, We do not like ‘Dagos’ and will not work with them, and they drive them off; they wouldn’t do that if they were Irish. [...] The  Irishman goes into a bar room and he sees an Italian there and knocks him down. Would that be a violation under your theory?
Moody replied, “I wouldn't go that far.”
Moody argued finally that the “war of races” now encompassed the whole nation, and that:Karlan, “Contracting the Thirteenth Amendment” (2005), pp. 792–794 
if the Negro who is in our midst can be denied the right to work and must live on the outskirts  of  civilization,  he  will  become  more  dangerous  than  the  wild beasts,  because  he  has  a  higher  intelligence  than  the  most  intelligent beast. He will become an outcast lurking about the borders and living by depredation.
The Court ruled 7–2 for Hodges, holding the federal statutes unconstitutional and overruling the Arkansas convictions.
Majority opinion
The majority opinion, authored by Brewer, maintained that the original constitution had intended for state governments to make contract law. According to the Tenth Amendment, those powers not explicitly assigned to the federal government belong to the states. Brewer quoted the Thirteenth Amendment in full and wrote: “The meaning of this is as clear as language can make it.” Brewer proceeded to give a definition of “slavery” from Webster's Dictionary.203 U.S. 16–17 (1906)Karlan, “Contracting the Thirteenth Amendment” (2005), p. 808Tsesis, The Thirteenth Amendment and American Freedom (2004), p. 80. 
Brewer interpreted the Thirteenth Amendment narrowly, in terms of legal rights, arguing that broad application led down a slippery slope to complete federal power. Responding to certain statements from the Department of Justice's brief, Brewer wrote:203 U.S. 18 (1906)Karlan, “Contracting the Thirteenth Amendment” (2005), p. 800 
The logic of this concession points irresistibly to the contention that the Thirteenth Amendment operates only to protect the African race. This is evident from the fact that nowhere in the record does it appear that the parties charged to have been wronged by the defendants had ever been themselves slaves, or were the descendants of slaves. They took no more from the Amendment than any other citizens of the United States. But if, as we have seen, that denounces a condition possible for all races and all individuals, then a like wrong perpetrated by white men upon a Chinese, or by black men upon a white man, or by any men upon any man on account of his race, would come within the jurisdiction of Congress, and that protection of individual rights which, prior to the Thirteenth Amendment, was unquestionably within the jurisdiction solely of the states, would, by virtue of that Amendment, be transferred to the nation, and subject to the legislation of Congress.
Brewer affirmed a contrary interpretation, that the Amendment “is the denunciation of a condition, and not a declaration in favor of a particular people. It reaches every race and every individual, and if in any respect it commits one race to the nation, it commits every race and every individual thereof.”203 U.S. 16 (1906)Karlan, “Contracting the Thirteenth Amendment” (2005), p. 796  Brewer also argued that not every “badge of slavery” qualified for federal intervention. Brewer cited an enforcement regime for the deportation of Chinese workers, arguing that because Chinese people were not a slave class in the U.S., requiring them to carry authorization certificates did not violate the Thirteenth Amendment:203 U.S. 19 (1906)  
But that it was not the intent of the Amendment to denounce every act done to an individual which was wrong if done to a free man, and yet justified in a condition of slavery, and to give authority to Congress to enforce such denunciation, consider the legislation in respect to the Chinese. In slave times, in the slave states, not infrequently every free negro was required to carry with him a copy of a judicial decree or other evidence of his right to freedom or be subject to arrest. That was one of the incidents or badges of slavery. By the Act of May 5, 1892, Congress required all Chinese laborers within the limits of the United States to apply for a certificate, and anyone who, after one year from the passage of the act, should be found within the jurisdiction of the United States without such certificate might be arrested and deported. In Fong Yue Ting v. United States, 149 U. S. 698, the validity of the Chinese deportation act was presented, elaborately argued, and fully considered by this Court. While there was a division of opinion, yet at no time during the progress of the litigation, and by no individual, counsel, or court connected with it was it suggested that the requiring of such a certificate was evidence of a condition of slavery, or prohibited by the Thirteenth Amendment.
Finally, Brewer wrote that Blacks deserved no special privileges because they enjoyed greater freedom as citizens:203 U.S. 19–20 (1906)Karlan, “Contracting the Thirteenth Amendment” (2005), pp. 794–795.  
One thing more: at the close of the Civil War, when the problem of the emancipated slaves was before the nation, it might have left them in a condition of alienage, or established them as wards of the government, like the Indian tribes, and thus retained for the nation jurisdiction over them, or it might, as it did, give them citizenship. It chose the latter. By the Fourteenth Amendment, it made citizens of all born within the limits of the United States and subject to its jurisdiction. By the Fifteenth, it prohibited any state from denying the right of suffrage on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude, and by the Thirteenth, it forbade slavery or involuntary servitude anywhere within the limits of the land. Whether this was or was not the wiser way to deal with the great problem is not a matter for the courts to consider. It is for us to accept the decision, which declined to constitute them wards of the nation or leave them in a condition of alienage where they would be subject to the jurisdiction of Congress, but gave them citizenship, doubtless believing that thereby, in the long run, their best interests would be subserved, they taking their chances with other citizens in the states where they should make their homes.
As precedent, Brewer's decision cites only The Slaughter-House Cases.Karlan, “Contracting the Thirteenth Amendment” (2005), p. 795.
Minority opinion
Justice John Marshall Harlan, a long-time supporter of broad Thirteenth Amendment powers,Tsesis, The Thirteenth Amendment and American Freedom (2004), p. 80 & passim.  wrote the dissenting opinion. (The document itself was three times longer than the statement of Brewer's majority decision.)William H. Pruden III, “Hodges v. United States”, Encyclopedia of Arkansas,  21 November 2012. Harlan insisted that the Amendment empowered Congress not only to target legal slavery directly, but additionally:203 U.S. 27 (1906)
... may make it impossible that any of its incidents or badges should exist or be enforced in any state or territory of the United States. It therefore became competent for Congress, under the Thirteenth Amendment, to make the establishing of slavery, as well as all attempts, whether in the form of a conspiracy or otherwise, to subject anyone to the badges or incidents of slavery offenses against the United States, punishable by fine or imprisonment or both.
And therefore: “legislation making it an offense against the United States to conspire to injure or intimidate a citizen in the free exercise of any right secured by the Constitution is broad enough to embrace a conspiracy of the kind charged in the present indictment.”
Harlan cited U. S. v. Cruikshank, which affirmed guarantees by the Civil Rights Act of 1866 of equal rights to make contracts. Harlan quoted at length from Bradley's opinion in Cruikshank, which suggested that Congress must affirmatively protect the right to make contracts (and could take action against racial segregation within economic activity):203 U.S. 29–30 (1906) 
Congress therefore acquired the power not only to legislate for the eradication of slavery, but the power to give full effect to this bestowment of liberty on these millions of people. All this it essayed to do by the civil rights bill passed April 9, 1866, 14 Stat. 27, by which it was declared that all persons born in the United States, and not subject to a foreign power (except Indians, not taxed), should be citizens of the United States, and that such citizens, of every race and color, without any regard to any previous condition of slavery or involuntary servitude, should have the same right, in every state and territory, to make and enforce contracts, to sue, be parties, and give evidence to inherit, purchase, lease, sell, hold, and convey real and personal property, and to full and equal benefit of all laws and proceedings for the security of persons and property, as is enjoyed by white citizens, and should be subject to like punishment, pains, and penalties, and to none other, any law, etc., to the contrary notwithstanding. [...]
If in a community or neighborhood composed principally of whites, a citizen of African descent, or of the Indian race, not within the exception of the Amendment, should propose to lease and cultivate a farm, and a combination should be formed to expel him and prevent him from the accomplishment of his purpose on account of his race or color, it cannot be doubted that this would be a case within in power of Congress to remedy and redress.
Citing the Civil Rights Cases and Clyatt v. U. S., Harlan's dissent reaffirmed the Thirteenth Amendment's unique status (particularly compared to the Fourteenth Amendment) as permitting Congressional intervention directly, even when state laws do not formally discriminate.203 U.S. 30–34 (1906)
Legacy
Hodges has been cited as a significant moment in the limitation of Thirteenth Amendment powers and in the denial of civil rights to Southern Blacks.Karlan, “Contracting the Thirteenth Amendment” (2005), p. 809. “But the questions Hodges raised – about congressional power under the  Reconstruction  Amendments  –  remain extraordinarily important today. And in a time when several key pieces of the Second  Reconstruction face  renewed  attack, it is worth remembering how the Court contributed to the demise of the First
President Theodore Roosevelt appointed Moody to the Supreme Court in December 1906.
The Supreme Court overturned Hodges in Jones v. Alfred H. Mayer Co. (1968).
Analysis
Pamela S. Karlan (law professor at Stanford) suggests in a 2005 law review that state prosecution of white-capping took place mostly for economic reasons—because intimidation of Black workers disrupted the operation of White-owned businesses.Karlan, “Contracting the Thirteenth Amendment” (2005), p. 786–787. “Rather, the prosecutions seem to have been undertaken at the instigation of prominent white citizens because the whitecappings interfered with their economic interests. Put bluntly, the race of the intimidated workers was simply a lever by which the “respectable white element” sought to invoke federal power in its battle with 'an inferior class of white men.'” When the case entered the Supreme Court, the focus shifted entirely to the scope of Congressional power and obligation under the Thirteenth Amendment. Karlan argues that the Court's decision reflects the intense effort that would indeed be required to address the legacy of slavery through legislation.Karlan, “Contracting the Thirteenth Amendment” (2005), p. 797. Because slavery-like conditions were indeed prevalent in the Jim Crow South: “To muster the entire power of the federal government to deal with the Whitehall situation would mean deciding that federal power was to be used in the ordinary course of events.”Karlan, “Contracting the Thirteenth Amendment” (2005), p. 807.
In her assessment, the decision represents an attempt to ignore the legacy produced by centuries of enslavement, portraying the racial animosity of the white-cappers as no different from anti-immigrant xenophobia. Karlan responds to Brewer's statement that “nowhere in the record does it appear” that the Black workers had been enslaved or were descended from slaves:
Essentially, the Court’s disingenuous statement about the record in Hodges rests on its refusal to presume that all animus against blacks stemmed from their past condition of slavery. In an age when society disliked immigrants for being different and bandied about ideas of inherent racial superiority, such a dissociation has a certain logic. Hodges and  his compatriots might dislike blacks and wish to prevent them from exercising their right to contract without any thought to those black workers’ previous condition of enslavement.
Thus, the Court pretended that “the problems of blacks” were “already solved”. Karlan's article, published in a journal issue dedicated to Lochner v. New York, speculates about the apparent divergence between Hodges and Lochner. She asks: “How could it be that freedom of contract was so fundamental a liberty that it was protected against state infringement by the Fourteenth Amendment but was not a right of free persons that could be protected against private impairment by the Thirteenth?”Karlan, “Contracting the Thirteenth Amendment” (2005), p. 801. The Court ruled on Fourteenth Amendment grounds in Lochner that New York could not constitutionally prevent workers from making contracts to work for more than 10 hours per day.Karlan, “Contracting the Thirteenth Amendment” (2005), p. 802. Karlan argues that the difference results from the different treatment of formal rights and practical rights—i.e., de jure versus de facto realities.Karlan, “Contracting the Thirteenth Amendment” (2005), pp. 803–804.
Karlan also suggests basic racial and economic biases, noting that Brewer had also written the majority opinion for In re Debs—finding in the latter case that a mass strike disrupting the railroad system did warrant federal intervention under the Commerce Clause. She writes: “the outcome in Hodges reflected the Court’s view that the problems of eight black men were not as significant or compelling as those surrounding eighty thousand strikers".Karlan, “Contracting the Thirteenth Amendment” (2005), pp. 804–807.
Karlan notes Arkansas Attorney General Whipple's satisfaction at having jailed the defendants for a year's worth of legal proceedings: “an early version of the notion that the process is the punishment.”Karlan, “Contracting the Thirteenth Amendment” (2005), p. 790.
David Bernstein (law professor at George Mason) adds to Karlan's analysis of the original economic motivation behind the case: “this is just one example of a much broader phenomenon; during the Lochner era, the interests of white industrialists and black workers often converged in opposition to the racially exclusionary policies and attitudes of working class whites.”Bernstein, “Thoughts on Hodges” (2005), p. 812. Following the line of discussion between Brewer and Moody, he argues that the Court might have perceived a broad interpretation as threatening to “the very existence of craft unions”. Bernstein suggests that Harlan and Day were able to recommend broader Thirteenth Amendment powers because they limited its application to Blacks.Bernstein, “Thoughts on Hodges” (2005), p. 818. “Because Justices Harlan and Day, in the Hodgesdissent, had concluded that the Thirteenth Amendment was primarily meant to secure freedom for blacks, and thus was relatively limited in scope, they were able to adopt a broad interpretation of the Thirteenth Amendment.”
Other commentators emphasize the affirmative Thirteenth Amendment protection applied by the Hodges majority to people of all races: “Slavery or involuntary servitude of the Chinese, of the Italian, of the Anglo-Saxon, are as much within its compass as slavery or involuntary servitude of the African.”Carter, “Race, Rights, and the Thirteenth Amendment” (2007), p. 1321.
References
Sources
 Bernstein, David E. “Thoughts on Hodges v. United States”. Boston University Law Review 85, 2005; pp. 811 – 819.
 Carter, William M., Jr. “Race, Rights, and the Thirteenth Amendment: Defining the Badges and Incidents of Slavery”. UC Davis Law Review 40(4); 2007; pp. 1311–1379. 
 Fiss, Owen M. The History of the Supreme Court of the United States, Volume 8: Troubled Beginnings of the Modern State. Cambridge University Press (Oliver Wendell Holmes Devise), 2006.  
 Karlan, Pamela S. “Contracting the Thirteenth Amendment: Hodges v. United States”. Boston University Law Review 85; 2005; pp. 783–809. 
 Tsesis, Alexander. The Thirteenth Amendment and American Freedom: A Legal History. New York University Press, 2004. 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Thirteenth Amendment case law
Category:1906 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Hodgson v. Bowerbank" ==> """
Hodgson and Thompson v. Bowerbank, 9 U.S. (5 Cranch) 303 (1809), was a United States Supreme Court case that held part of the Judiciary Act of 1789 unconstitutional. The invalidated portion conferred federal courts jurisdiction to try cases between aliens.Varat, J.D. Constitutional Law Cases and Materials, Concise Thirteenth Edition. Foundation Press, New York, NY: 2009, p. 33
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1809 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
"""

From "Hodgson v. Minnesota" ==> """
Hodgson v. Minnesota, 497 U.S. 417 (1990), was a United States Supreme Court abortion rights case that dealt with whether a state law may require notification of both parents before a minor can obtain an abortion. The law in question provided a judicial alternative.
Background
The case concerned a Minnesota law. The law required notice to both parents of a minor before she could undergo an abortion; it also contained a judicial bypass provision designed to take effect only if a court found one to be necessary. Dr. Jane Hodgson, a Minneapolis gynecologist, challenged the law. The Eighth Circuit had ruled that the law would be unconstitutional without a judicial bypass, but that the bypass provision saved it.
Opinion of the Court
While Justice Stevens delivered a majority opinion for one of the holdings, there were five votes for each of two holdings, with Justice O'Connor proving as the decisive vote for each. Justices Stevens, Brennan, Marshall, Blackmun and O'Connor formed a majority holding that the two-parent notice requirement by itself was unconstitutional. Justice O'Connor believed that the two-parent requirement entailed risk to a pregnant teenager; she also argued that the rule failed to meet even the lowest standard of judicial review, a rationality standard. She joined the Court's more conservative Justices (Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justices White, Scalia and Kennedy), to form a majority for the law being valid with the judicial bypass; Justice Kennedy had pointed out the usefulness of the bypass procedure, as judges granted all but a handful of requests to authorize abortions without parental notice.
The ruling struck down the two-parent notification requirement, the majority citing an APA brief asserting that one-parent families are common in that state and that within the state, a minor often only needs one parent's permission for certain health needs; the rest of the statute, though, was voted constitutional because of its allowance for judicial bypass.
This case involved the first restriction on abortion that Justice O'Connor voted to strike down.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 497
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 References 
External links
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:Right to abortion under the United States Constitution
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1990 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:Right to privacy under the United States Constitution
Category:Women in Minnesota
"""

From "Hoffman Estates v. The Flipside, Hoffman Estates, Inc." ==> """
Hoffman Estates v. The Flipside, Hoffman Estates, Inc., 455 U.S. 489 (1982), is a United States Supreme Court decision concerning the vagueness and overbreadth doctrines as they apply to restrictions on commercial speech. The justices unanimously upheld an ordinance passed by a Chicago suburb that imposed licensing requirements on the sale of drug paraphernalia by a local record store. Their decision overturned the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals.
Concerned that the sale of items such as bongs and rolling papers, along with books and magazines devoted to the era's drug culture promoted and encouraged illegal recreational drug use, the board of trustees of the village of Hoffman Estates, Illinois, passed an ordinance requiring that vendors of drug paraphernalia obtain a license to do so, as they lacked the power to ban their sale outright. As a condition of that license, they were required to keep a record of the name and address of anyone buying such items for inspection by the police at any time. One of the two stores it applied to, The Flipside, filed suit in federal court for the Northern District of Illinois, seeking to have the ordinance invalidated, claiming its scope was so wide and overbroad as to possibly prevent the store from selling the books and magazines, thus infringing its First Amendment rights.
Justice Thurgood Marshall wrote for the Supreme Court that the village's ordinance was neither vague nor overbroad since it clearly defined the items affected and only explicitly prohibited marketing that alluded to their use in consuming illegal controlled substances. Byron White wrote a separate concurrence arguing that the Court need only have considered the vagueness issue since the Seventh Circuit had not considered the overbreadth claim. John Paul Stevens took no part in the case.
In the wake of the case many more communities began enacting and enforcing drug-paraphernalia laws, greatly curtailing their sale. It has not had much impact since then, or outside that narrow area of law, but it did establish two important precedents for later cases concerning the overbreadth and vagueness doctrines. In the former area, it clarified an earlier ruling and stated explicitly that the doctrine does not apply to commercial speech; in the latter, it established that a statute challenged for vagueness on its face, prior to enforcement, must be "impermissibly vague in all its applications" for the plaintiff to prevail. It also established that laws regulating economic activity, already held to a lower standard for vagueness since businesspeople can reasonably be expected to know their industry and its products, have an even lower standard to meet when they only call for civil penalties.
Background
During the 1970s, the late 1960s counterculture spread from the college campuses and cities that had nurtured it into American culture as a whole, as those who had experienced it as college students graduated and entered society. One of its many effects was that the recreational use of illegal drugs became more widespread and socially accepted, even outside of the former students. Sociologists Erich Goode and Nachman Ben-Yehuda later wrote that "[t]he 1970s represented something of a high water mark in both the use and the public acceptance and tolerance of illegal drugs."
Marijuana and cocaineDEA 1973–2003, 35. in particular were widely used and not considered to be terribly dangerous. Popular culture of the time depicted drug culture and illegal drug use as common and unexceptional. Comedians like Cheech and Chong built their acts around drug humor, songs like "Cocaine" became hits and movies like Annie Hall had scenes with drug use.
Reflecting this trend, sales of drug paraphernalia, products that facilitated the use of illegal drugs, proliferated, becoming a multibillion-dollar business. At first sold on the streets, eventually head shops dedicated to selling them opened up. Stores that sold other merchandise associated with the counterculture, such as rock records, also sold paraphernalia. Some did so quite blatantly, using slogans like "Everything You Need But The Weed," which led lawmakers to believe that these establishments were promoting illegal drug use among teenagers, and indeed even mocking the illegality of those drugs.Regnier, Thomas; "Civilizing" Drug Paraphernalia Policy: Preserving Our Free Speech and Due Process Rights While Protecting Children ; 14 N.Y.U. J. of Leg and Public Pol'y 115, 125 (2011). Retrieved June 29, 2012.
thumb|left|Increased use of illegal drugs, especially marijuana, by teenagers during the 1970s led to efforts to control drug paraphernalia sales.|alt=A young woman looking left with her eyes nearly closed smokes a large cigarette in a wooded setting near a body of water. Behind her another young woman looks at her
In response, many communities began passing ordinances that either restricted or prohibited their sale outright. The head shops and other sellers of paraphernalia challenged them in court. While some surivived,Record Head Inc. v. Olson, 476 F.Supp. 366 (D.N.D., 1979) many early ones were overturned by courts as vague due to their drafters' lack of familiarity with the targeted items and the fact that most smoking equipment can also be used to smoke tobacco and other legal substances, therefore making it hard to say that it is intended and sold only with illegal use in mind.Regnier, 123.
Compounding the ordinances' constitutional difficulties was the Supreme Court's recent decision in  Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council,Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council,  which held that commercial speech was protected under the First Amendment. A Lawrence Township, New Jersey, ordinance targeting five head shops in the Quaker Bridge Mall was thus found to be overbroad since it banned advertising paraphernalia to minors;Record Museum v. Lawrence Township, 481 F.Supp. 768 (D.N.J., 1979) similarly, a Newark ordinance banning the advertising of paraphernalia was struck down.Bambu Sales, Inc. v. Gibson, 474 F.Supp. 1297 (D.N.J., 1979) In response, the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) drafted a model ordinance for communities in 1979.
Underlying dispute
In 1978, a year before the DEA promulgated its model ordinance, the board of trustees of the village of Hoffman Estates, Illinois, a suburb of Chicago, passed an ordinance of its own. It did not ban the sale of paraphernalia, but instead required those businesses selling "any item, effect, paraphernalia, accessory or thing which is designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs" to get a license. Applicants were required to file an affidavit certifying that no one employed by the business had ever been convicted of a drug-related offense and to keep a record of the name and address of anyone purchasing items covered by the law, which the village police could inspect at any time. Sales to minors were also prohibited. The license fee was $150 (roughly $ in modern dollars), with any violation punishable by a fine of $10.Flipside, Etc. v. Village of Hoffman Estates (hereafter Hoffman Estates I), 485 F. Supp. 400, 402–404 (N.D. Ill., 1980).
The village's attorney determined that two businesses in Hoffman Estates were affected by the ordinance. One of them, the Flipside, had been doing business on West Higgins Road in the village for three years, selling primarily recorded music and accessories for that, as well as jewelry and novelty devices. In one section of the store it sold paraphernalia, accompanied by books such as A Child's Garden of Grass and Marijuana Grower's Guide and magazines like High Times, Rolling Stone and National Lampoon, which often carried articles either discussing drug culture or casually depicting illegal drug use.
After the ordinance passed, the Flipside was notified that it was likely affected. It requested from the village attorney further guidance on what sort of specific items it sold were likely to be affected. Items such as roach clips were in the guidelines as covered by the ordinance. Other items were determined to be covered if they were displayed in the proximity of "literature encouraging illegal use of cannabis or illegal drugs."
The Flipside decided not to apply for a license. Instead it removed 80 items from its shelves and filed suit in federal court, alleging the ordinance was "vague, overbroad, capable of being arbitrarily enforced, and not reasonably related to any legitimate governmental objective of the village in controlling drug abuse." These in turn deprived the Flipside of its rights under the First Amendment and the Commerce Clause. Enforcement of the ordinance would similarly violate its right to due process and equal protection under the Fourteenth Amendment.
Lower courts
The case was first heard by the federal court for the Northern District of Illinois. In 1980, Judge George N. Leighton ruled for the village, holding the ordinance neither vague nor overbroad. His decision was then reversed by the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals.
District court
After reviewing the existing law on the subject of vagueness, starting with the Supreme Court's decision in Grayned v. City of RockfordGrayned v. City of Rockford,  eight years earlier, Leighton considered Hoffman Estates' ordinance. "It is obvious that [it] is not a model of legislative clarity," he began. "Its purpose, nonetheless, is evident." The words "item", "effect", "paraphernalia", "accessory" or even "thing" were not used in a technical sense; "they are, in fact, ordinary words." Since no precedent had considered their definition, he resorted to a dictionary and found clear and specific definitions for all but one. To get a better handle on the remaining word, "paraphernalia", he looked to a 1954 decision in a bookmaking case by a California appellate court, which noted that it was "not a technical word in the law of crimes, although it may be in the law of property."People v. Watkins, 126 Cal.App.2d 199, 205 (1954), cited at Hoffman Estates I, 406. More recently, he noted, both law enforcement and drug users had begun referring to the items targeted by the ordinance collectively as paraphernalia, and the Eighth Circuit had taken notice of that usage in a case where it upheld the seizure of such items based on search warrant which had used the word.United States v. Johnson 541 F. 2d 1311, 1315 (8th Cir., 1976), cited at Hoffman Estates I, 407.Hoffman Estates I, 406–07.
At trial the village attorney had given testimony suggesting that he did not know the meaning of some of the terms in the guidelines, and the village president had testified that she did not know what, exactly, was being regulated. The Flipside had argued that these pointed to the statute's vagueness, but Leighton dismissed those concerns. Both passages had been taken out of context, he wrote. The attorney had been describing how he relied on a report from the police on how such items were displayed in a store, and the village president had similarly explained how she had relied on expertise from the police that she did not herself possess to inform her vote in favor of the ordinance. The judge also noted that the village had enacted an administrative review process to resolve questions over potentially vague terms in the ordinance at the time of any application for a license.
"The guidelines adopted almost contemporaneously with the ordinance, together with the terms used, lead this court to conclude that the operative words of the ordinance under attack are not vague," Leighton wrote. "They are common, ordinary expressions, the meaning of which is known to everyone familiar with the English language. They are sufficiently clear that all persons that acted for and on behalf of the plaintiff could gain a reasonably clear idea of what the ordinance required ..." If they had not been, the Flipside would not have, prior to litigation, removed from its shelves enough items for the village to have conceded to the court that the ordinance no longer applied to it.
Leighton next turned to the overbreadth argument. The Flipside had claimed that since the guidelines had expressly referred to whether the affected items were placed next to literature advocating or promoting the use of illegal drugs as a factor in determining whether they were covered, their rights to offer such literature for sale would be subject to a chilling effect. While he agreed that their extensive briefs on the issue were "highly sophisticated, indeed ingenious", he agreed with the village that there was no First Amendment issue.Hoffman Estates I, 408–09.
The Flipside's briefs had properly relied on Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council. But, Leighton reminded them, an earlier case, Pittsburgh Press Co. v. Pittsburgh Commission on Human Relations,Pittsburgh Press Co. v. Pittsburgh Commission on Human Relations,  had also held that commercial speech proposing illegal activity (for example, offering illegal drugs for sale) could be constitutionally regulated. "Thus, even assuming that marketing is a form of advertising entitled to some degree of First Amendment protection, the restriction applied by this ordinance does not infringe on any protected First Amendment activity," Leighton concluded. And, since it only affected that, it could not be considered overbroad. "Plainly, by no construction of the Constitution has the plaintiff any right to sell, either in the village of Hoffman Estates or anywhere else, any 'items, effect, paraphernalia, accessory or thing which is designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs ... '"
Lastly, Leighton considered the Flipside's Fourteenth Amendment claims. The record store had conceded that while the village had a legitimate governmental interest in curbing the sale and use of illegal drugs in its jurisdiction, no compelling state interest existed to justify abridgement of its First Amendment rights by the ordinance. "[T]he court is constrained to agree with defendants," wrote Leighton, since the Flipside have overcome the presumption that the ordinance was valid only if it had shown the absence of a rational basis. Since it had already conceded the village's interest in enforcing state drug laws, and Leighton had already found the ordinance did not infringe the record store's First Amendment rights, there was no constitutional violation. " Furthermore, there is no conceivable colorable claim of a fundamental constitutional right to sell items which facilitate and encourage the use of illegal drugs," Leighton added.
"The objectives of the defendants in enacting this ordinance," Leighton concluded, "to prevent convicted drug dealers and users from selling drug paraphernalia and gaining contacts with a ready market, to prevent a marketing approach which encourages and facilitates illegal drug use, and to require that these items be sold by responsible businesses which are reasonably licensed, are rationally related to the compelling interest in controlling drug abuse, well within the proper health and safety concerns of the village." He denied the Flipside both declaratory and injunctive relief.Hoffman Estates I, 410.
Appeals court
The Flipside appealed to the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals. A pair of circuit judges, Robert Arthur Sprecher and Harlington Wood, Jr., were joined by Henry George Templar of the District of Kansas to form a panel. They heard oral arguments late in 1980 and announced their decision reversing the district court early the next year.Flipside, Inc. v. Village of Hoffman Estates, hereafter Hoffman Estates II, 639 F.2d 373 (7th Cir., 1981)
After reviewing the facts of the case and the proceedings thus far, Sprecher noted that since the case was filed, there had been challenges to drug-paraphernalia ordinances all over the country, many to ordinances based on the DEA model that criminalized the sale, manufacture and possession of the affected items. Within circuits, and indeed even within districts, judges had reached different conclusions. Those that had found the ordinances unconstitutional had done so on vagueness grounds. Only one had reached an appeals court,Geiger v. City of Eagan, 618 F.2d 26 (8th Cir., 1980). and none had reached the merits of the ordinances themselves.Hoffman Estates II, 375–76.
Hoffman Estates' ordinance was different, Sprecher observed, in that imposed not a ban and criminal penalties but licensing and civil penalties. It recognized that paraphernalia was legal to sell, "[y]et one of the purposes of the ordinance obviously must be to do indirectly what it claims it cannot do directly—to effectively ban the sale of a broad class of items, some of which may be used with illegal drugs." No business, he reasoned, would want the stigma of being so publicly identified as a paraphernalia dealer, nor would many patrons buy such items if they had to provide their identities, potentially to the police. It was possibly, Sprecher allowed, to draft an ordinance to accomplish that goal within constitutional limits.Hoffman Estates II, 377.
"But the inherent vagueness of the English language," Sprecher concluded after reviewing the text of the ordinance and Grayned and the other relevant precedents, "coupled with the admirable intention of stemming drug abuse, cannot save an ordinance which fails to give fair notice of what it prohibits." He subjected the text to a closer reading than the district court had. Yes, he agreed with Leighton, the five words had clear meanings. "But the fact that [they do] does not sufficiently clarify the scope of the licensing requirement, which applies to any person who sells [them]." He found the phrase after those words, "which is designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs" to be most determinative of how the ordinance would be interpreted and enforced. "Unless the license guidelines give additional clarity to this phrase, we must agree with plaintiff that the ordinance is so vague that it does not give sufficient notice to merchants as to whether they are required to obtain a license, and for which items the name and address of the purchaser must be recorded and sale to minors prohibited."Hoffman Estates II, 380–81.
In an unreported Indiana case, Sprecher wrote, a three-judge district court panel had found a more detailed ordinance too vague in the use of the similar phrase "designed for use with drugs" since many legal items could be used, or easily altered for use, as drug delivery devices. He read the guidelines written for Hoffman Estates ordinance by the village attorney as using "designed" to denote "those items which are inherently suited only for drug use, and are thus covered by the ordinance regardless of the manner of display or avowed intent of the retailer." However, even in one case where the guidelines left no room for interpretation based on the latter, the guidelines were insufficient.
When it came to rolling papers, Sprecher found the guidelines not only vague but confusing:
Ultimately, the problem with "designed for use", he said, was that the manufacturer, not the seller, determined that. Were the ordinance to prescribe criminal penalties, that aspect alone would be enough to invalidate it, he added in a footnote.Hoffman Estates II, 381n18.
Sprecher dismissed the village's argument that the marketing of the items met the test laid out by the Supreme Court in Leary v. United States, that there be a rational connection between the fact proved and the fact presumed.Leary v. United States,  They had missed the point of that case, where the Court had struck down Timothy Leary's conviction for smuggling marijuana because it could not be rationally presumed, as the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 did, that someone possessing the drug knew it came from outside the United States. "[T]he issue here is whether the 'fact proved,' (marketing scheme), is too vague a standard to give rise to the 'fact presumed,' (drug-relatedness)," he said.Hoffman Estates II, 382–83.
The guidelines were also unsatisfactory on how to determine if the items were marketed for use with illegal drugs, Sprecher found. They depended heavily on the items being sold in "proximity" to other covered items, or "literature encouraging illegal use of cannabis or drugs." Since "paraphernalia" had such an expansive definition, he argued, anything sold near such literature could be covered. "This means that paper clips sold next to Rolling Stone magazine conceivably could trigger the requirements of the ordinance."
The village had argued that, even if the words were vague themselves, they adequately defined what had come to be known as drug paraphernalia. Further, they cited McGowan v. Maryland,McGowan v. Maryland,  where the Supreme Court had held that regulations aimed at business activities had a lower vagueness standard to meet since businesses knew their industry could reasonably be expected to research and prepare for the implementation of those regulations. Sprecher rejected that. "To apply that standard as defendants suggest would presuppose that the business the retailers are engaged in is the business of selling items 'designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs,'" he wrote. "The plaintiff vigorously contests that characterization of its business."
Because of the ordinance's vagueness there was a danger of "arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement", Sprecher claimed. He pointed to a Georgia case brought by two stores had had their business licenses revoked for selling alleged paraphernalia, where the judge had found, among other vague aspects of the law in question, that "conflicting lifestyles and political views suffuse the decision maker's perception of what buyers will do with the product."Housworth v. Glisson, 485 F.Supp. 29, 38 (N.D.Ga., 1978), cited at Hoffman Estates II, 384. He saw the same possibility in the case before him. The village's brief had, Sprecher observed, suggested that no responsible business would sell paraphernalia.
Sprecher also found that the requirement to keep names and addresses of paraphernalia buyers created the same issue, since it might well have been considered probable cause sufficient for a search warrant. The village had likened it to similar records pharmacists were required to keep of Schedule V controlled substances. But he distinguished it by noting that the Schedule V drugs were themselves otherwise illegal to possess, whereas the paraphernalia was perfectly legal. "[T]he record-keeping section implies that a customer who purchases an item 'designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs' intends to use the item with illegal cannabis or drugs."
The village's final argument was that the guidelines were only a beginning and could evolve over time into something more specific. But Sprecher did not see that as even possible. "[T]his ordinance is impermissibly vague on its face," he wrote. "Therefore, it does not provide an administrative body with adequate standards to guide and limit the administrators' discretion in drawing guidelines." Since he had so thoroughly explained why the ordinance was void for vagueness, he found it unnecessary to consider the overbreadth arguments.Hoffman Estates II, 385–86.
Before the Court
A petition for rehearing was denied. The village then petitioned the Supreme Court for certiorari, which was granted late in 1981. Amicus curiae briefs on its behalf, urging reversal, were filed by the attorneys general of 21 states, the village of Wilmette, Illinois (another Chicago suburb), and Community Action Against Drug Abuse. American Businesses for Constitutional Rights filed a brief urging affirmance.Hoffman Estates v. The Flipside, Hoffman Estates, Inc., hereafter Hoffman Estates III, .
Oral arguments were heard late in the year. Richard Williams, the village attorney and drafter of the ordinance, argued for it as he had throughout the proceedings; similarly, Michael Pritzker argued for the Flipside. Justice John Paul Stevens, the Seventh Circuit's chief judge prior to his 1976 elevation to the Court, took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.
Hoffman Estates' oral argument
Williams focused on defending the village from the First Amendment claims, saying he and the board had been aware of that and tried to draft the ordinance narrowly. He noted that the appeals court had focused purely on the vagueness issue. "[T]his is a civil licensing ordinance," he told the justices, "and, we believe, one that does not invade constitutionally protected areas."
Nevertheless, the Court wanted to hear about the vagueness issue. "[W]hat if you can identify some article under this ordinance that any fool would know is covered by it?" Justice Byron White asked. "Is that the end of the inquiry?" Williams eventually was able to tell him that, if there was a clearly identified object, that it would have been held that there was nothing to review until actual enforcement created a potential issue.
When he had begun drafting the ordinance, prior to the DEA's model, "[w]e saw the difficulty right away with trying to make these items per se." So, following McGowan, they decided to put the burden on the retailer by focusing on the marketing of the paraphernalia. "We chose to place no criminal prohibition even on a minor that bought from a retailer that was selling illegally," which, he explained, addressed the issue of transferred intent.
By avoiding any regulation of actual advertising, as had occurred in other cases, the board felt it had steered clear of all First Amendment issues, Williams continued. "[E]ven if their argument on display could be free expression, it fails because it is advocating use with illegal substances," he said in answer to a question about the distinction between advertising and marketing.
Sandra Day O'Connor asked Williams if he had interpreted the ordinance to include a scienter requirement. No, he told her, whereupon she asked him to explain what intent element he saw. "Designed or marketed, we believe, are active words, as opposed to passive." Intent, he argued, could be inferred from the manner of sale or display.
The Seventh Circuit, Williams continued, had "strained to find an interpretation other than designed for use ... A court should not strain to find unconstitutionality." He reiterated that the ordinance was not meant to target a hardware dealer selling alligator clips, but head shops in particular. "I think drug abuse is a serious cancer in our society, and we think that this will chill the retailing of these items to be used with illegal drugs."
When bongs, rolling papers and the other covered items that had legal uses were displayed together, Williams asked, "What is the one common use that can be used with these items? And that, of course, as any child or parent would know, would be to be used with illegal substances. It is more likely than not that they will be used with illegal substances, not tobacco or any other item."
"We are really asking the Court two things," he continued. The first was to take the presumption that illegal use was intended in that kind of marketing, or at least take judicial notice. The second was in regard to the appeals court's concern about targeting certain lifestyles. "I can't make the argument strong enough that I think under the rational interest of the community and the state we have a right to legislate against lifestyles, such as homicidal maniacs, burglars, and drug abusers ... We don't like his lifestyle in Hoffman Estates, and I don't think anywhere else in the country do they care for that lifestyle, and I believe we have a right to legislate."
The Flipside's oral argument
Pritzker said the village had "attempted to narrow the question so that the issue presented is any item, effect, thing which is designed or marketed for use with illegal drugs, unconstitutionally vague." That presentation of the issue, he went on, "is an attempt to overlook the dynamics and other problems inherent in the construction of the ordinance based on the trial record and as construed by the Seventh Circuit." He characterized their argument as "vacillating between an argument that this is drug paraphernalia; on the other hand, well, it is not really paraphernalia, it is paraphernalia because of the way it is marketed."
One justice asked Pritzker about Oliver Wendell Holmes's observation in Nash v. United States that "the law is full of instances where a man's fate depends on his estimating rightly, that is, as the jury subsequently estimates it, some matter of degree."Nash v. United States, , at 377, Holmes, J. He allowed that there was "some looseness" but said the ordinance was still vague, allowing too much room for personal taste to color judgement: "Is a blue pipe inherently criminal, and a brown pipe lawful because in the officer's experience brown is customary and usual? We are essentially talking about taste, and I think we have been unfairly characterized with regards to what lifestyle means. Lifestyle did not refer to drug culture."
White challenged Pritzker on what the situation would be if a customer explicitly referred to an intent to use illegally during the sale. He responded that a different standard would apply, and held to that position when asked how, if that was the case, the ordinance could still be vague on its face, since that would more clearly indicate such marketing. "[I]f a customer had gone into a grocery store and purchased a thousand Glad bags or Ziploc bags because that is the common way that marijuana is distributed in small amounts, and if he sold it, would that grocer be required to get a license?" He maintained that the ordinance strictly targeted just the marketing, and so its requirements wouldn't be triggered by any reference to illegal sale.
Pritzker reminded the Court of the circumstances under which the ordinance had been originally enforced. "They walked into the Flipside store and said, this ordinance is coming into effect, and you are covered, so certainly they don't mean intent, because they just determined intent." At trial, he noted, some of the items the village claimed had been purchased at the Flipside turned out to have been, in fact, acquired at other shops. A village police officer testified that a bong he had once seized turned out to have tobacco residue in it. "I think the only issue is, if a brass water pipe is lawful, like Pier 1 sells and like many tourists who come back from the east [buy], why is a blue one unlawful"
Could the same ordinance cover hypodermic needles, Pritzker was asked. He replied that Illinois law already prohibited their possession or sale without a prescription, and limited their sale to pharmacies. Also, he noted, states like North Dakota had exempted them when they adopted the DEA model, since it was common for farmers to inject veterinary medicine into animals themselves. He denied that a needle ban would be vague because the law already clearly defined hyodermic needles and syringes.
Pritzker asked the justices to consider other examples of situations where the ordinance's underlying theory would be problematic. The village, he recalled, had found support for part of its ordinance in the prohibition of alcohol sales to minors. One of the devices sold by the Flipside that it had complained about was a small mirror with "Cocaine" written on it.Prior to snorting, lumps of cocaine are often placed on mirrors and cut into lines with razor blades. "[Would it] be so clear that if a child cannot possess liquor, would it be unlawful for him to possess a Schlitz glass, a beer mug with the word Schlitz on it? And since he can't drink, would it be unlawful for him to have a Johnny Walker Red mirror?" Many tobacconists' shops had sold books and magazines as well, often related to tobacco use. "Suppose we take Dunhill, and their pipe shop, and their pipe array, and we add to that the posters," he asked. "Does that change the marketing aspect? Do we have NORML posters, and Liberate Marijuana, and those kind of posters on the wall? Now we are displaying the same merchandise, but have we changed the manner of display?"
Pritzker held to his argument even in cases posited of an ordinance that prohibited the public display, without a license to do so, of pistols with barrels shorter than five inches (), which are limited to police use. "The merchant would know what is expected of him," he answered. "There are standards for compliance," which, he went on to argue at length, were lacking in the village's ordinance, although he agreed that there were other statutes, such as the Robinson–Patman antitrust statute, where "people cannot be absolutely certain whether they are complying or not."
Lastly, Pritzker maintained that even a presumption of intent would not suffice to render the law constitutional. "Intent does not give a standard for adjudication or compliance," he said. "[I]ntent cannot add a standard, does not give somebody notice of what is expected of them."
Hoffman Estates' rebuttal
The village was granted five minutes to make a rebuttal argument. Williams focused on Pritzker's distinction that while the village required a license for all sellers of milk, it did not require one for all sellers of corncob pipes, just the Flipside and the other store. "We didn't say we do," he said. "We license only corncob pipes marketed for use with illegal drugs."
"We are going right at the retailer," Williams maintained, citing some other recent appellate decisions that had upheld similar ordinances. Asked if it would help his case if the paraphernalia was displayed next to signs "reading generally, forget your troubles, escape from your anxieties, et cetera?" he said it all came to down to where it was displayed. If such a sign was next to the records, it would not factor into how the ordinance was enforced, he said.
Opinion of the Court
In March 1982 the Court handed down its decision. All eight participating justices had sided with the village, holding the ordinance valid and constitutional. Thurgood Marshall wrote the opinion, joined by all the other justices except Byron White, who wrote a separate concurrence.
After reviewing the case, Marshall set out the court's task. "In a facial challenge to the overbreadth and vagueness of a law, a court's first task is to determine whether the enactment reaches a substantial amount of constitutionally protected conduct." Laws that did not would not be invalidated as overbroad. Next, a court considering vagueness "should uphold the challenge only if the enactment is impermissibly vague in all of its applications. A plaintiff who engages in some conduct that is clearly proscribed cannot complain of the vagueness of the law as applied to the conduct of others".Hoffman Estates III, 494–95, Marshall, J.
The appeals court had not done that in this case, Marshall wrote. It had found the ordinance vague based on a review of only some of its possible applications. "Under a proper analysis," Marshall began, "the ordinance is not facially invalid."
He started with the overbreadth claims, which the appeals court had declined to review. The Flipside's argument that the guidelines' focus on the books and magazines displayed with the paraphernalia constituted a form of prior restraint were "exorbitant" for two reasons: the ordinance did not reach noncommercial speech to begin with, and the only commercial speech it did affect was the marketing of paraphernalia for illegal use.Hoffman Estates III, 495–97.
"We doubt that the village's restriction on the manner of marketing appreciably limits Flipside's communication of information—with one obvious and telling exception," Marshall wrote. In a footnote, he pointed out that the record store had testified at trial that it placed many of those items near the cash register because they were either likely to be impulse purchases best placed at the point of sale or because they were small and likely to be shoplifted, not because it had wanted to communicate any particular information to customers.Hoffman Estates III, 496n8. "The ordinance is expressly directed at commercial activity promoting or encouraging illegal drug use," Marshall said. "If that activity is deemed 'speech,' then it is speech proposing an illegal transaction, which a government may regulate or ban entirely." The overbreadth doctrine not only did not apply, it could not apply since it did not cover commercial speech, something the Court had implied in another case two years earlier.Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission, , at 565n8, Powell, J.
Marshall next considered the vagueness claim. "The ordinance nominally imposes only civil penalties. However, the village concedes that the ordinance is 'quasi-criminal,' and its prohibitory and stigmatizing effect may warrant a relatively strict test," he wrote. But even under a stricter test, the ordinance was "sufficiently clear." No one doubted the meaning of the terms for cannabis or other illegal drugs; those were already and extensively defined in Illinois's state statutes. "The Court of Appeals' speculation about the meaning of 'design' is largely unfounded," he went on. Going with the dictionary definition of "design" as meaning "to fashion according to a plan," he observe that "a business person of ordinary intelligence would understand that this term refers to the design of the manufacturer, not the intent of the retailer or customer." While there were, he admitted, ambiguous terms in the guidelines and ordinances, he found the "designed for use" standard "sufficiently clear to cover at least some of the items that Flipside sold," in particular roach clipsIn a footnote (501n18), Marshall said the Seventh Circuit's criticism of the ordinance for not defining "roach clip" was "unfounded," since a dictionary definition of "roach" that included "the butt end of a marijuana cigarette" existed, and specialized drug slang dictionaries further defined roach clips. which have no legal use.Hoffman Estates III, 500–03.
"Marketed for use" was, in contrast, a "transparently clear" standard. "[I]t describes a retailer's intentional display and marketing of merchandise," Marshall wrote. "The standard requires scienter, since a retailer could scarcely 'market' items 'for' a particular use without intending that use."
Finally, Marshall turned to the Seventh Circuit's concern that the ordinance could be selectively enforced and used to harass people who chose alternative lifestyles. He called it misplaced and outside the scope of the review. "In reviewing a business regulation for facial vagueness ... the principal inquiry is whether the law affords fair warning of what is proscribed," he wrote. "Here, no evidence has been, or could be, introduced to indicate whether the ordinance has been enforced in a discriminatory manner or with the aim of inhibiting unpopular speech. The language of the ordinance is sufficiently clear that the speculative danger of arbitrary enforcement does not render the ordinance void for vagueness."Hoffman Estates III, 503–05.
"We do not suggest that the risk of discriminatory enforcement is insignificant here," Marshall admitted, since the village had said that it had relied on the experience of its police officers and would do so in the future. But it was too soon to tell if that would lead to constitutional issues in practice. And furthermore, it was likely that "the village w[ould] take no further steps to minimize the dangers of arbitrary enforcement" since it could adopt administrative regulations that could narrow or clarify the vague terms in the ordinance. In fact, Marshall wrote, the village's decision to base its enforcement on the marketing of products, rather than their design, was a better standard since it did not require analysis of each individual item, and thus was less likely to be enforced unfairly.
In closing, Marshall acknowledged the many cases of similar laws on the federal docket:
White's short concurrence agreed with Marshall's conception of the vagueness test. "I do not, however, believe it necessary to discuss the overbreadth problem in order to reach this result," he wrote. "There is, in my view, no need to go any further: If it is 'transparently clear' that some particular conduct is restricted by the ordinance, the ordinance survives a facial challenge on vagueness grounds." The Flipside's overbreadth claim was so "tenuous" that it was best left to the lower court as the appeals court had done.Hoffman Estates III, 507–08, White, J., concurring.
Aftermath
With the ordinance upheld, many other communities across the country passed similar anti-paraphernalia ordinances. Court challenges continued, but eventually sales of drug paraphernalia became less widespread, as many record stores and small retailers felt they could no longer sell such merchandise profitably under the restrictions. The DEA would later claim that "thousands of paraphernalia shops were literally legislated out of business."
thumb|right|Bongs and pipes being sold on the street in New York City, 2007, with "tobacco use only" sign|alt=A man sitting at a table on a sidewalk. On the table are an array of pipes from large and ornate to small and plain. A sign taped to the tablecloth in front says "Tobacco use only."
Drug paraphernalia is still sold today, but in a legal gray area. Congress passed a federal ban in 1986; in all states save West Virginia (which just requires a license) paraphernalia is prohibited as well.  Often they are accompanied by signs that remind purchasers they are meant for legal purposes only; retailers will also deny any sale where a customer mentions illegal use. Many sellers have moved to the Internet, where the industry has once reached, according to a 2003 estimate, a billion dollars in annual sales.
Subsequent jurisprudence
Hoffman Estates guided many lower courts considering similar cases, but it did not guarantee the same result. Where no distinction between the challenged ordinance or statute and the one at issue in Hoffman Estates could be made, the governments prevailed, as in Stoianoff v. Montana, a Ninth Circuit case early in 1983.Stoianoff v. Montana, 695 F.2d 1214 (9th Cir., 1983) However, in late 1983, an Ohio district judge threw out a similar ordinance from West Carrollton because it had failed to include any guidelines.Philman's, Inc. v. West Carrollton, 577 F.Supp. 1380 (S.D.Ohio, 1983).
In Seventh Circuit
Back on the Seventh Circuit, two more cases decided shortly after Hoffman Estates considered two different types of ordinances in light of that holding. One, Levas and Levas v. Village of Antioch,Levas and Levas v. Village of Antioch, 684 F.2d 446 (7th Cir., 1982) concerned the model DEA ordinance, passed by another Illinois community. The other, Record Head Corp. v. Sachen, turned on a West Allis, Wisconsin, ordinance that carried criminal penalties.Record Head Corp. v. Sachen, 682 F.2d 672 (7th Cir., 1982)
The same three-judge panel, consisting of circuit chief judge  Walter J. Cummings, Jr., Circuit judge Wilbur Frank Pell, Jr. and William G. East, a senior judge of the District of Oregon sitting by designation, heard both cases but deferred deciding them while Hoffman Estates was pending. Afterwards, it asked all parties for fresh briefs on their positions taking the decision into account, and announced both decisions on the same day, four months after Hoffman Estates.
The panel upheld the Antioch ordinance in Levas but struck down the West Allis ordinance in Record Head. The decisions were not unanimous. Pell issued a one-sentence concurring opinion in the former but dissented at length from the latter.
Levas and Levas v. Village of Antioch
In Levas, two brothers who ran a T-shirt shop in Antioch challenged that village's ordinance. Writing for himself and East, Cummings admitted that due to the difference in the ordinances Hoffman Estates was not controlling precedent, as the village had argued. But, he reminded the Levases, "[it] also sets important limits on facial constitutional attacks in the drug paraphernalia area, and is therefore not so distinguishable as [they] would have us believe."Levas and Levas, 451–52.
Following the Supreme Court, Cummings dispensed with the overbreadth argument, summarizing the Court's position as "[litigants] cannot assert the commercial speech rights of others." The vagueness claims required longer discussion for several reasons. First, the ordinance imposed criminal penalties, requiring a more thorough review; and second, Antioch's ordinance differed from Hoffman Estates' by setting out a list of specific factors that could be considered as determinative of intent to use illegally. The Levases further argued that, by defining coke spoons and marijuana pipes in great detail, the village had imposed strict liability not present in the Hoffman Estates ordinance, making the objects illegal per se without regard to lawful uses.
The Antioch ordinance had "a large, but not entirely amorphous class of items that can be paraphernalia, and an intent requirement that differentiates innocent transfers of multi-purpose items from illegal transfers of drug paraphernalia," Cummings noted. "That combination satisfies the fair notice aspect of the vagueness test, even in its strictest form." Despite all the precedent he cited, he felt that conclusion required further elucidation:
The ordinance's passages on factors that could be considered indicators of intent to use illegally, Cummings found, went from highly probative (statements of intent to use illegally, illegal drug residue on object) to highly relevant (previous drug convictions of defendant, proximity in time and space to illegal use when found) to somewhat relevant (the scope and size of possible legal uses in the community) to two that were not (national and local advertising concerning use and expert testimony concerning use). "Most of these factors are specific and relevant. They constitute effective directions of enforcement activities, and they limit the possibilities of arbitrary enforcement," he wrote. "To the extent that all the factors are not equally relevant and specific, however, the chance that the weaker ones will be relied on is too remote to sustain a facial vagueness attack."Levas, 452–54
On the strict-liability question, Cummings distinguished the issue from other paraphernalia-ordinance cases. Where plaintiffs in those, like Hoffman, had attacked the ordinances for lacking an exact definition of the various items, Antioch's went into great detail, defining coke spoons and pot pipes, for instance, as those having bowls below a certain size and thus optimal for illegal use. "We cannot see how the definitions could be more specific," he observed, "and the remote possibility that they could apply to an antique salt spoon or a woman's pipe does not require a finding of vagueness." Instead, the Levases had argued that the specificity had made those items illegal despite known lawful uses.Levas, 454–56
"As a matter of statutory construction, appellants are correct," Cummings wrote. But even so, that might not be a problem. "In the first place, making the sale of cocaine spoons or marijuana or hashish pipes per se illegal may well not offend the Constitution ... At most, there is an outside chance that the provisions might be found to violate the Due Process Clause." He could not find any successful cases where plaintiffs making a pre-enforcement vagueness challenge to a statute on strict-liability grounds had succeeded, and said it was better to wait and see if any such issues arose as an ordinance was challenged.
In conclusion, Cummings held the Antioch ordinance constitutional provided three conditions were met: that it was construed to preclude convictions based on transferred intent, that it required the seller or possessor have knowledge of intended illegal use rather than "negligent ignorance", and that strict-liability enforcement be limited. "We intimate no views about constitutional issues that may arise in the context of particular attempts to enforce the ordinance."
Record Head Corp. v. Sachen
West Allis's ordinance focused on curbing drug paraphernalia sales to minors. Not only were such sales forbidden, all paraphernalia sales within a thousand feet (305 m) of a school. It also required that paraphernalia be displayed only in portions of stores not visible to minors and where they could only go if accompanied by a parent or guardian. Unlike Hoffman Estates, West Allis provided for criminal penalties, with fines and jail time.Record Head, 675–76.
"It is clear that the opinion in Hoffman Estates establishes a method—though it does not necessarily dictate a result—for judging the facial constitutionality of all such ordinances," Cummings wrote. After reiterating the Court's holding that the overbreadth doctrine did not reach commercial speech, he moved on to the vagueness question. West Allis's ordinance demanded "a somewhat more searching examination," due to the criminal penalties involved, although he admitted the Supreme Court had treated Hoffman Estates' ordinance as "quasi-criminal." West Allis's also governed paraphernalia transactions between individuals, further heightening the standard of review.
Cummings described the quandary faced by anyone creating these ordinances:
Both Hoffman Estates and West Allis had sought to overcome that issue by a licensing scheme and a geographical limit to the prohibition, respectively. But "[t]hese legislative strategies do not really solve the problem," Cummings observed, as it was the definition of paraphernalia that was still the fundamental issue in a vagueness review.
West Allis used the language "designed for use or intended for use with illegal drugs" in its ordinance. It pointed to five factors that could be used to answer that question: whether the business had a license to sell tobacco products, expert testimony as to use, the proportion of such sales to the total sales of the business, national and local advertising for the product and local advertising for the store. "Far from curing vagueness, these factors seem to us to exacerbate it," Cummings wrote. Only three had any bearing on the seller's intent, the fourth would only if manufacturers deliberately advertised their product for illegal use, and the second seemed capable of overriding any inferences that might be drawn from the others. "These factors, which are both general and unweighted, invite inquiry into areas of doubtful relevance rather than make the prohibited conduct any clearer."Record Head, 677–79.
Cummings believed that they would encourage arbitrary enforcement, which he defined in this case as "enforcement that leaves to the arresting or prosecuting authorities the job of determining, essentially without legislative guidance, what the prohibited offense is." Unlike Hoffman Estates' ordinance, West Allis's focused on the use of the items rather than its marketing. In addition to the criticisms he had already made, he said that some of the five factors "just shift the uncertainty from one area to another."
West Allis did, however, win on one complaint. Cummings found that the ordinance did not violate the Equal Protection Clause, reversing the district court. While the fave factors were impermissibly vague, they were not so imprecise as to fail the rational basis test. "[I]n deciding what means to employ," he wrote, "[West Allis City Council] can rely on actual or hypothetical facts, and can attack only certain aspects of a problem without having to justify its failure to fashion a comprehensive solution." He approvingly quoted the words of former Supreme Court justice William O. Douglas to similar effect: "[T]he law need not be in every respect logically consistent with its aims to be constitutional. It is enough that there is an evil at hand for correction, and that it might be thought that the particular legislative measure was a rational way to correct it."Williamson v. Lee Optical Co., , at 487–88, Douglas, J. Quoted at Record Head, 679.
After reversing that holding, Cummings disposed of the case by remanding it to district court and invoking the ordinance's severability provisions. The new proceedings should ask West Allis which direction it would prefer to go with a revised ordinance. "[W]ould it rather retain the sound provisions of this statute and deal separately with the paraphernalia problems, or would it prefer to begin again with a more specifically drawn ordinance covering both paraphernalia and simulated drugs?"
In Hoffman Estates, Pell began his dissent, "the Court seemed to put to rest the idea that municipalities could not, in an endeavor to retard the growing menace of drug abuse, legislate against the activities of the so-called head shops without running afoul of Constitutional prohibitions." He felt that the differences between the two ordinances were "matters of form rather than substance ... [T]he majority opinion appears to be straining unduly to distinguish [them]."Record Head, 682.
Pell called the West Allis ordinance "a sensible and pragmatic approach, within constitutional limitations." While the majority had used a higher standard of review owing to the criminal nature of the ordinance, he reminded them that the Court had called the Hoffman Estates ordinance "quasi-criminal" and held it to the same higher standard. It had approved it, and "[t]he same result, in my opinion, is necessary here." To him, the majority's distinction of the West Allis ordinance as reaching beyond economic or business activity missed the point:
"I simply fail to comprehend," Pell continued, "the reasoning of the majority that the phrase 'intended for use' is broader than 'marketed for use' and therefore somehow becomes vague, although 'marketed for use' is 'transparently clear' with regard to intention," as the Supreme Court had written. In fact, he remarked, Hoffman Estates treated the two phrases as more or less identical, since marketing for a use implied an intention for that use.Record Head, 683.
Pell did not find anything unconstitutional with the factors. "[They] do tend to make the prohibited conduct quite clear." He elaborated:
Lastly, he dismissed the arbitrary-enforcement concern since he felt that West Allis could follow Hoffman Estates' example and administratively narrow or clarify the ordinance. "In candor, I am compelled to conclude that we are involved in a stream of words and an implication of meanings which distort the plain, simple, and easily comprehendible language of this ordinance."
In other cases
Outside the wave of drug-paraphernalia ordinances and statutes challenged in federal courts in its wake, Hoffman Estates has not been significantly revisited by courts at any level, though it has played a significant role in some later analyses outside that area. The Colorado Supreme Court clarified what it called "the Flipside test" for determining the standard of a vagueness review in its 1988 case Parrish v. Lamm. There, two chiropractors had challenged a new state law criminalizing as "abuse of health care" the practice by some health care providers of waiving a patient's health insurance copayment and/or deductible, or advertising that they did so.Parrish v. Lamm, 758 P.2d 1356, Colorado Supreme Court, 1988.
Justice Anthony Vollack wrote for a unanimous court that there were four components to the test: whether the statute was an economic regulation, whether it was civil or criminal, had a scienter component or was overbroad. The lower court had found all four were applicable and struck the law down; the chiropractors that if any of the factors were present the stricter standard of review should apply. "[A] mere tally ... will not suffice," responded Vollack. He considered the overbreadth factor to be the most important and, finding for the state on that one and two of the other three, held the statute was not unconstitutionally vague.Parrish, 1367.
Roark & Hardee L.P. v. City of Austin
Changes in society since Hoffman Estates were reflected in, Roark & Hardee L.P. et al v. City of Austin, the most recent case to rely on it as a significant precedent. In a 2005 referendum, the voters of Austin, Texas, approved a smoking ban in indoor public places within the city. The plaintiffs, owners of several city bars, filed suit in the Western District of Texas seeking to have the ordinance overturned on several grounds, including vagueness.Roark & Hardee L.P. et al v. City of Austin, 394 F.Supp.2d 911 (W.D.Tex., 2005)
Judge Sam Sparks issued a preliminary injunction barring the city from enforcing the ordinance after finding it imposed a higher fine than state law allowed and lacking in a review procedure. Between that time and trial a year later, the city issued several sets of guidelines on the "necessary steps" a business must take to prevent smoking within its premises, a phrase which had been attacked by the plaintiffs as particularly vague. Further, the city had issued violation notices to two of the plaintiffs. Sparks believed these factors made the case more urgent and made his preliminary injunction permanent.Roark & Hardee L.P. et al v. City of Austin, 522 F.3d 533, 539–41 (5th Cir., 2008)
The city appealed to the Fifth Circuit. In 2008 a panel ruled in its favor on all the issues. Carolyn Dineen King, writing for the court, cited Hoffman Estates as laying the procedure for a facial vagueness challenge.Roark & Hardee, 546.
Per it, King had to start with a First Amendment issue. The plaintiffs had argued that one of the "necessary steps", that they ask customers not to smoke, was compelled speech. She rejected that argument: "[T]his speech is plainly incidental to the ordinance's regulation of conduct. After all, the guidelines were amended to include these verbal requirements only after Plaintiffs 'allegedly' experienced difficulty in implementing the ordinance."Roark & Hardee, 549–550.
Next, King considered whether the ordinance was vague in all its possible applications. She held it significant that the guidelines had been drawn up by the city in response to business concerns, giving it a point of similarity with the Hoffman Estates ordinance and the Court's holding that the ability to clarify justified a less strict vagueness standard. But "to be safe", she wrote, the court was applying the stricter standards for criminal ordinances.
The guidelines were of even more importance, wrote King, since unlike Hoffman Estates, the ordinance had been passed by voters rather than city council and Austin's city charter forbade such initiatives from being amended or repealed for two years. The amended guidelines, she continued, "essentially provide plaintiff bar owners and operators a clear 'how to' guide for avoiding a violation under the 'necessary steps' provision." And some of those plaintiffs had not only received multiple notices of violation but seemed to be trying to find loopholes in it, such as making patrons sign written forms confirming that they had been instructed not to smoke inside but otherwise not discouraging them from doing so, and putting empty candleholders on tables instead of ashtrays. Inspectors who cited the bars for violations also circled steps that were not taken when providing notice. "[I]n light of the evidence at trial, Plaintiffs fail to demonstrate that the 'necessary steps' provision is so indefinite as to provide them with no standard of conduct at all."
Analysis and commentary
A few months after the decision, James Atkins wrote a short article it in the Campbell Law Review. Most of his text was descriptive, but at the end he offered some analysis, finding the Court's methods more important than its holding. "This method facilitates a decision that falls comfortably in line with those decisions since Nebbia v. New York in which the Court has deferred to the legitimate exercise of public policy formation by state and local legislatures, particularly with regard to
issues concerning public welfare."Atkins, James; Head Shops—Legitimate Governmental Interest in Regulating the Sale of Drug Paraphernalia Receives Judicial Recognition; 5 Campbell L. Rev. 231, 243 (1982). Retrieved June 29, 2012.
"With respect to the constitutional challenges raised by Flipside," Atkins wrote, "the Court has adopted a sliding-scale standard of permissibility which is measured against the conduct or activity addressed by the statute under challenge. Presumably, the Court is saying that varying degrees of overbreadth or vagueness are required to invalidate different enactments."
Lastly, Atkins wrote, it was a reaffirmation of the Burger Court's "basic policy of noninterference by the judiciary in the exercise of legislative judgment in this area of the law." He said it was clear that the Court had committed itself to an as-applied approach to any future cases arising from drug-paraphernalia laws. As a result of the holding and the Burger Court's policy, he predicted courts would be considering fewer such cases in the future.Atkins, 246.
Many years later, in 2011, John Marshall Law School professor Thomas Regnier criticized Hoffman Estates as prematurely foreclosing constitutional challenges to still-problematic drug-parpahernalia laws in an article in New York University's Journal of Legislation and Public Policy. The village's responses to questions at oral argument suggest they were using the DEA's model ordinance, which had by then been criticized as too vague, as a model, Regnier writes. One of Hoffman Estates' guidelines, that sales of white rolling paper were permitted but not its colored counterpart, came in for some heavy criticism. "[It] sent a clear message to consumers: roll your joints with white papers."Regnier, 136.
In dismissing The Flipside's overbreadth claims, Regnier notes, the Court's analysis was particularly deficient due to an oversight on the record store's part:
Regnier criticized the Court's vagueness analysis as, ultimately, circular.
This, Regnier continued, makes Hoffman Estates part of a general pattern of cases where constitutional concerns the Court has used proactively in other situations are often dismissed by it when the case involves drug-law enforcement, a criticism made as well by Justice John Paul Stevens, who called the Court "a loyal foot soldier in the Executive's fight against [drugs]" in a 1991 dissent.California v. Acevedo, , at 601–02, Stevens, J., dissenting. He contrasts the Court's willingness to let the village clarify its ordinance with Papachristou v. Jacksonville,Papachristou v. Jacksonville,  where it struck down an anti-vagrancy ordinance that used a number of terms for those targeted that were nevertheless insufficiently defined. "In short, the Supreme Court in Flipside would have none of this hairsplitting about whether one could adequately define drug paraphernalia—not if it would prevent American communities from combating the scourge of drugs," he wrote. "We know it when we see it, the Court seemed to say," alluding to Justice Potter Stewart's famous definition of hard-core pornography in Jacobellis v. Ohio.Jacobellis v. Ohio, , at 197, Stewart, J., concurring.Regnier, 141–42.
After Hoffman Estates, Regnier observes, no business challenged a drug-paraphernalia ordinance on constitutional grounds, despite what he believes were unresolved issues in many, particular those that followed the DEA model. "It is unfortunate that the Supreme Court saw fit to uphold such a poorly written piece of legislation as the Village ordinance," he writes. He points to subsequent prosecutions such as Operation Pipe Dreams in the early 20th century, in which comedian Tommy Chong wound up serving several months in prison for his supposedly promotional role in his son's bong-dealing business after his past drug humor was introduced at his sentencing, as demonstrating the chilling effect originally feared by Flipside and the other paraphernalia dealers. "For these reasons, drug paraphernalia is a more appropriate subject for civil regulation than criminal prosecution."Regnier, 143–44.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 455
Notes
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1982 in United States case law
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit cases
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:United States commercial speech case law
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:Overbreadth case law
Category:Void for vagueness case law
Category:Hoffman Estates, Illinois
Category:Drug paraphernalia
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Hoffman Plastic Compounds, Inc. v. NLRB" ==> """
Hoffman Plastic Compounds, Inc. v. National Labor Relations Board, 535 U.S. 137 (2002), is a United States labor law decision in which the Supreme Court of the United States denied an award of back pay to an illegal immigrant worker, Jose Castro, who had been laid off for participating in a union organizing campaign at Hoffman Plastics Compounds plant, along with several other employees. The case was originally filed against Hoffman by Dionisio Gonzalez, an organizer with the United Steelworkers.
The National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) found that the layoff of Castro had violated National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) section 8(a)(3) on the unlawful firing of union supporters. Castro had  entered the United States illegally and had also used another person's identity (a friend's birth certificate) to gain employment at Hoffman Plastics.
In a 5–4 decision, with the justices divided along ideological lines, the Supreme Court interpreted that the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 (IRCA), which penalizes undocumented workers and provides for significant penalties to companies that knowingly employ illegal immigrants, disallows the use of the make-whole remedial scheme of the NLRA against an employer that benefits any person who knowingly broke  immigration law. Chief Justice William Rehnquist delivered the opinion of the Court, joined by Justices Sandra O'Connor, Antonin Scalia, Anthony Kennedy, and Clarence Thomas.
Justice Stephen Breyer wrote a dissent, joined by Justices John Paul Stevens, David Souter, and Ruth Bader Ginsburg. They expressed concern that employers would use the illegal immigration status of an employee to relieve themselves of responsibility under the NLRA.
Facts
Hoffman Plastics, a small business based in Paramount, California, manufactures polyvinyl resins and plastic pipework. In 1988, Hoffman Plastics hired Castro after he had presented to Hoffman what seemed to be an authentic US birth certificate as verification of his legal right to work in the United States.
Approximately seven months after Castro was hired, the United Rubber, Cork, Linoleum and Plastic Workers of America of the AFL–CIO started an organizing campaign at Hoffman Plastics. Castro, along with several other employees, showed their support for unionization by participating in the handing out of fliers and union authorization cards.
In retaliation, Hoffman laid off Castro and the other pro-union employees. Three years later, the NLRB found Hoffman Plastics to be in violation of section 8(a)(3) of the NLRA and awarded Castro back pay and reinstatement at Hoffman Plastics, but at an administrative law judge hearing to decide how much back pay should be awarded to the parties involved, Castro admitted that he had entered the country illegally and used a friend's birth certificate to obtain the documents needed to gain employment.
After two unsuccessful attempts by Hoffman to reverse the decision to pay Castro, the Court granted certiorari.
National Labor Relations Act
The National Labor Relations Act was first instituted by the Democratic New York Senator Robert F. Wagner (D) in 1935, who submitted a bill to Congress to eliminate unfair labor practices of businesses. The NLRA outlines the benefits and rights of employees. One of its most important sections is section 7, which gives employees rights to organize labor unions without the fear of retaliation from their employer: "Employees shall the right to self-organization, to form, join, or assist labor organizations, to bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing, and to engage in other concerted activities for the purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual aid and protection." The National Labor Relations Board brought the case to the Supreme Court with its determination based on the Wagner Act was violated by Hoffman Plastics for firing Castro and others for contributing to the Union organizing at the plant.
Section 7 entitles workers to organize or join a union if they are so desired, and protection is provided also by the First Amendment of the Bill of Rights in the US Constitution. There have been numerous cases brought to the courts by violators such as Walmart for firing employees for threats of employees organizing labor forces to better job benefits such as pay, medical insurance, and paid time off. In 2002, the NLRB brought more than 40 cases to court regarding violations of section 7 of the National Labor Relations Act against Walmart.
Immigration Reform And Control Act
The Immigration Reform And Control Act (IRCA) was originally the Immigration and Nationality Act, which was adopted by the 99th Congress was signed into law in 1986 by President Ronald Reagan. The Act added many new provisions for the purpose of requirements and punishments of the US immigrant workforce and served for the illegal documentation of the worker Jose Castro when he used a friends birth certificate for identification. The law states under section 101, "Control of Unlawful Employment of Aliens," that workers must provide proper documents such as a passport, certificate of United States citizenship, unexpired foreign passport, naturalization card, certificate of birth in the United States, or one that establishes United States nationality at birth with a stamp from the Attorney General. All documents must be verified to be confirmed as legal.
Judgment
The Supreme Court ruled 5-4 that Jose Castro had illegally worked at Hoffman Plastics because of his illegal immigration status. Sure-Tan, Inc. v. NLRB, one of the major cases used in finding its decision, was a very similar case about the firing of illegal immigrants. The Court did not refer to the Immigration Control and Reform Act in its findings and applied only one federal law, the National Labor Relations Act of 1938, since the issue was whether or not to pay the back pay, not the illegal hiring decision of Hoffman.
The NLRB sought back pay, which could have been earned if Castro had not been terminated. Under the IRCA, Castro was not a documented worker, and since he was ineligible to work. Therefore, the Supreme Court decided that no back pay could be awarded.
In dissent, Justice Breyer wrote:
Significance
According to the US Department of Labor, the ruling "does not mean that undocumented workers do not have rights under the U.S. labor laws." The ruling found that workers must have authorization to be working in the US to be protected under all labor laws. Knowingly committing fraud by using false identification to gain employment is as much as a crime as it is to hire illegal undocumented workers.
The decision of the NLRB to award back pay to Castro was overturned by the Supreme Court, which found that Castro was not eligible for back pay since he was an undocumented worker and was working illegally in the United States. When the Court ruled on Sure-Tan, it would have rewarded Castro the back pay to which he was entitled because he was protected under the law. Since Sure-Tan, the IRCA introduced new laws to help curb undocumented workers, but the new laws do not protect undocumented workers by allowing them six months to become a citizen or obtain a work visa.
See also
US labor law
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 535
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2002 in United States case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:National Labor Relations Board litigation
Category:Plastics industry
Category:History of Los Angeles County, California
Category:United Steelworkers litigation
"""

From "Hoke v. United States" ==> """
Hoke v. United States, 227 U.S. 308 (1913), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court that held that the United States Congress could not regulate prostitution per se, which was strictly the province of the states. Congress could, however, regulate interstate travel for purposes of prostitution or other "immoral purposes." 
The case revolved around an offer to transport women from New Orleans to Beaumont, Texas for the purpose of prostitution. The Supreme Court upheld prosecution under the Mann Act.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 227
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:1913 in United States case law
Category:Mann Act
Category:Sex case law
Category:Prostitution law in the United States
Category:Prostitution in Texas
Category:History of Beaumont, Texas
Category:Crime in New Orleans
"""

From "Holden v. Hardy" ==> """
Holden v. Hardy, 169 U.S. 366 (1898), is a United States labor law case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a limitation on working time for miners and smelters was constitutional.
Facts
In March 1896, the Utah state legislature passed a law that limited the number of work hours for miners and smelters.
A few months later, Salt Lake County Sheriff Harvey Harden arrested Albert Holden, the owner of Old Jordan Mine, for breaking that law. He charged him with forcing two of his workers to work much longer than eight hours. While Holden admitted to making his workers work longer hours, he also argued that the Utah law was unconstitutional because it prevented individuals from making contracts with each other. In addition, Holden argued that the law prevented him from having both property and liberty without due process. Not only that, the law also singled out managers in the mining industry, preventing them from equal protection of the laws. Well, Holden was found guilty, anyway, and he was fined $50, which he refused to pay so ended up serving a jail sentence of 57 days.
Meanwhile, Holden appealed the case to the Utah Supreme Court, focusing on the part of the Utah Constitution that protected the freedoms of labor. Holden argued the Utah legislature had no right to pass any law restricting how many hours people can work in a day. The Utah Supreme Court disagreed with him, siding with the legislature and explaining that mining and smelting was dangerous, writing "prolonged effort day after day...will produce morbid, noxious, and often deadly effects in the human system." Therefore, limiting hours of this work was necessary.
Holden then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, who agreed to hear oral arguments on October 21, 1897.
Judgment
The Supreme Court, in a majority opinion by Henry Billings Brown, held the Utah law was a legitimate exercise of the police power. Such a law is legitimate if there is indeed a rational basis, supported by facts, for the legislature to believe particular work conditions are dangerous. It distinguishes the case from laws imposing universal maximum hour rules, that were unconstitutional under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
See also
US labor law
Lochner v. New York: Similar case denying limited working hours for bakers
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 169
References
External links
Category:1898 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Working time
Category:Legal history of Utah
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:Mining law and governance
Category:Mining in Utah
"""

From "Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project" ==> """
Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project, 561 U.S. 1 (2010), was a case decided in June 2010 by the Supreme Court of the United States regarding the Patriot Act's prohibition on providing material support to foreign terrorist organizations (18 U.S.C. § 2339B). The case, petitioned by United States Attorney General Eric Holder,Unknown author, (Aug 4, 2012) Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project, The Oyez Project at IIT Chicago-Kent College of Law, retrieved August 7, 2012 represents one of only two times in First Amendment jurisprudence that a restriction on political speech has overcome strict scrutiny. The other is Williams-Yulee v. Florida Bar.
The Supreme Court ruled against the Humanitarian Law Project, which sought to help the Kurdistan Workers' Party in Turkey and Sri Lanka's Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam learn how to resolve conflicts peacefully.Adam Liptak, Court Affirms Ban on Aiding Groups Tied to Terror, The New York Times, June 21, 2010. It concluded that the US Congress had intended to prevent aid to such groups, even for the purpose of facilitating peace negotiations or United Nations processes because that assistance fit the law's definition of material aid as "training," "expert advice or assistance," "service," and "personnel." The finding was based on the principle that any assistance could help to "legitimate" the terrorist organization and free up its resources for terrorist activities.
The court noted that the proposed actions of the Humanitarian Law Project were general and "entirely hypothetical" and implied that a post-enforcement challenge to the application of the "material support" provisions was not prevented.
 Reception 
Former President Jimmy Carter criticized the decision and argued:
Élisabeth Decrey Warner, the president of the Swiss NGO Geneva Call, also expressed her disapproval by stating, "Civilians caught in the middle of conflicts and hoping for peace will suffer from this decision. How can you start peace talks or negotiations if you don't have the right to speak to both parties?".
In January 2011, David D. Cole, a professor of law at Georgetown University Law Center, who argued the case for the Humanitarian Law Project, commented on developments since the decision. He noted that several prominent former officeholders, including Rudolph Giuliani and Tom Ridge, had spoken in support of the People's Mujahedin of Iran, an Iranian opposition group designated by the United States as a terrorist organization.Cole, David (2011-01-02) Chewing Gum for Terrorists, New York Times He stated that he supported their right to speak but that even nonviolent advocacy, such as urging a designation as "terrorist" to be revoked, was illegal under the Supreme Court decision. He also pointed to exemptions granted under the rubric of "humanitarian aid" that turned out to include products like cigarettes and chewing gum. He stated, "Under current law, it seems, the right to make profits is more sacrosanct than the right to petition for peace, and the need to placate American businesses more compelling than the need to provide food and shelter to earthquake victims and war refugees."
The linguist Noam Chomsky criticized the decision as an issue of freedom of speech and stated that it was "the first major attack on freedom of speech in the United States since the notorious Smith Act back around 1940." He also stated that it had troubling legal implications since Humanitarian Law Project gave out advice to PKK to urge the group to pursue nonviolence."Democracy Uprising" in the U.S.A.?: Noam Chomsky on Wisconsin's Resistance to Assault on Public Sector, the Obama-Sanctioned Crackdown on Activists, and the Distorted Legacy of Ronald Reagan. Democracy Now!, February 17, 2011
The magazine Mother Jones stated that "the Supreme Court ruled that even protected speech can be a criminal act if it occurs at the direction of a terrorist organization." It went on to say that people "could be convicted of materially supporting terrorism merely for translating a document or putting an extremist video online, depending on [their] intentions."Adam Serwer, Does Posting Jihadist Material Make Tarek Mehanna a Terrorist?, Mother Jones, December 16, 2011.
Representatives of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement stated that the ruling would probably not affect its operations or its relationship with the US government.
 Implementation 
In September 2010, the FBI raided activists in Minneapolis and Chicago; seized computers, cellphones and files; and issued subpoenas to some targeted individuals to appear before a federal grand jury. The FBI agents were seeking evidence of ties to groups deemed by the US government to be foreign terrorist organizations, including the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia and the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.Colin Moynihan, F.B.I. Searches Antiwar Activists’ Homes, New York Times, September 24, 2010Search warrant  and subpoena  (Indymedia) Attorneys linked the raids to the Holder decision.Sheila Regan, FBI raids activist homes in Minneapolis, Chicago, Twin Cities Daily Planet, September 24, 2010.Activists to Protest Recent FBI Raids on Anti-War Members, Associated Press, September 24, 2010.
 See also 
 Anti-terrorism legislation
 Freedom of speech in the United States
 Incitement to terrorism
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 561
 References 
 Further reading 
 External links 
 The Supreme Court goes too far in the name of fighting terrorism (Washington Post)
 What Counts as Abetting Terrorists? (NYT)
 Andrew F. March, "A Dangerous Mind?" New York Times Sunday Review, April 22, 2012
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:Patriot Act
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Void for vagueness case law
"""

From "Holguin-Hernandez v. United States" ==> """
Holguin-Hernandez v. United States was a United States Supreme Court case. The Court decided that the sentence imposed on the defendant was unconstitutional, in violation of the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution, furthermore, the court affirmed the principle that the Federal Sentencing Guidelines were not mandatory.
 Case description 
Holguin-Hernandez was convicted of drug charges and sentenced to 60 months in prison and 5 years of supervised release. The government requested that an additional sentence of 12 to 18 months in prison be imposed for violation of the conditions of the previous term. The district court accepted the request and imposed an additional 12-month sentence. The defendant appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit and argued that the sentence was unconstitutional as it was greater than the necessary sentence to accomplish its goals. The Court of Appeals found that he could not argue its unconstitutionality because he didn't argue it before the District Court. Before the Supreme Court of the United States, the court ruled that the sentence imposed was "unreasonably long" and that the Federal Sentencing Guidelines were not mandatory for judges to follow, and that he could argue for its unconstitutionality.
 Influence 
The case resulted in the re-affirmation that the Federal Sentencing Guidelines were not mandatory, it also created the principle that sentences couldn't punish over the amount that highly promote justice.
The effects are seen to this day in many lower court cases.
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure case law
"""

From "Holland v. Florida" ==> """
Holland v. Florida, 560 U.S. 631 (2010), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the statute of limitations under the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act is subject to equitable tolling in appropriate cases.
 Background 
The case arose from a prosecution for the murder of police officer Scott Winters and the sexual assault of Thelma Johnson by Albert Holland.
On July 29, 1990, Holland attacked Johnson in Pompano Beach, Florida, rendering her semiconscious and inflicting severe head wounds. He ran off after a witness interrupted the attack, but was later found by K-9 patrol officer Scott Winters of the Pompano Beach Police Department. Holland grabbed Winters's gun and fatally shot Winters in the groin and lower stomach.Holland v. State, 773 So. 2d 1065 (Fla. 2000). Holland was later convicted of first-degree murder, armed robbery, attempted sexual battery, and attempted first-degree murder.Holland v. State , 916 So. 2d 750 (Fla. 2005).
 Opinion of the Court 
Associate Justice Stephen Breyer authored the majority opinion..
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 560
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:Pompano Beach, Florida
"""

From "Hollingsworth v. Perry" ==> """
Hollingsworth v. Perry was a series of United States federal court cases that re-legalized same-sex marriage in the state of California. The case began in 2009 in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California, which found that banning same-sex marriage violates equal protection under the law. This decision overturned California ballot initiative Proposition 8, which had banned same-sex marriage. After the State of California refused to defend Proposition 8, the official sponsors of Proposition 8 intervened and appealed to the Supreme Court. The case was litigated during the governorships of both Arnold Schwarzenegger and Jerry Brown, and was thus known as Perry v. Schwarzenegger and Perry v. Brown, respectively. As Hollingsworth v. Perry, it eventually reached the United States Supreme Court, which held that, in line with prior precedent, the official sponsors of a ballot initiative measure did not have Article III standing to appeal an adverse federal court ruling when the state refused to do so..
The effect of the ruling was that same-sex marriage in California resumed under the district court trial decision from 2010. Other findings from the trial decision, including Judge Vaughn Walker's findings of fact, remain controlling precedent for future relevant cases. The case was docketed with the Supreme Court at 570 U.S. 693 (2013) (Docket No. 12-144).
 Background 
In May 2008, the California Supreme Court held in the case In re Marriage Cases that state statutes limiting marriage to opposite-sex applicants violated the California Constitution. The following month, same-sex couples became able to marry in California. In November 2008, California's voters approved Proposition 8, an amendment to the state constitution that sought to restore a prior opposite-sex-couple limitation on marriage; but following its adoption, several lawsuits were filed that challenged the validity of the amendment, under various state constitutional provisions. On May 26, 2009, the California Supreme Court held, in Strauss v. Horton that (while Proposition 8 was a lawful enactment), all same-sex marriages that had been contracted before the proposition's passage remained valid.
The National Center for Lesbian Rights, Lambda Legal and American Civil Liberties Union had originally obtained the right to same-sex marriage in California, in In re Marriage Cases, and defended it in Strauss v. Horton.
Three days before the Strauss decision occurred, the American Foundation for Equal Rights (AFER) filed suit in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California, to challenge the validity of Proposition 8 on behalf of two same-sex couples. The couples' legal team was led by David Boies and former U.S. Solicitor General Theodore Olson (who, incidentally, had previously represented opposite parties in Bush v. Gore, with Boies representing Al Gore and Olson representing George W. Bush, the case that, effectively, decided the 2000 presidential election). In the 2010 Time 100, they were listed, for "their nonpartisan and strong legal approach to challenging Proposition 8."
Lambda Legal and the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) opposed the filing because they felt a federal challenge at this time might do more harm than good. Olson and AFER rebuffed this argument and defended the timing of the lawsuit.
Following a pre-trial hearing on July 2, 2009, the three legal groups moved to intervene in the lawsuit, as did the City of San Francisco in a separate filing. The plaintiffs opposed allowing the groups or the city to intervene. On August 19, Judge Walker denied the legal groups' motions to intervene, but granted the City's, albeit in a limited capacity. Despite the other groups' failed attempt to intervene in the lawsuit, they offered support to the legal team litigating the case, with James Esseks of the ACLU saying: "We are interested in doing whatever we can to make sure their case is as successful as possible".
 Parties 
 Plaintiffs 
In May 2009, the Alameda County Clerk-Registrar, Patrick O'Connell, denied Kristin Perry and Sandra Stier a marriage license because they are a same-sex couple. For the same reason, Dean Logan, the Los Angeles County Clerk, denied Paul Katami and Jeffrey Zarrillo a marriage license. The couples sued the two county clerks and several state officials: Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger, Attorney General Jerry Brown, and two officials in the Department of Public Health.
Several groups sought to intervene as plaintiffs, including the groups who had prosecuted the actions entitled In re Marriage Cases and Strauss v. Horton. San Francisco also filed a motion to intervene in the case. The City cited its work in the earlier cases that had provided "extensive evidence and proposed findings on strict scrutiny factors and factual rebuttals to long claimed justifications for marriage discrimination". City Attorney Dennis Herrera said that his office is "singularly well-prepared" to help "put anti-gay discrimination on trial based on the facts". Walker permitted only San Francisco to intervene, as it could speak to the impact of Proposition 8 on local governments. He also ordered the attorney general to assist San Francisco in analyzing Proposition 8's impact. Walker stated that necessary speed and swiftness "on an issue of this magnitude and importance" were required and that the intervention of additional groups would only complicate and stall the case.
 Defendants
Attorney General Jerry Brown chose not to defend the lawsuit, saying that Proposition 8 violates the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution and should be struck down. Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger also declined to participate in the defense but said it was appropriate for the courts to hear the case and "resolve the merits of this action expeditiously" because it "presents important constitutional questions that require and warrant judicial determination." On November 2, 2010, Brown was elected governor and Kamala Harris was elected attorney general. Both ran on platforms promising not to defend the proposition,. and the state continued to decline defending Proposition 8 in court after they assumed office.
Two groups, the official proponents of Proposition 8, ProtectMarriage.com, led by then-Senator Dennis Hollingsworth, and a rival group, the Campaign for California Families, sought to intervene as defendants. The court allowed the official proponents to intervene, filling the void left by the state officials' acquiescence. The judge denied the request from the Campaign for California Families.
On December 15, Imperial County also filed a motion to intervene as a defendant despite the fact that the intervenor deadline had passed. They argued that the civil agencies named in the suit, the counties of Alameda and Los Angeles and the state government, were not actively defending the Proposition. They continued to argue that the case needed a proper governmental defendant. On August 4, along with the ruling, Judge Vaughn Walker denied Imperial County intervenor status.
 District court trial 
 Pre-trial motions 
Plaintiffs filed a motion for a preliminary injunction that would have immediately restored same-sex marriage in California until the lawsuit was decided. Walker deferred a ruling on the motion and said he would instead "proceed directly and expeditiously to the merits".
During discovery, the plaintiffs requested that the campaign produce internal documents that related to the purpose and intent of the amendment and the development of political messages during the campaign. The Proposition 8 proponents objected to the request because of the potential adverse effect on political speech, among other grounds. On October 1, Walker rejected the contention that the First Amendment shielded all of those communications. The proponents appealed that decision to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit and separately moved to stay the proceedings in the district court. Stating that the proponents were unlikely to succeed in this appeal, Walker rejected the stay request on October 23. Regardless, the proponents continued to assert a First Amendment privilege over these documents, a sampling of which Walker reviewed privately.Perry v. Schwarzenegger, Discovery teleconference transcript , pp. 42–43. November 1, 2009. Retrieved November 14, 2009. On December 11, 2009, the Ninth Circuit overturned Walker's ruling, saying that the release of the documents "would likely have a chilling effect on political association and the formulation of political expression" in a unanimous opinion by Raymond C. Fisher with Kim McLane Wardlaw and Marsha Berzon.Perry v. Schwarzenegger, 591 F. 3d 1147 (9th Cir. 2010)
In September, Proposition 8 proponents filed a motion for summary judgment. Running more than 100 pages, the motion asked the court to rule that Proposition 8 did not offend the U.S. Constitution without the need to find facts at a trial. The motion asserted that Baker v. Nelson foreclosed any further review by the court. Failing that, the motion argued that all of the couples' claims failed as a matter of law. After a two-hour hearing on October 13, Walker denied the motion. He noted that the Supreme Court doctrine on sexual orientation and gender discrimination had changed since 1972. Resolving the amendment's validity, Walker noted, required hearing testimony at trial.
 Broadcast and online coverage 
Perry would have been the first federal trial to be filmed and be shown live at public courthouses in San Francisco, Pasadena, Seattle, Portland, and Brooklyn, through an experimental new system developed by the Ninth Circuit Appeals Court. The trial would have also been shown on the video-sharing website YouTube. Walker noted that he had received 138,574 comments on the plans to broadcast the trial, and all but 32 were in favor.
On January 11, 2010, two days before the trial, the defendant-intervenors filed emergency papers with Supreme Court Circuit Justice Anthony Kennedy to bar telecasting the trial, with the court ruling 8–1 to temporarily stay live streaming until January 13, with the lone dissenter being Stephen Breyer.Hollingsworth v. Perry No. 09A648, 130 S.Ct. 1132 (2010) Although a coalition of media organizations, including CNN, Fox News, the Associated Press, and Court TV, filed an emergency amicus brief in support of live streaming and delayed broadcast, the court passed an unsigned 5–4 ruling in Hollingsworth v. Perry to indefinitely block live streams to various federal courthouses, although it refused to rule on plans to delay broadcasts on YouTube.Hollingsworth v. Perry No. 09A648, 130 S.Ct. 705 (2010) A dissenting opinion by Breyer that was joined by John Paul Stevens, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, and Sonia Sotomayor reveals that the majority was formed by John Roberts, Antonin Scalia, Anthony Kennedy, Clarence Thomas, and Samuel Alito.
Despite the ruling, the proceedings elicited unprecedented live coverage through social networking site Twitter from the gay-interest magazine The Advocate, the National Center for Lesbian Rights, an official feed from the group representing the plaintiffs (AFER), a California-based progressive organization Courage Campaign, and several independent parties including Chris Geidner, maintainer of the LGBT-oriented Law Dork blog, San Francisco-based attorney Chris Stoll, and others.
Filmmakers John Ireland and John Ainsworth filmed and distributed a re-enactment of the trial. Actors participating in the project include Adrienne Barbeau, Arye Gross, and Tess Harper.
 Hearing 
In scheduling a trial for January 11, 2010, to gather facts about the case, Walker largely surprised both the plaintiffs and defendants. The trial was intended to address issues such as how having same-sex parents affects children, whether same-sex marriages undermine opposite-sex marriages, the history of discrimination against gays, and the effects of prejudice against gays. Notable trial witnesses included historian George Chauncey, psychologist Gregory M. Herek, and philosopher Daniel N. Robinson.
The trial began with opening statements by Theodore Olson and San Francisco Deputy City Attorney Therese Stewart for the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs sought to show that marriage is a fundamental right; that depriving gays and lesbians of the right to marry hurts them and their children; and that there was no reason or societal benefit in prohibiting them from getting married. Charles J. Cooper made an opening statement for the defendants, saying that marriage had been universally limited to opposite-sex couples. The plaintiffs then testified about their personal experiences as gay Americans, and the reasons why they wished to marry.
Following the Supreme Court's decision in Christian Legal Society v. Martinez on June 28, 2010, the plaintiffs in Perry cited the decision by Justice Ginsburg as Supreme Court precedent that sexual orientation is "an identifiable class" in opposition to the defense's argument that sexual orientation is "behavioral". Christian Legal Society had asserted that it did not restrict membership based on sexual orientation but based on "conduct and belief that the conduct is not wrong".Christian Legal Society v. Martinez 130 S. Ct. 2971 at 2990, 561 US __, Slip. op. at p. 23 (2010) Ginsburg rejected that distinction, noting that with respect to sexual orientation the court has "declined to distinguish between status and conduct" and offering an analogy from an earlier opinion: "A tax on wearing yarmulkes is a tax on Jews."Christian Legal Society v. Martinez, 130 S. Ct. 2971, 2990; 561 US __ (2010), retrieved July 20, 2010. Citing Bray v. Alexandria Women's Health Clinic 506 U.S. 263 (1993).
Testimony 
 History of marriage 
The plaintiffs called expert witness Nancy Cott, an American history scholar, who testified that "marriage has never been universally defined as a union of one man and one woman, and that religion has never had any bearing on the legality of a marriage". The next day, she continued her testimony, which revolved around three key points: how marriage has historically been used "punitively" to demean disfavored groups, how the legally enshrined gender roles in marriage had been disestablished during the 20th century and how the changes in the institution of marriage had mainly involved "shedding inequalities", which she said strengthens marriage. She emphasized the importance of the institution of marriage by noting that "when slaves were emancipated, they flocked to get married. And this was not trivial to them, by any means".
Cott was then cross-examined by David Thompson, who asked about her personal feelings on same-sex marriage to establish that she was an advocate rather than a dispassionate scholar. Defense counsel argued that marriage has traditionally been between a man and a woman because it provided a stable unit for procreation and child rearing.
 Discrimination 
Professor George Chauncey of Yale University, a social historian who specializes in LGBT history, described how previous government campaigns had attempted "to demonize gay people as dangerous sexual deviants and child molesters". He then analyzed campaign material from the Yes on 8 campaign to show how they played upon the same message. He analyzed the words of Dr. William Tam, which included assertions that, were California to fail to pass Proposition 8, other states would follow and "fall into Satan's hands", and that following legalization of same-sex marriage, the advocates of the "gay agenda" would attempt to "legalize having sex with children". Chauncey connected these messages to the earlier history of government demonizing gays and lesbians which he had previously discussed. Helen Zia, a scholar on Asian American social and political movements who was also asked to analyze those words, explained how her encounters with similar Asian community organizers encouraged her to "[step] into the closet and [slam] the door." David Thompson for the defense cross-examined Prof. Chauncey by focusing on the progress that had been made for mainstream acceptance of gays and lesbians in the last twenty years. Thompson noted anti-discrimination laws, support for domestic partnerships, and the proliferation of media like the sitcom Will & Grace and 2005 film Brokeback Mountain. Thompson's line of questioning was intended to establish "whether systemic bias against lesbians and gay men prevents them from being treated by others as equal citizens in the political process".
Professor Gary Segura, a political scientist at Stanford University, said that no other minority groups in America — including undocumented aliens — have been the target of more restrictive ballot initiatives than gay men and lesbians. He accused Proposition 8 of being the type of social stigma that makes "gay and lesbian social progress seem like it comes at expense of other people and organizations and it makes the hill steeper". Under cross-examination, defense witness David Blankenhorn revealed that he believed the principle of equal human dignity applied to gay and lesbian Americans, and that "we would be more American on the day we permitted same-sex marriage than we were on the day before".
Gregory Herek, a professor from the University of California, Davis, contended that "structural stigma" in the form of laws like Proposition 8 directly encourages social stigma, harassment, and violence against LGBT people. He also testified that there is no evidence "conversion therapy" is effective in changing a person's sexuality, and that it "sends a harmful and false message to young people that homosexuality is a disorder", directly leading to more discrimination. During cross-examination, he asserted that "sexual orientation is a combination of attraction, identity, and behavior, and that the complexities researchers face in defining sexual orientation are no different than those they face in defining other characteristics such as race".
San Diego Republican mayor Jerry Sanders testified how he transitioned from believing that domestic partnership was an ideal compromise to believing that same-sex marriage was fundamental. "What hit me was that I had been prejudiced", he explained. During cross-examination, he agreed with the defendants that not all people who voted for Proposition 8 were "bigots", but that he believed their vote was "grounded in prejudice".
 Psychological effects 
Relationship psychologist Anne Peplau took the stand and argued that individuals gain physical, psychological, and social benefits from being married. Edmund A. Egan, the chief economist for San Francisco, agreed and said that the citizen's improved health would save city emergency health funds. She also argued that the quality and stability of same-sex relationships are similar to those of heterosexual relationships and that permitting same-sex couples to marry will not harm the institution of marriage in any way. Peplau was cross-examined by Nicole Moss, who asked Peplau about the differences between same-sex and opposite-sex relationships, but Peplau reiterated there are no significant differences. The plaintiffs also called forward Dr. Ilan H. Meyer, senior scholar of public policy at the Williams Institute on Sexual Orientation Law and Public Policy at the UCLA School of Law, to testify on the mental and psychological harms of being denied the right to marry. "Young children do not aspire to be domestic partners, marriage is a common, socially approved goal," he said. He then explained the effects of minority stress on gays and lesbians.
 Parenting 
Examining the impact of same-sex marriage on children, the plaintiffs introduced Michael Lamb, a developmental psychologist at the University of Cambridge. He contended that there is a fairly substantial body of literature since the late 1970s that focuses specifically on the adjustment of children parented by gay men and lesbians which provides very good understanding of the factors that affect the adjustment of children being raised by gay and lesbian parents. This substantial body of evidence documents that children raised by gay and lesbian parents are just as likely to be well adjusted as children raised by heterosexual parents. He noted that for significant number of these children, their adjustment would be promoted were their parents able to get married. He added that a field of developmental psychology came to the conclusion that what makes for an effective parent is the same both for a mother or a father, and that children do not need to have a masculine-behaving parent figure, a father, or feminine-behaving parent figure, a mother, in order to be well adjusted. Testimony showed that California was supportive of same-sex couple adoption and viewed it positively, providing testimony of both the state's experience of same-sex couples and parenting, which was not changed by Proposition 8. Defense witness David Blankenhorn, under cross-examination, concurred that the well-being of children raised by same-sex couples would improve should they be allowed to marry.
 Economics 
In an exploration on the economics of Proposition 8, the plaintiffs called forward Edmund A. Egan, the chief economist for San Francisco. He testified that same-sex marriage would aid the city because "married individuals tend to accumulate more wealth than single individuals" and that "married individuals are healthier on average and behave themselves in healthier ways than single individuals", saving the city from paying emergency room bills and insurance funds. He also testified that San Francisco's revenue would increase if same-sex marriage were legal, citing the period in 2008 when 5,100 marriage licenses were issued. He estimated that the city of San Francisco was losing out on $37.2 million in retail and hotel spending and $2.5 million in sales and hotel tax revenue each year.
San Francisco Attorney Therese Stewart noted in the closing arguments that the city itself was uniquely losing out on potential profits because Proposition 8 dissuaded gay tourists and their families from visiting the "cool, gray city of love" (as Walker referred to it) to get married. She also argued, through testimony by Ryan Kendall and Meyer, that the city was burdened with higher incidents of mental health disorders and the subsequent costs to the public health system.
 Political strength 
The defense called Professor Kenneth P. Miller from Claremont McKenna College to testify that LGBT people had strong political and social support within California. He argued that all the major newspapers, Hollywood, Silicon Valley, and a majority of state politicians all strongly opposed Proposition 8.
During cross-examination of George Chauncey, the defense claimed that LGBT people have enjoyed increased political and social clout, with increased acceptance by society as exemplified by films such as Brokeback Mountain. Chauncey also admitted that employers in California are forbidden to discriminate on grounds of sexual orientation.  On the basis of these testimonies, the defense was arguing that homosexuals do not qualify as a special oppressed minority class in need of the court's protection.
 District court opinion 
Judge Walker heard closing arguments on June 16, 2010.
On August 4, 2010, Walker announced his ruling in favor of the plaintiffs, overturning Proposition 8 based on the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. Walker concluded that California had no rational basis or vested interest in denying gays and lesbians marriage licenses:
An initiative measure adopted by the voters deserves great respect. The considered views and opinions of even the most highly qualified scholars and experts seldom outweigh the determinations of the voters. When challenged, however, the voters' determinations must find at least some support in evidence. This is especially so when those determinations enact into law classifications of persons. Conjecture, speculation and fears are not enough. Still less will the moral disapprobation of a group or class of citizens suffice, no matter how large the majority that shares that view. The evidence demonstrated beyond serious reckoning that Proposition 8 finds support only in such disapproval. As such, Proposition 8 is beyond the constitutional reach of the voters or their representatives.
He further noted that Proposition 8 was based on traditional notions of opposite-sex marriage and on moral disapproval of homosexuality, neither of which is a legal basis for discrimination. He noted that gays and lesbians are exactly the type of minority that strict scrutiny was designed to protect.
 Findings of fact 
Over 50 pages of the opinion were devoted to documenting Walkers' summary of 80 findings of fact and related testimony and evidence, which had been heard during the hearing. Examples included -
 Marriage is a civil, not religious, matter.
 How the State defines civil marriage.
 Sexual orientation refers to an enduring pattern of sexual, affectional or romantic desires for and attractions to men, women or both sexes. An individual's sexual orientation can be expressed through self-identification, behavior or attraction.
 Individuals do not generally choose their sexual orientation. An individual does not, through conscious decision, therapeutic intervention or any other method, change sexual orientation.
 The State has no interest in asking gays and lesbians to change their orientation or in reducing the number of gays and lesbians in California.
 Marriage has benefits which the State and individuals gain from, which apply to same and opposite sex marriage alike.
 Same sex couples are identical to opposite sex couples in terms of characteristics relevant to successful marriage and union.
 Marrying a person of the opposite sex is an unrealistic option for gays and lesbians.
 Domestic partnerships lack the social meaning associated with marriage.
 Marriage of other groups, controversial on comparable grounds at the time, such as race or ethnicity, has not reduced the "vibrancy" or importance of marriage as a social institution, although many people raised concerns of its degradation at the time.
 The costs and harm (to the State and to lesbians and gays) resulting from denial of marriage to same-sex couples.
 A parent's gender is not a factor in a child's adjustment. An individual's sexual orientation does not determine whether that individual can be a good parent. Children raised by gay or lesbian parents are as likely as children raised by heterosexual parents to be healthy, successful and well-adjusted.
 Gay and lesbian adoption is widespread and is supported and encouraged in California law, providing evidence concerning same sex couples and parenting, with around 18% of same sex couples in California raising children. As a corollary, this provides evidence of fact that Proposition 8 is not rationally connected to improving parenting, since it makes no attempt to amend or revoke state approval of any aspect of parenting by non-married same sex couples.
 Gays and lesbians have a long history of being victims of discrimination.
 Religious beliefs that gay and lesbian relationships are sinful or inferior to heterosexual relationships harm gays and lesbians.
 Substantive due process 
Judge Walker characterized the right at issue as "the right to marry", which, he wrote, "has been historically and remains the right to choose a spouse and, with mutual consent, join together and form a household", citing Loving v. Virginia and Griswold v. Connecticut. He went on to say that "[r]ace and gender restrictions shaped marriage during eras of race and gender inequality, but such restrictions were never part of the historical core of the institution of marriage".
Before analyzing Proposition 8 under the applicable level of review (strict scrutiny for fundamental rights), Walker noted that California's domestic partnership laws do not satisfy California's obligation to provide gays and lesbians the right to marry for two reasons: (1) domestic partnerships do not provide the same social meaning as marriage; and (2) domestic partnerships were created "specifically so that California could offer same-sex couples rights and benefits while explicitly withholding marriage from same-sex couples."
Judge Walker then found Proposition 8 unconstitutional because it does not pass even a rational basis review (as he explains in the Equal Protection context), much less strict scrutiny.
 Witness credibility 
The expert witnesses presented by the plaintiffs were assessed as "amply qualified to offer opinion testimony on the subjects identified" and "offered credible opinion testimony on the subjects identified."Perry v. Schwarzenegger , 704 F.Supp.2d 921 at 940 (N.D. Cal. 2010). The defense proffered only two witnesses as experts, both assessed as poor quality who "either couldn't or wouldn't respond" effectively to questions under cross-examination, despite the trial judge (in the analysis of watching legal analysts) "practically beg[ging] and cajol[ing] the Prop 8 lawyers to do better for their cause [and] to make more persuasive arguments": David Blankenhorn, who had been allowed to testify, was ultimately judged as lacking "the qualifications to offer opinion testimony".  The court found that Kenneth P. Miller's "opinions on gay and lesbian political power are entitled to little weight and only to the extent they are amply supported by reliable evidence." In 2012, Blankenhorn said he had changed his opinion and now accepted same-sex marriage.
 Legal analysis of the decision 
Professor Doug NeJaime of Loyola Law School noted that Judge Walker's decision was crafted similarly to the standard used by Justice Kennedy in his decision in Lawrence v. Texas, and suggested that Walker was "speaking" to Kennedy, who is commonly the swing vote on the Supreme Court. John C. Eastman, a law professor who supported Proposition 8, agreed with Professor NeJaime's assessment. Barry McDonald, a constitutional law professor at Pepperdine University, believed that Walker's strict handling of the case and meticulous evidence gathering would "make it more difficult for appellate courts to overturn this court's ruling."
"Only a trial court [like Walker's] can make factual findings," lawyer Brian DeVine said in an analysis. He further noted that "a Court of Appeal must give great deference to the factual findings of the trial court", and praised Walker "for carefully and diligently going through the facts of the case, creating a detailed and compelling record for the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court". Andrew Cohen, CBS's legal analyst, questioned the defense team's decision to "cede so much ground at trial to their opponents" and called "inconceivable" their gamble that the conservative Supreme Court might "save the day". He praised Judge Walker's handling of the case, especially in respect to the defendant-intervenors. "During the trial, Walker practically begged and cajoled the Prop 8 lawyers to do better for their cause. He asked them written questions to draw them out. He scolded them during closing arguments to make more persuasive arguments. They simply didn't or couldn't or wouldn't respond." Lea Brilmayer, a Yale law professor, suggested that the perceived slant of the trial evidence and the decision resulted from "[Prop 8] supporters' sorry lawyering". Vikram Amar, a law professor from UC Davis argued that the defendant's decision to not put up a case may help them in the long run by arguing in higher courts that the evidence was irrelevant: Walker looked at whether a rational basis was supported by evidence, but might have considered instead whether a voter believing gay marriage might have a negative effect was entitled to be seen as holding their belief rationally, indifferent to any evidence.
The law firm Liberty Counsel, which has litigated opposition to same-sex marriage in California since 2004, criticized Alliance Defense Fund's handling of the case. "ADF presented only two witnesses at trial, following the 15 witnesses presented by those who challenged Proposition 8. Even Judge Walker commented that he was concerned by the lack of evidence presented by ADF on behalf of Prop 8."
Ed Whelan, president of the conservative Ethics and Public Policy Center and a former lawyer in the George W. Bush administration, criticized the ruling as being based on the judge's subjective and unsubstantiated views of current societal mores rather than on a neutral interpretation of the law. Whelan criticized in particular Judge Walker's repeated contention that certain facts about society were "beyond any doubt" or "beyond debate," such as Walker's contentions that same-sex parenting has been shown to be equally effective as opposite-sex parenting or that allowing same-sex couples to marry would not in any way negatively affect the rights of opponents of same-sex marriage. Whelan believes those points are in fact hotly contested.
 Reaction to the judgment 
Rallies in support of the decision were planned in major cities across the country.
California's elected officials generally also responded positively to the ruling. Governor Schwarzenegger, who is named as a defendant in the case, said that "for the hundreds of thousands of Californians in gay and lesbian households who are managing their day-to-day lives, this decision affirms the full legal protections and safeguards I believe everyone deserves." He also complimented Walker's conduct during the trial, congratulating his efforts to "respect both sides of the issue equally". Attorney General Brown, also a defendant, lauded the decision, calling it "great news for California". The mayors of San Francisco, Los Angeles, and San Diego — Gavin Newsom, Antonio Villaraigosa, and Jerry Sanders, respectively — also praised the ruling. Both of California's United States Senators, Barbara Boxer and Dianne Feinstein, approved of the ruling as an advancement of equal rights.
Several Hollywood celebrities reacted positively to the decision. Ellen DeGeneres jubilantly tweeted "This just in: Equality won!" Paris Hilton also chimed in by tweeting, "What a huge historical day for equal rights in this country! They finally overturned Prop 8! There shouldn't be a law on true love. :)" Lady Gaga tweeted that the decision inspired her to write songs. Adam Lambert responded to the ruling by saying "I'm glad California has restored the right for all of its citizens to marry whomever they choose." The reaction on social networking sites like Twitter was overwhelmingly positive, with the terms "overturned" and "prop. 8" becoming trending topics immediately following the decision.
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints commented: "this decision represents only the opening of a vigorous debate over the rights of the people to define and protect this most fundamental institution – marriage ..." The Roman Catholic bishops of California stated: "... the courts do not have the right to distort the meaning of marriage". National Organization for Marriage (NOM) chairman Maggie Gallagher also disagreed with the ruling. She targeted the judge's sexuality and accused Walker of "substituting his views for those of the American people and of our Founding Fathers who I promise you would be shocked by courts that imagine they have the right to put gay marriage in our Constitution". Brian Brown, president of NOM, complained of the "biased way [Walker] conducted the trial." Some critics have characterized the ruling as judicial activism. The American Family Association called for Walker's impeachment.
 Appeals by proponents and intervenors 
The State of California did not appeal the decision. However, the defendant-intervenors (including the official proponents of Proposition 8) did challenge it.
(Subsequent to the appeal ruling, the Supreme Court eventually determined that in line with many other past cases, these parties lacked Article III standing under the U.S. Constitution's Case or Controversy clause, and therefore while the Courts of Appeal did in fact rule (and had affirmed the District Court decision), their ruling was subsequently withdrawn (vacated) in 2013 by direction of the Supreme Court, on the grounds that under Federal law they erred and should have dismissed the appeal.)
 Court of Appeals 
On August 4, 2010, the defendant-intervenors filed a notice of appeal to the Ninth Circuit.Attorney General's Opposition To Defendant-Intervenors' Motion For Stay Pending Appeal , August 6, 2010, accessed February 22, 2012 Imperial County, which was denied the right to intervene as a defendant, appealed that denial and Walker's decision. In January 2011, the Ninth Circuit dismissed the Imperial County appeal for lack of standing.Seeger Salvas: "Notice of Appeal," August 10, 2010 , accessed February 22, 2012 Walker cast doubt on whether the defendant-intervenors had legal standing to appeal. If they lack standing, only the named defendants could appeal, and the principal named defendants, Governor Schwarzenegger and Attorney General Brown, refused to participate in the defense. A California Court of Appeals dismissed an emergency request by the Pacific Justice Institute, a conservative legal organization, to force Schwarzenegger and Brown to defend the case on appeal without a hearing, followed by the California Supreme Court on September 8, 2010, who denied without explanation.
On August 12, 2010, the defendant-intervenors filed an "emergency motion" in the Ninth Circuit for a stay of execution pending appeal.Ninth Circuit "Emergency Motion Under Circuit Rule 27–3" August 12, 2010, accessed February 22, 2012 The stay motion was heard by a 3-judge panel in the Ninth Circuit made up of Edward Leavy, Michael Daly Hawkins, and Sidney Thomas. On August 16, 2010, the Ninth Circuit unanimously granted the motion to stay, ordered expedited briefing on the merits of the appeal, and directed the parties to brief the issue of why the appeal should not be dismissed for lack of standing.Ninth Circuit: "Order," August 16, 2010, accessed February 22, 2012 On August 17, 2010, the same Ninth Circuit panel ordered expedited briefing on the Imperial County appeal.Ninth Circuit: "Order," August 17, 2010, accessed February 22, 2012 The court also ordered both appeals calendared for oral argument during the week of December 6, 2010, in San Francisco.
thumb|Recording of the first hour of oral arguments that discussed the issue of standing.
The merits were heard by a different three-judge panel from the Ninth Circuit consisting of Stephen Reinhardt, Hawkins, and N. Randy Smith.Ninth Circuit: "United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit Calendar for San Francisco, California December 6 – 10, 2010," November 26, 2010, accessed February 22, 2012 Reinhardt, the most senior of the three judges, is considered a solid liberal. Hawkins is a Clinton appointee, and Smith was appointed by George W. Bush. Erwin Chemerinsky, who filed a brief in support of Walker's ruling, characterized the panel as "ideologically diverse". On December 1, 2010, Proposition 8 proponents filed a motion to disqualify Reinhardt from hearing the case because his wife, Ramona Ripston, is the executive director of the ACLU of Southern California and thus put his impartiality into question.Appellants' Motion for Disqualification, December 1, 2010, accessed February 22, 2012. Reinhardt denied the motion the next day.Order Denying Motion to Disqualify, December 2, 2010, accessed February 22, 2012.Explanation of Denying Motion to Disqualify, January 4, 2011, accessed May 20, 2012. On December 6, 2010, the judges heard oral arguments, which were also televised and made available on C-SPAN.
thumb|The second hour of oral arguments addressed the constitutionality of Proposition 8.
On January 4, 2011, in the appeal by the defendant-intervenors, the Ninth Circuit certified a question to the California Supreme Court. Because California officials had declined to defend the law, the federal court asked the state court to decide whether the backers of a challenged initiative had "a particularized interest in the initiative's validity or the authority to assert the State's interest in the initiative's validity" that would permit them to defend the law when state officials refuse to do so.Perry v. Schwarzenegger, 628 F.3d 1193 (9th Cir. 2011). The Ninth Circuit stayed the appeal pending a response from the California Supreme Court. The California Supreme Court heard oral argument on the certified question on September 6, 2011, and on November 17 ruled that the non-governmental proponents of Proposition 8 have the legal standing to defend it. Chief Justice Tani Cantil-Sakauye wrote in a unanimous opinion, "[I]n the past official proponents of initiative measures in California have uniformly been permitted to participate ... in numerous lawsuits in California courts challenging the validity of the initiative measure the proponents sponsored" and a concurring opinion was written by Justice Joyce L. Kennard.
 Decision 
On February 7, 2012, the three-judge panel ruled 2–1 in favor of the plaintiffs, declaring Proposition 8 unconstitutional. Reinhardt authored the majority opinion and Judge Smith filed a dissent on the constitutional issue while concurring that the defendant-intervenors had the standing to appeal and that Judge Walker's ruling should not be denied. In describing the issue before the court, Reinhardt said the usage of the word "marriage" was what was at stake, not any substantive legal rights: "Because under California statutory law, same-sex couples had all the rights of opposite-sex couples, regardless of their marital status, all parties agree that Proposition 8 had one effect only. It stripped same-sex couples of the ability they previously possessed to obtain from the State, or any other authorized party, an important right—the right to obtain and use the designation of 'marriage' to describe their relationships. Nothing more, nothing less."
The decision was made on narrow grounds, although Reinhardt wrote that "were we unable ... to resolve the matter on the basis we do, we would not hesitate to proceed to the broader question - the constitutionality of denying same-sex couples the right to marry", and that in their decision the only facts that mattered are in fact adjudicative facts capable of being proper findings, about the parties and their actions and motives, and facts conceded by the defendants, and therefore the standard of review became irrelevant in the appeal.
The majority opinion states that "Proposition 8 serves no purpose, and has no effect, other than to lessen the status and human dignity of gays and lesbians in California, and to officially reclassify their relationships and families as inferior to those of opposite-sex couples," and citing Romer v. Evans, that "The Constitution simply does not allow for 'laws of this sort'." It also states that the court did not need to consider Walker's reasons for holding Proposition 8 unconstitutional (that "it deprives same-sex couples of the fundamental right to marry" and violates the Equal Protection Clause by excluding same-sex couples from an "honored status" permitted different-sex couples) since the matter could be decided on narrower grounds: "Proposition 8 singles out same-sex couples for unequal treatment by taking away from them alone the right to marry", a "distinct constitutional violation" in that it subjected a minority group to "the deprivation of an existing right without a legitimate reason."  The opinion call this "the narrowest ground" for considering the case.
Reinhardt then asked if "the People of California have legitimate reasons for ... tak[ing] away from same-sex couples the right to have their lifelong partnerships dignified by the official status of 'marriage'." Finding a close parallel concerning the removal of an existing right from a minority group without legitimate reason in the case of Romer v. Evans 634-635 (1996), in that it was based on the narrowest ground upon which the matter could be decided, he rejected each of the reasons offered as justifications for Proposition 8.  First, it had no effect on child-rearing since it made no change to laws governing parenting and adoption by either gender. Second, it would not affect the procreative behavior of opposite-sex couples. Similarly, it could not reflect a reasonable attempt to "proceed with caution" in altering social institutions because more than 18,000 same-sex couples had already married and because its intention was to create an absolute barrier embedded within the constitution (rather than a cautious restriction). Voters were told instead that the proposition would "eliminate" the right of same-sex couples to marry.  The law had just one effect, namely to strip a disfavored minority of an "extraordinarily significan[t]" official designation - the name that society gives to the relationship that matters most between two adults. Stating that in law, the willful creation of a new legal status quo and withdrawal of the right to a designation with significant social consequences is very different from a mere declining to extend that designation to a group in the first place, he concluded that the "inevitable inference" was that Proposition 8's rationale was "disapproval of gays and lesbians as a class", and agreed with its unconstitutionality: "[T]he People of California may not, consistent with the Federal Constitution, add to their state constitution a provision that has no more practical effect than to strip gays and lesbians of their right to use the official designation that the State and society give to committed relationships, thereby adversely affecting the status and dignity of the members of a disfavored class." 
Reinhardt's majority opinion is grounded in details specific to the case of California and supported by a narrow Constitutional principle. This narrowing was widely discussed and analyzed following the decision, with many legal commentators suggesting that the narrower decision made it more likely to either be upheld by, or denied certiorari by, the Supreme Court. William Eskridge, writing at the Stanford Law Review, described the courts as being "unable, and usually unwilling, to strongly challenge entrenched inequalities", and went on to suggest that while California may be ready to embrace same-sex marriage, the country is not, and as a result, the Supreme Court would be "wise to deny review ... or to go along with Judge Reinhardt's narrow ruling." Jane S. Schacter, writing at the Harvard Law Review, framed the opinion in terms of an incremental, federalist approach to securing LGBT rights. Schacter and many other commentators also suggested that Reinhardt's decision may be deliberately directed at Justice Anthony Kennedy, who is widely regarded as a swing vote in any Supreme Court decision on the case.
On February 21, 2012, Proposition 8 supporters requested an en banc review by the Ninth Circuit. On June 5, 2012, the request was denied; at least four of the twenty-nine judges voted to rehear the case. The judges known to have voted for an en banc review are Diarmuid O'Scannlain, who filed a dissent joined by Jay Bybee and Carlos Bea, and Smith, who declined to file a written opinion or join O'Scannlain's. Reinhardt and Hawkins filed a concurring opinion that agreed with denying the en banc rehearing. The ruling was temporarily stayed to allow an appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court.
 U.S. Supreme Court 
thumb|A demonstration in front of the Supreme Court on the day of oral arguments
Proponents of Proposition 8 appealed the case (captioned Hollingsworth v. Perry) to the U.S. Supreme Court on July 31, 2012. On August 24, opponents of Proposition 8 asked the Supreme Court not to hear the case. Olson said, "It was with strong mixed emotions ... But in the end, we represent real, live people, and if the court doesn't take the case, we've won and our clients and thousands of others in California can get married."
The Supreme Court granted certiorari in the case on December 7, 2012, ordering the parties to brief and argue the additional question of whether supporters of Prop. 8 have standing, i.e., a legal right to be involved in the case, under Article III, Section 2 of the U.S. Constitution. Olson and Boies stated that they would "address all the issues, focused on the fundamental constitutional right to marry of all citizens" before the Supreme Court, while defenders of Proposition 8 stated they would now have their first chance at a fair trial since they began defending Proposition 8. The Supreme Court heard oral arguments on March 26, 2013. For the United States, Donald B. Verrilli, Jr. was the amicus curiae supporting the respondents.
On June 26, 2013, in a 5–4 decision, the Supreme Court declined to revisit the Ninth Circuit's decision on the grounds that the backers of Proposition 8 had lacked standing to appeal and that "Petitioners' arguments to the contrary are unpersuasive". For the same reasons, the Court ruled that the Proposition 8 proponents lacked standing at the Court of Appeals level. Therefore, the case was returned to the Ninth Circuit with instructions to vacate its former ruling (affirming the district court's overturning of Proposition 8). The majority opinion was authored by Chief Justice Roberts and was joined by Justices Scalia, Ginsburg, Breyer, and Kagan. Justices Kennedy, Thomas, Alito, and Sotomayor dissented. The Court's action left the original district court ruling (overturning Proposition 8) as the final ruling in the case. It also meant that the Supreme Court did not discuss the underlying merits of the case and the case did not result in a formal precedent for states other than California (although Obergefell v. Hodges would later result in a national precedent).
 Details of the ruling 
The Supreme Court decided the case on the basis of lack of standing (see Case or Controversy Clause: Interpretation):
[A]ny person invoking the power of a federal court must demonstrate standing to do so. In other words, the litigant must seek a remedy for a personal and tangible harm. Although most standing cases consider whether a plaintiff has satisfied the requirement when filing suit, Article III demands that an "actual controversy" persist throughout all stages of litigation ... Standing "must be met by persons seeking appellate review, just as it must be met by persons appearing in courts of first instance."... The parties do not contest that respondents had standing to initiate this case against the California officials responsible for enforcing Proposition 8. But once the District Court issued its order, respondents no longer had any injury to redress, and the state officials chose not to appeal. The only individuals who sought to appeal were petitioners, who had intervened in the District Court, but they had not been ordered to do or refrain from doing anything. Their only interest was to vindicate the constitutional validity of a generally applicable California law. As this Court has repeatedly held, such a "generalized grievance"—no matter how sincere—is insufficient to confer standing.
The ruling also drew upon a "lengthy pedigree" of similar rulings on the same point of law, such as Lujan v. Defenders of WildlifeLujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555 (1992) ("[A litigant] raising only a generally available grievance about government—claiming only harm to his and every citizen's interest in proper application of the Constitution and laws, and seeking relief that no more directly and tangibly benefits him than it does the public at large—does not state an Article III case or controversy."), Allen v. WrightAllen v. Wright 468 U. S. 737, 754 (1984) ("an asserted right to have the Government act in accordance with law is not sufficient, standing alone, to confer jurisdiction on a federal court"), Diamond v. CharlesDiamond v. Charles, 476 U.S. 54 (1986) (Article III standing "is not to be placed in the hands of 'concerned bystanders,' who will use it simply as a 'vehicle for the vindication of value interests.'"), Arizonans for Official EnglishArizonans for Official English, 520 U.S. ("Nor has this Court ever identified initiative proponents as Article-III-qualified defenders of the measures they advocated."), Karcher v. MayKarcher v. May, 484 U. S. 72 (1987) (Citizens who had standing in their 'public official' roles did not retain standing once they left public office), and other cases unanimous on the point. The ruling summed up that Californian law provides a "right of proponents to defend their initiatives in California courts where Article III does not apply", but standing in federal court is based upon federal, not state, law; the same reasoning also invalidated the previous hearing by the Ninth Circuit.
Eric Segall, a professor of law at Georgia State University, commented on the ruling:
[T]he interests of the people who proposed Proposition 8 are no different than the interests of any other citizen who believes that the constitutional amendment is valid. Allowing such a person (with no unique injury) to appeal an adverse federal court decision is roughly the same as saying any plaintiff can sue a state in federal court if he or she thinks a state law is invalid and is angry about it. And that is simply not allowed.  So, the people who appealed the Proposition 8 case had no interest in the case beyond their [personal] wish to see the amendment upheld and thus did not suffer the requisite personal injury to satisfy the 'cases' or 'controversies' requirements of Article III.
Dissent
Justice Anthony Kennedy in his dissenting opinion, joined by Justices Alito, Thomas and Sotomayor, expressed concern about the implications of the Supreme Court ruling, noting that voter initiatives existed precisely for when voters felt the State was insufficiently responsive to their concerns or as a way for the people to assert their rights, and that elected officials should not have the ability to nullify such laws simply by choosing not to defend them. Kennedy wrote: "In the end, what the Court fails to grasp or accept is the basic premise of the initiative process. And it is this. The essence of democracy is that the right to make law rests in the people and flows to the government, not the other way around. Freedom resides first in the people without need of a grant from government."
Constitutional law scholar and law school dean Erwin Chemerinsky suggested that, in the future, the state should be required to appoint a special attorney in the event that the state declines to undertake a defense, in order that a hearing on the law's constitutionality would not be dismissed before the merits had been considered.Prop. 8 deserved a defense: The state shouldn't abandon measures passed by voters - L.A. Times, by Erwin Chemerinsky, June 28, 2013Prop. 8 ruling raises fears about effects on other initiatives - L.A. Times, by Chris Megerian/Anthony York, June 27, 2013
 Aftermath
thumb|right|300px|Plaintiffs Perry (left) and Stier at the 2013 San Francisco Pride Parade shortly after their marriage at San Francisco City Hall
Following the Supreme Court decision, on June 28, 2013, the same Ninth Circuit panel dissolved its stay of the district court's order, allowing same-sex marriages to proceed in California.http://sblog.s3.amazonaws.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/Prop.-8-CA-order-6-28-13.pdf  The same day, Kristin Perry and Sandra Stier, plaintiffs in the case, married with California Attorney General Kamala Harris officiating at the ceremony.
Two legal challenges to the implementation of the ruling followed, both dismissed by the courts:
 The day after the Ninth Circuit dissolved its stay, proponents of Proposition 8 filed an emergency application asking the Supreme Court to enforce the usual 25-day period in which the losing party may make a petition for rehearing; Circuit Justice Kennedy, overseeing the Ninth Circuit, denied the request on June 30, 2013.
 Proposition 8 supporters also sought a discretionary Writ of Mandate before the Supreme Court of California on July 12, 2013, to ask the court to stay, and then override, the statewide application of the court's ruling, contending it was not a class action and applied only to the counties and specific individuals named in the suit. Their argument was rejected by California's governor, who on legal advice "ordered" the change to license issue, California's Attorney General Kamala Harris, who noted that "state officials are obligated to govern marriage equally in all counties and that Walker's ruling specifically covers those officials", San Francisco's city attorney who stated that it was "the most basic concepts of American law ... that a state court will not overrule the federal judiciary", and by 24 defendant County Clerks who through their lawyer stated that their role was ultimately state supervised and it would be unfeasible to have a "patchwork" of different marriage criteria varying between the counties of a single state. On July 15, the court unanimously declined the request for immediate action and requested arguments from the parties, and on August 14, in a one-sentence order, unanimously refused to take up the petition.
This decision only made same-sex marriage legal in California. The decision would not apply in other states where it was still not allowed. In 2015, the United States Supreme Court decided Obergefell v. Hodges, 576 U.S. 644, which legalized same-sex marriages nationwide.
 Related motions 
thumb|Recording of appeal to vacate Walker's decision.
Judge Walker retired in February 2011 and on April 6 told reporters that he is gay and has been in a relationship with a male doctor for about ten years. On April 25, supporters of Proposition 8 filed a motion in district court to vacate Walker's decision. They argued he should have recused himself or disclosed his relationship status, and unless he "disavowed any interest in marrying his partner", he had "a direct personal interest in the outcome of the case". District Court Chief Judge James Ware heard arguments on the motion on June 13 and denied it the next day. Ware wrote in the decision, "Requiring recusal because a court issued an injunction that could provide some speculative future benefit to the presiding judge solely on the basis of the fact that the judge belongs to the class against whom the unconstitutional law was directed would lead to a Section 455(b)(4) standard that required recusal of minority judges in most, if not all, civil rights cases. Congress could not have intended such an unworkable recusal statute." Supporters of Proposition 8 appealed this decision to the Ninth Circuit. On November 21, 2011, the court consolidated this appeal with the merits appeal.United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit: Order Consolidating No. 10-16696 and No. 11-16577, filed November 21, 2011 The appeals court in its February 7, 2012, decision found no evidence of bias on Walker's part and rejected arguments that he recuse himself.
thumb|Recording of appeal to keep videotapes sealed.
On September 19, 2011, Ware ordered the release of the trial videotapes to the public, which the defender-intervenors had sought to keep under seal. The Ninth Circuit stayed the release of the videos pending appeal,United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit: Order granting Emergency Motion for Stay, accessed February 6, 2012 and heard oral arguments on the appeal on December 8, 2011.United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit: Order for oral arguments, accessed February 6, 2012 On February 2, 2012, the court decided that the videos should remain sealed. Writing for the panel, Reinhardt wrote: "The trial judge on several occasions unequivocally promised that the recording of the trial would be used only in chambers and not publicly broadcast. ... To revoke Chief Judge Walker's assurances after proponents had reasonably relied on them would cause serious damage to the integrity of the judicial process."
In April 2017, a local San Francisco Bay Area news broadcaster KQED filed a motion with the District Court to unseal the videotapes from the 2010 trial. The Court plans to maintain the seal until August 12, 2020.
 See also 
Same-sex marriage in California
In re Marriage Cases – 2008 California State Supreme Court case holding same-sex marriage to be a right under the state constitution
Proposition 8 – State constitutional amendment banning same-sex marriage in California
 United States v. Windsor – a 2013 case, decided the same day as Hollingsworth v. Perry, that struck down Section 3 of the Defense of Marriage Act. 
Obergefell v. Hodges
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 570
8 – a staged verbatim reenactment of the Perry v. Schwarzenegger district trial based on the transcripts and interviews.
The Case Against 8 – a 2014 documentary film following the case from its initiation through to the final Supreme Court decision
 References 
 Further reading 
 External links 
American Foundation for Equal Rights, organization that filed the lawsuit.
Protect Marriage, sponsors of Proposition 8.
Equality on Trial, coverage and analysis of the trial.
Post-DOMA and Post-Prop 8 Facts Sheets, Lambda Legal, June 28, 2013.
Proposition 8's long and winding road to legal defeat by Maura Dolan from the Los Angeles Times on July 6, 2013.
 Video 
U.S. District Court official case site
U.S. Ninth Circuit official case site
U.S. District Court trial video re-enactment
 Files 
Judge Vaughn Walker's U.S. District Court decision
Ninth Circuit decision (vacated by U.S. Supreme Court)
Ninth Circuit order lifting stay
Archive of Amicus Curiae: San Francisco Attorney General
Legal Filings: American Foundation for Equal Rights
Legal Filings: Justia Dockets
U.S. District Court trial evidence
Judge Ware decision to release trial video tapes
Ninth Circuit decision to seal trial video tapes
Petition for certiorari in the U.S. Supreme Court: Sponsors of Proposition 8
 News 
"The Conservative Case for Gay Marriage", Theodore B. Olson, Newsweek, January 19, 2010
Theodore Olson and David Boies discuss the trial, evidence, and legal approach with journalist Bill Moyers on PBS, February 26, 2010.
"Marriage Equality in America after the Supreme Court Ruling," NPR journalist Steve Inskeep discusses the history and outcomes of the two landmark same-sex marriage cases with David Boies, posted by the Aspen Institute on July 12, 2013.
Category:2010 in LGBT history
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:2008 California Proposition 8
Category:United States same-sex union case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2013 in LGBT history
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Hollingsworth v. Virginia" ==> """
Hollingsworth v. Virginia, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 378 (1798), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court ruled early in America's history that the President of the United States has no formal role in the process of amending the United States Constitution and that the Eleventh Amendment was binding on cases already pending prior to its ratification..
Background
Levi Hollingsworth was a Pennsylvania merchant who owned shares in the Indiana Company, which was heavily involved in land speculation.  The Indiana Company was seeking to resolve a land claim with the state of Virginia regarding land in what is now West Virginia.Marcus, Maeva.  Suits Against States, pp. 274-289 (Columbia U. Press 1994).  Hollingsworth replaced a previous plaintiff in the case, a Virginian named William Grayson.  This replacement was made when the U.S. Supreme Court decided in Chisholm v. Georgia (1793) that a state could be sued in federal court by a citizen of another state; Hollingsworth was from another state, whereas Grayson was not.  This derivative suit dragged on, and President John Adams announced on January 8, 1798 that the Eleventh Amendment was ratified.  That Amendment overturned Chisholm.
So, the first main issue in the case became whether the Eleventh Amendment was valid, not having been presented to the President for approval or veto.  The second main issue was whether the Eleventh Amendment applied retroactively to ongoing cases that had already begun before the Amendment was ratified.
The attorneys for Hollingsworth were William Tilghman and William Rawle.  They argued for presidential involvement in the amendment process (and against the constitutionality of the Eleventh Amendment), saying: "Upon an inspection of the original roll, it appears that the amendment was never submitted to the President for his approbation."  The proposed amendment had been laid before President George Washington merely "for transmission” to the states.Tillman, Seth. "A Textualist Defense of Article I, Section 7, Clause 3: Why Hollingsworth v. Virginia was Rightly Decided, and Why INS v. Chadha was Wrongly Reasoned", Texas Law Review, Vol. 83, pg 1265, 1300 n. 78 (2005).
U.S. Attorney General Charles Lee took the position during oral argument in Hollingsworth that the Eleventh Amendment had been properly proposed, and Lee's argument was reproduced together with the opposing argument and the Court's decision in the case.  Here is the exchange between Attorney General Lee and Associate Justice Chase during oral argument:
Decision, rationale, and later discussion by the Court
The Court decided unanimously that the Eleventh Amendment had been validly adopted.  The Court also decided in Hollingsworth that it had no jurisdiction in the case, even though the case had arisen prior to ratification of the Eleventh Amendment.  Here is the full text of the Court's opinion:
In oral argument, Justice Samuel Chase had stated that the president "has nothing to do with the proposition, or adoption, of amendments to the Constitution".Hollingsworth v. Virginia, 3 U.S. 378 (1798).  Notice that Chase did not completely rule out a presidential role in the amendment process, but only with respect to proposal and adoption.  Presidents have often transmitted proposed amendments to states, and announced to Congress when ratification has been completed.  Likewise, Chase did not exclude the possibility of a presidential veto with regard to the Article V "call" for a constitutional convention, although he did not affirm it either. See Caplan, Russell.  Constitutional Brinksmanship, p. 135 (Oxford U. Press 1988).  The brief report by the reporter of decisions quotes Chase and the arguments of the opposing attorneys, but fails to explicitly give precise reasons for the Supreme Court's unanimous decision in this case, though it is known that none of the earlier amendments had been presented to the president for approbation either.Currie, David.  "The Twelfth Amendment" in Unintended Consequences of Constitutional Amendment, pp. 89-89 (David Kyvig ed., U. Georgia Press, 2000).  Many years later, President James Buchanan and also President Abraham Lincoln would unnecessarily sign proposed amendments.  See Vorenberg, Michael.  Final Freedom: The Civil War, the Abolition of Slavery, and the Thirteenth Amendment, p. 210 (Cambridge U. Press, 2001).
Article V of the Constitution says: "The Congress, whenever two thirds of both Houses shall deem it necessary, shall propose Amendments to this Constitution".  Congress thus may propose an amendment if there is a two-thirds vote of both houses of Congress, without waiting for a constitutional convention or a presidential signature or anything else, according to the decision in Hollingsworth. The clarity of this language in Article V has been cited as a reason why the Court did not think that further explanation of its decision was needed.Bellis, M. "The illusion of clarity" in Obscurity and Clarity in the Law: Prospects and Challenges, pp. 207-208 (Wagner and Cacciaguidi-Fahy eds., Ashgate Publishing, 2008).
Although the Presentment Clause generally gives the president veto power, the ancient interpretive principle that the specific governs the general (generalia specialibus non derogant) is applicable to the specific circumstance of a constitutional amendment. Article V requires Congress to propose amendments, "whenever" it deems necessary by the same supermajority specified in the Presentment Clause, and therefore Congress has always treated the latter vote as unnecessary and inapplicable.See Black, Charles.  "Amending the Constitution: A Letter to a Congressman", Yale Law Review, Vol. 82, p. 209 (1972).  Critics of the Hollingsworth decision, such as Professor Black, have analyzed the "two thirds of both houses" requirement in isolation rather than in the context of complementary language (e.g. the mandatory word "shall" and the inclusive word "whenever"), whereas supporters of the Hollingsworth decision have criticized such analysis as the "imaginings of professors".  Bellis, M. "The illusion of clarity" in Obscurity and Clarity in the Law: Prospects and Challenges, pp. 207-208 (Wagner and Cacciaguidi-Fahy eds., Ashgate Publishing, 2008)
The question of whether the president can veto a proposed amendment was also answered negatively in INS v. Chadha (1983), albeit in dicta:INS v. Chadha, 462 U.S. 919 (1983) (opinion full text).  The Court had said basically the same thing in Hawke v. Smith, 253 U.S. 221 (1920).
Hollingsworth remains good law.  Even those scholars who find it difficult to justify concede that it is firmly entrenched.Carter, Stephen. "The Constitutionality of the War Powers Resolution", Virginia Law Review, Vol. 70, . 101, 130
(1984); Sopan Joshi, Note, The Presidential Role in the Constitutional Amendment Process, 107 Nw. U. L. Rev. 963  (2013) (arguing--on originalist grounds--that Hollingsworth was wrongly decided).
Instance of judicial review
Hollingsworth was one of the earliest instances of judicial review by the U.S. Supreme Court.  In this case, the Court decided whether the Eleventh Amendment would be upheld or stricken down.  Hollingsworth also may mark the first time that the Court struck down a federal law as unconstitutional, assuming that the Court in Hollingsworth was reading the Eleventh Amendment retroactively to invalidate part of the Judiciary Act of 1789.Treanor, William. “Judicial Review Before Marbury”, 58 Stanford Law Review 455, 547 (2005).
However, there was an even earlier case, U.S. v. Todd (1794), that also may have held an act of Congress unconstitutional.Ritz, Wilfred. "United States v. Yale Todd (U.S. 1794)", 15 Washington and Lee Law Review 220 (1958).  In 1800, Justice Chase implied that neither Hollingsworth nor Todd involved any unconstitutional federal statute:Cooper v. Telfair, 4 U.S. 14 (1800).  Justice Chase did not join the Court until 1796, and so was not on the Court when Todd was decided. 
Assuming that Chase was correct, then perhaps Marbury v. Madison was the first such case.  Indeed, Walter Dellinger has written that the first judicial review of a constitutional amendment (in Hollingsworth) pre-dated the first invalidation of federal legislation (in Marbury).Dellinger, Walter.  “The legitimacy of constitutional change: Rethinking the Amendment Process”, 97 Harvard Law Review 386, 403 (1983).
Alternative theory about the case
In 2005, an article in the Texas Law Review by Seth B. Tillman theorized that it may be incorrect to interpret Hollingsworth as holding that constitutional amendment resolutions need not be presented to the President for possible veto.Thomas, Kenneth.  The Constitution of the United States of America: Analysis and Interpretation, p. 4 (Government Printing Office 2011).  This notwithstanding that the Court—in decisions issued in the twentieth century—itself has adopted that interpretation of its prior decision in Hollingsworth. Tillman did not suggest that Hollingsworth was wrongly decided, but only that its scope (as originally understood) might have been narrower than commonly thought today.
Tillman noted that Justice Chase's statement was not his official opinion, but merely a remark from the bench at oral argument, and therefore the failure of the other justices to contradict him should not elevate the status of Chase's remark to an official opinion by either him or by the Court.  Moreover, Tillman argued that there were several other grounds potentially explaining the Court's decision, including: that the proposed Eleventh Amendment was in fact delivered to George Washington, he declined to sign it, and Washington's non-signature did not amount to a pocket veto because Congress remained in session. If this latter explanation explains the Court's obscure language in its opinion, then the Court only decided that on the particular facts actually before it the Eleventh Amendment was valid.
Other explanations for the Hollingsworth holding are also possible. For example, Tillman also noted Chase's specific language at oral argument. Chase took the position that the president played no role in regard to the "proposition ... or adoption" of amendments. But the Court's actual opinion only used the "adoption" language, not the "proposition" language used by Chase at oral argument. This might lead to the conclusion that the Court was of the view that once  of the states had ratified a proposed amendment (i.e., how the amendment was "adopted"), then it was part of the Constitution without respect to potential defects in how an amendment (such as the Eleventh Amendment) was proposed.
During oral argument in Hollingsworth, U.S. Attorney General Lee advanced two independent arguments in support of the validity of the Eleventh Amendment (leaving aside his discussion of the issue of whether or not the amendment only had prospective effect). He argued that it was valid because presentment to the president was not necessary. Lee also argued that "the amendment was in due form" because it was enacted using the same procedures which were used in enacting the Bill of Rights. 3 U.S. 381.
Lee did not advance the alternative theory that the Eleventh Amendment was valid because George Washington declined to veto it.  If the Court adopted this position in Hollingsworth, which was one of the theories presented in the 2005  Texas Law Review article, then the Court silently based its decision in regard to a matter of law (not fact) on arguments which were not presented to it by one of the parties. On the other hand, Lee's "due form" argument is consistent with the text of the Court's decision. And once Chase had opened discussion distinguishing the proposition of amendments (by Congress) and their adoption (by the States), the parties were on notice that these issues were important to the Court. The parties had an opportunity to speak to these issues at oral argument. If they chose to neglect them, the Court could still address them, and arguably the Court did so in its decision.
Historian David E. Kyvig has argued that the Supreme Court in Hollingsworth adopted the position put forward by Attorney General Lee, although Kyvig published that argument several years prior to the 2005 article in the Texas Law Review.Kyvig, David.  Explicit and Authentic Acts: Amending the U.S. Constitution, 1776-1995, p. 114 (1996). Kyvig suggests that the Court adopted Lee's position. However, Kyvig does not explain which of Lee's specific arguments were adopted by the Court or how the language in the Court's opinion explains the primary issue in the case: the scope of Article V and the scope of Article I, Section 7, Clause 3 and the interplay (if any) between the two provisions.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 3
References
External links
Category:1798 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Ellsworth Court
Category:United States Constitution Article Five case law
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:Legal history of Virginia
Category:1798 in Virginia
"""

From "Hollister v. Benedict & Burnham Manufacturing Co." ==> """
Hollister v. Benedict & Burnham Mfg. Co., 113 U.S. 59 (1885), was an American bill regarding alleged infringement on a patent issued to Edward A. Locke for specific improvements in identifying revenue marks. The defendants, Benedict & Burnham Manufacturing Company of Waterbury, were assignees of the patentee, and the plaintiff was the collector of internal revenue for the Second collection district of Connecticut.. The court ruled that, while the improvement was useful, it was not novel enough to be a patent.
Background
The patent was for a device that was designed specifically for sealing liquor casks with identifying marks or labels for tax purposes and for identifying the contents of the cask, and any other pertitent information. It was designed so that the marks and labels could not be fraudulently removed. There were two pieces, one to be retained by the government, the other meant to stay affixed to the cask.
In 1875 new regulations in regard to the use of tax-paid stamps, by which a portion of the stamp is cut out at the time of dumping and returned with the gauger's report, was adopted. This method effectually destroys the stamp and prevents its reuse, while, at the same time, a sufficient mount of the engraving is shown upon the slip to determine whether the stamp is genuine. It was believed that this system afforded the government an effective means of protection against fraud in connection with the collection of distilled spirit taxes.
Decision
The court observed that while there was an increased utility beyond previous devices, there was no observable change in the character of the stamp, the identifying marks, nor the purpose of destroying the stamp while retaining the evidence of the stamp's purpose and "seems to us not to spring from that intuitive faculty of the mind put forth in the search for new results or new methods, creating what had not before existed, or bringing to light what lay hidden from vision; but, on the other hand, to be the suggestion of that common experience which arose spontaneously, and by a necessity of human reasoning, in the minds of those who had become acquainted with the circumstances with which they had to deal."
"Cutting out a portion of the stamp, as a means of defacing and mutilating it so as to prevent a second use, was matter of common knowledge and practice before the date of this patent; and cutting out a particular portion on which the identifying marks had been previously written or printed was simply cutting a stub from the stamp instead of cutting the stamp from the stub, as before."
The court mentioned a flaw in the system whereby frauds were committed by the "removal of tax-paid stamps from packages on which they had been originally placed by the officer to others surreptitiously substituted for them, or by emptying the packages of their original contents and fraudulently refilling them with spirits on which had not been paid, attracted the general attention of the revenue department, the answer to the problem of prevention was found by immediate inference from the existing regulations, in the adoption of the expedient now in question."
"As soon as the mischief became apparent, and the remedy was seriously and systematically studied by those competent to deal with the subject, the present regulation was promptly suggested and adopted; just as a skilled mechanic, witnessing the performance of a machine, inadequate by reason of some defect, to accomplish the object for which it had been designed, by the application of his common knowledge and experience perceives the reason of the failure and supplies what is obviously wanting. It is but the display of the expected skill of the calling, and involves only the exercise of the ordinary faculties of reasoning upon the materials supplied by a special knowledge, and the facility of manipulation which results from its habitual and intelligent practice; and is in no sense the creative work of that inventive faculty which it is the purpose of the constitution and the patent laws to encourage and reward. On this ground the decree of the circuit court is reversed, and the cause remanded, with directions to enter a decree dismissing the bill; and it is so ordered."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States patent case law
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Revenue stamps
Category:Waterbury, Connecticut
"""

From "Holloway v. United States" ==> """
Holloway v. United States, 526 U.S. 1 (1999), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the court addressed the issue of whether the federal carjacking law applies to crimes committed with the "conditional intent" of harming drivers who refuse a carjacker's demands.
Federal law considers the act of hijacking an automobile as carjacking only if the hijacker did so with the intent to kill or inflict serious bodily harm to the driver of the car.
Facts of case
Francois Holloway, a.k.a. Abdu Ali, was charged with three counts of carjacking as defined by . Holloway's co-defendant and prosecuting witness testified that, although he pointed a gun at the driver and threatened to shoot him unless the driver relinquished the car and keys, the intent was to steal the vehicles and not to harm the occupants.  However, he testified he would have used his gun if it was necessary to obtain the car. The jury was instructed that the requisite intent under law may be conditional and the government would have satisfied the condition of intent if it proved  that the defendant intended to cause death or bodily harm if the drivers refused to comply. Thereafter, the jury found Holloway guilty. The Court of Appeals affirmed the conviction, holding that a conditional intent to harm was within the bounds of a reasonable interpretation of the legislative purpose behind the federal carjacking law.United States v. Arnold, 
The Supreme Court granted  Holloway's writ of certiorari.
Decision
The Court decided in a 7–2 decision that the federal carjacking law does apply  to carjacking crimes committed by defendants  with the "conditional intent" of harming drivers who resist the hijacker. The requirement of intent is satisfied if the government proves that at the moment the crime is committed, the defendant possessed the intent to seriously harm or kill the driver if this was necessary to steal the car..
The court's reasoning was that the federal statute's element of mens rea  is directed at the defendant's state of mind at that moment in time when he hijacks the vehicle.  A reading of  shows no distinction between conditional or unconditional intent and therefore does not expressly exclude either species of intent. The court concluded that a reasonable interpretation of the statute is that it covers both conditional and unconditional intent.
The Court  also presumed that when Congress enacted the carjacking statute, it was aware of opinions regarding the issue of intent and therefore recognized that "the 'specific intent' to commit a wrongful act may be conditional".
Discussion
 requires  intent to cause a result, but actual occurrence of the result is not an element of the offense of carjacking. It is clear that the government prosecution, to establish a carjacking charge, must prove that a defendant acted with the "intent to cause" death or harm.  There is no requirement that this intent had to have actually resulted to complete the elements for the carjacking offense. Rather, the substantive harm that must result is the taking of a motor vehicle, by force and violence or by intimidation, from the person or in the presence of the victim. Therefore, the intent necessary to commit a carjacking is a conditional intent. The defendant does not have to indicate a desire to injure the victim if the jury can infer that, if the victim had refused to give up his car, the carjacker would have harmed him.
The Court's conclusion is also supported by another consideration. The defendant's interpretation of the statute would remove from the statute any coverage  of the conduct that Congress specifically intended to prohibit. It can be assumed that Congress was familiar with the leading opinions and court cases regarding the need for allowing specific intent to commit a wrongful act to be conditional under certain conditions.
The issue of conditional purpose is addressed in Model Penal Code § 2.02(6), which states that, "When a particular purpose is an element of an offense, the element is established although such purpose is conditional...".
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 526
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
Footnotes
External links
Holloway V. United States: The United States Supreme Court Examines "conditional intent" in the Anti Car Theft Act of 1992
Category:United States Supreme Court criminal cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1999 in United States case law
Category:Motor vehicle theft
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "HollyFrontier Cheyenne Refining, LLC v. Renewable Fuels Assn." ==> """
HollyFrontier Cheyenne Refining, LLC v. Renewable Fuels Association, 594 U.S. ___ (2021), was a United States Supreme Court case dealing with exemptions from blending requirements for small refineries set by the Renewable Fuel Standard program. The case dealt with the statutory interpretation of the congressional language for extending the exemption, if this allowed a lapse in the exemption or not. In a 6–3 decision, the Supreme Court ruled that by the majority's interpretation of the law, the congressional law did allow for refineries to seek extensions after their exemption period had lapsed.
Background
Congress established the Renewable Fuel Standard program as part of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 to promotion the production of renewable fuels. The program, managed by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), requires oil refineries to blend in renewable fuels, such as ethanol, into their products produced from fossil fuels. The amount to blend increased each year. As the program progressed, Congress recognized that the blending requirements created potentially disproportionate economic hardships for smaller refineries, those that produced less than 75,000 barrels per year, and created a temporary exemption in the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 for smaller refineries lasting through 2010. Congress instructed the Department of Energy (DOE) to study if there were disproportionate impacts of this blending requirements on the smaller refineries from which then the EPA could then grant extensions to the original exemption for smaller refiners. DOE did conclude that such hardships did exist, leading the EPA to begin issuing extensions of the original exemption, requiring the refinery to annually reapply for further extensions.
The case at hand involves three small refineries who had either failed to file for an extension in 2011, or failed to renew their extension with the EPA: HollyFrontier Woods Cross Refining LLC, HollyFrontier Cheyenne Refining LLC, and Wynnewood Refining Company. After their exemption period has expired, the three refineries separately sought a new extension to the exemption from the EPA, which the EPA granted. As more exemptions were being passed during the Trump administration, the EPA's decisions to allow for these three refineries to have disrupted extended exemptions was challenged in court by several renewable fuels associations. The associations argued that the congressional language around the Renewable Fuels Program meant that once a small refinery's exemption extension had expired, the exemption could no longer be prolonged.   The refineries argued that the language of the law suggested an extension may be applied for "at any time", and did not require a continuous exemption period. The consolidated suit was brought directly to the Tenth Circuit, where the court overturned the EPA's decision, stating the agency exceeded its authority, and agreed with the renewable fuel associations' assertion that by interpretation of "extension", there had to be an exemption to extend in place already.
Supreme Court
The refineries petitioned to the Supreme Court to review the Tenth Circuit's ruling, and the case was granted certiorari in January 2021. Oral hearing were held on April 27, 2021.
The Court issued its decision on June 25, 2021. In a 6–3 decision, the Supreme Court reversed the Tenth Circuit's ruling, and concluded a refinery that had allowed their exemption period to lapse can still apply to extend to re-continue the exemption period. Justice Neil Gorsuch wrote the majority opinion joined by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justices Clarence Thomas, Samuel Alito, Stephen Breyer, and Brett Kavanaugh joined. Gorsuch wrote on the majority's statutory interpretation of the congressional language used to reach this decision. First, Gorsuch stated that Congress had not defined "extension" in context of the Renewable Fuels Program, so they turned to the word's ordinary meaning, and that if Congress wanted a more restrictive meaning of "extension", they would have included such language in the law. Gorsuch wrote that their interpretation was "entirely natural -- and consistent with ordinary usage -- to seek an 'extension' of time even after some lapse," similar to seeking "an extension for a term paper after the deadline has passed." Second, the majority had considered the arguments put forth by the associates as to why an alternative interpretation could be read into the passed congressional language, but deemed that if that was the intent that Congress had, there was language that should have been included in the bill to indicate that. Gorsuch wrote that nothing in the law "commands a continuity requirement" as the associations asserted. Finally, Gorsuch relied on the Chevron deference in that in absence of other standing language from Congress, that the EPA's interpretation of the congressional language have priority.
Justice Amy Coney Barrett wrote a dissent joined by Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan. Barrett argued that the majority's interpretation of the ordinary meaning of "extension" was incorrect, and that it was implied that this required the continuous exemption period to be in place to extend.
References
 External links 
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States environmental case law
"""

From "Holmby Productions, Inc. v. Vaughn" ==> """
Holmby Productions, Inc. v. Vaughn, 177 Kan. 728 (1955), 282 P.2d 412, is a Kansas Supreme Court case in which the Kansas State Board of Review, the state censorship board, and the attorney defendants appealed the decision of the District Court of Wyandotte County. It was found that the law that allowed the board to deny a request for a permit allowing United Artists to show the motion picture The Moon is Blue in Kansas theaters was unconstitutional, and an injunction was issued prohibiting the defendants from stopping the exhibition of the film in Kansas.
Background
Holmby productions, the owner of the film The Moon is Blue, and its exclusive worldwide distributor, United Artists Corporation, pursuant to a Kansas statute (G.S. 1949, 51-103), applied for a license from the Kansas State Board of Review to distribute the film in Kansas. On June 17, 1953, the board disapproved the film:
Appeal
The owner and distributor decided to appeal and filed suit in the District Court of Wyandotte County. After a trial, the court found the statute unconstitutional, saying that  a permanent injunction was entered against the defendants, prohibiting them from stopping the exhibition of the film.
Re-examination
After the injunction was granted, on September 11, 1953, the board re-examined the film, and again disapproved the film, saying  Being unable to stop exhibition of the film it had rejected twice, the Board appealed.
 Supreme Court of Kansas 
The Supreme Court of Kansas overturned the district court and found that that the board being an executive branch agency, neither the District Court nor it could substitute its own opinion of the film, and there was no abuse of discretion on the part of the board. The court said, 
 Meaning of words and prior restraint 
The court went on to use ordinary dictionary entries to show the words have clearly-defined meanings. The court then looked at the plaintiff's argument that the board represented censorship or prior restraint. Examining a number of U.S. Supreme Court cases, the court looked first at Near v. Minnesota, 283 U.S. 697, 75 L.ed. 1357, 51 S.Ct. 625, (prior restraint of newspapers is unconstitutional), in which Justice Hughes said,  The court also looked at Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 315 U.S. 568, 86 L.ed. 1031, 62 S.Ct. 766, ("fighting words" are not protected by the First Amendment) where Justice Murphy stated, 
The court then went on to look at a US Supreme Court case both sides had referenced, Joseph Burstyn, Inc. v. Wilson, 343 U.S. 495, 96 L.ed. 1098; 72 S.Ct. 777  (New York state motion picture licensing system similar to the one in Kansas, which prohibited "sacrilegious" films was unconstitutional)  in which the U.S. Supreme Court said,
 Findings 
Since the court in Burstyn had excepted obscenity  from First Amendment protection, the State Board of Review classifying the film as obscene meant the Board was within its power to ban the film. The court overturned the decision of the trial court and instructed it to reinstate the decision of the Board.
US Supreme Court
United Artists, the distributor, appealed to the US Supreme Court. The decision per curiam (by the entire court), Holmby Productions, Inc. v. Vaughn, 350 U.S. 870, literally consisted entirely of   The use of a "shotgun approach" to obscenity was disaowed and overturned.
 Aftermath 
As a result, the distributor was now able to exhibit the film in Kansas. The decision of the US Supreme Court reversing the case was recognized by the highest courts of other states that Kansas's Censorship Statute was unconstitutional.Recognized as unconstitutional by the Court of Appals of Maryland in United Artists v. Bd. of Censors, 124 A. 2d 292, 210 Md. 586 O1956), and by the Pennsyulvania Supreme Court in Commonwealth v. Blumenstein, 396 Pa. 417 (1959). The US Supreme Court, in Interstate Circuit, Inc. v. Dallas, , recognized that its decision in Holmby struck down the Kansas Film Censorship statute as unconstitutional.
Ten years later, in Freedman v. Maryland, , the US Supreme Court ruled that censorship boards had no power to ban a film and that  laws allowing bans were unconstitutional. A board could approve a film or had to sue to stop a film's exhibition.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 350 
 References 
Category: 1955 in United States case law
Category: United States Supreme Court cases
Category: United States Free Speech Clause case law 
Category: United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court 
Category: Film censorship in the United States
Category: Film controversies in the United States
Category: 20th-century American trials
Category: Kansas state case law
"""

From "Holmes v. City of Atlanta" ==> """
Holmes v. Atlanta, 350 U.S. 879 (1955), was a per curiam order by the Supreme Court of the United States that summarily reversed an order by the Georgia Court of Appeals that permitted the city of Atlanta to allocate a municipal golf course to different races on different days.  The case was remanded to the district court with directions to enter a decree in conformity with Mayor and City Council of Baltimore City v. Dawson.Varat, J.D. et al.  Constitutional Law Cases and Materials, Concise Thirteenth Edition.  Foundation Press, New York, NY: 2009, p. 526
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 350
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1955 in United States case law
Category:History of Atlanta
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:United States racial desegregation case law
"""

From "Holmes v. Hurst" ==> """
Holmes v. Hurst, 174 U.S. 82 (1899), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held when someone begins printing a serial book in a magazine, they may file for copyright of the entire book even if the book does not exist as a completed whole. Failing that, the book is in the public domain, as expected..
In specific, the Court decided The Autocrat of the Breakfast-Table by Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. had entered the public domain because of its publication in Atlantic Monthly without copyright notices or an attempt to register a copyright. Its subsequent registration and publication as a whole book by Holmes could not take the individual chapters out of the public domain, so the owner of the book's copyright after Holmes's death could not prevent the publication of those chapters assembled in order as an equivalent book.
The Supreme Court later heard a similar case, Mifflin v. R. H. White Company, about the sequel to The Autocrat.
 References 
External links
Category:1899 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:The Atlantic (magazine)
"""

From "Holmes v. South Carolina" ==> """
Holmes v. South Carolina, 547 U.S. 319 (2006), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court involving the right of a criminal defendant to present evidence that a third party instead committed the crime.  The Court vacated the rape and murder conviction in South Carolina of a man who had been denied the opportunity to present evidence of a third party's guilt, because the trial court believed the prosecutor's forensic evidence was too strong for the defendant's evidence to raise an inference of innocence.  The Court ruled unanimously that this exclusion violated the right of a defendant to have a meaningful opportunity to present a complete defense, because the strength of a prosecutor's case had no logical relationship to whether a defendant's evidence was too weak to be admissible.
The opinion was delivered by Justice Samuel Alito, and was his first opinion as a member of the Court following his confirmation on January 31, 2006. This follows a Supreme Court tradition that the first written opinion of a new justice reflect a unanimous decision. Also, this case had marked the last time in ten years that Clarence Thomas had asked a question during oral argument.Liptak, Adam "It’s Been 10 Years. Would Clarence Thomas Like to Add Anything?", The New York Times, February 1, 2016, accessed February 2, 2016 This period of silence lasted until shortly after the death of Antonin Scalia, with the oral argument during Voisine v. United States.
 Background 
In 1989, an 86-year-old woman was beaten, raped, and robbed in her home in South Carolina, and died the following year of complications stemming from her injuries.  After a four-day jury trial in York County Circuit Court in 1993, Bobby Lee Holmes was convicted of the crime and sentenced to death.  The South Carolina Supreme Court affirmed his convictions and sentence,State v. Holmes, 464 S.E. 2d 334 (S.C. 1995). and the U.S. Supreme Court denied certiorari.Cert. denied, Holmes v. South Carolina, 517 U.S. 1248 (1996).  Holmes was granted a new trial, however, upon state postconviction review.
At the second trial,The second trial was also held in York County Circuit Court, Judge John C. Hayes, III presiding. the prosecution relied heavily on forensic evidence that Holmes' palm print and fibers consistent with his clothing were found at the scene, that the victim's DNA was found in Holmes' underwear and her blood was found on his tank top.  The prosecution also introduced evidence that Holmes had been seen near the victim's home within an hour of when the prosecutor believed the attack took place.
As a major part of his defense, Holmes presented expert witnesses who claimed that the forensic evidence was contaminated by poor handling procedures, and that the palm print was planted by police who Holmes asserted were trying to frame him.  Holmes also tried to introduce proof that another man, Jimmy McCaw White, had actually attacked the victim.  At a pretrial hearing, Holmes had presented several witnesses who placed White in the victim's neighborhood on the morning of the attack, and four other witnesses who testified that White had admitted to committing the crime, or at least acknowledged that Holmes was innocent.  White testified at the pretrial hearing and denied making the incriminating statements.  He also provided an alibi for the time of the crime, but this was refuted by another witness.
The trial court excluded Holmes' third-party guilt evidence based on State v. Gregory, 16 S.E.2d 532 (S.C. 1941), in which the South Carolina Supreme Court had held that such evidence is only admissible if it "raises a reasonable inference or presumption as to [the defendant's] own innocence."  Holmes was subsequently convicted again.  On appeal, the South Carolina Supreme Court affirmed the conviction,State v. Holmes, 605 S.E. 2d 19 (S.C. 2004). citing to both Gregory and its later decision in State v. Gay 541 S.E.2d 541 (S.C. 2001).  The State Supreme Court held that "where there is strong evidence of an appellant's guilt, especially where there is strong forensic evidence, the proffered evidence about a third party's alleged guilt does not raise a reasonable inference as to the appellant's own innocence."Id. at 24.  Applying this standard, the court held that petitioner could not "overcome the forensic evidence against him to raise a reasonable inference of his own innocence."  The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari.Holmes v. South Carolina, 545 U.S. ___, 126 S. Ct. 34 (2005).
 Opinion of the Court 
In a unanimous decision by Justice Samuel Alito, the U.S. Supreme Court vacated and remanded the decision of the South Carolina Supreme Court.The case was argued by John H. Blume of Ithaca, New York on behalf of Holmes; Donald J. Zelenka, the Assistant Deputy Attorney General of Columbia, South Carolina on behalf of the state agency and officials; and Stephen H. Johnson of Washington, D.C., on behalf of the State of Kansas as amicus curiae in support of South Carolina.  The Court ruled that the South Carolina rule of evidence did not rationally serve the interest of "excluding evidence that has only a very weak logical connection to the central issues", because it was illogical to determine the weakness of a defendant's evidence by the strength of the prosecution's case.
Though state and federal rulemakers have broad constitutional latitude to establish rules of evidence in criminal trials, this is limited by the guarantee that criminal defendants have "a meaningful opportunity to present a complete defense", a right protected by both the Compulsory Process Clause of the Sixth Amendment and the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.Because the Court has found this right protected by both amendments, this decision should be considered precedent in relation to both. Additionally, the Court interprets the due process protections of the Fourteenth Amendment, which applies to the states, the same as those under the Fifth Amendment, which applies to the federal government.  The Court's ruling will accordingly be extended to actions taken by the federal government as well. This right is violated by rules of evidence that "infringe upon a weighty interest of the accused" and are arbitrary or "disproportionate to the purposes they are designed to serve". The Court had struck several such arbitrary rules as unconstitutional in prior decisions.The Court summarized the rulings in four cases that had found arbitrary rules of evidence unconstitutional: Washington v. Texas, 388 U.S. 14 (1967); Chambers v. Mississippi 410 U.S. 284 (1973); Crane v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 683 (1986); and Rock v. Arkansas, 483 U.S. 44 (1987).
Well-established rules of evidence permit trial judges to exclude defense evidence if its probative value is outweighed by its unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or potential to mislead the jury. The Court noted that it had elaborated on this standard by permitting the exclusion of evidence that is "repetitive, only marginally relevant or poses an undue risk of harassment, prejudice, or confusion of the issues". (Internal marks and citations omitted.) Rules regulating the admissibility of third-party guilt apply this principle, because this evidence is often too speculative or remotely associated with the crime. The Court observed that these rules are widely accepted,In a footnote, the Court cited the decisions of twenty-three state courts and the District of Columbia applying such rules. and were not in and of themselves being challenged in this case.
The Court believed the rule adopted by the South Carolina Supreme Court in Gregoy to be of this kind, and to have been adapted from a rule presented in Corpus Juris Secundum and American Jurisprudence.See 16 C.J.S., Criminal Law § 1085, p. 560 (1918) and 20 Am. Jur., Evidence § 265, p. 254 (1939)  However, the Court considered the later decision in State v. Gay and the instant case to represent a radical change and extension of the Gregory rule. In Gay, the South Carolina Supreme Court had ruled that the defendant's evidence could not raise a "reasonable inference" of his innocence "in view of the strong evidence" of his guilt, particularly the forensic evidence.See State v. Gay, 541 S.E.2d 541, 545 (S.C. 2001). Similarly, in the present case, the court applied the rule that "where there is strong evidence of [a defendant's] guilt, especially where there is strong forensic evidence, the proffered evidence about a third party's alleged guilt" may (or perhaps must) be excluded.Holmes, 605 S.E.2d at 24.
This rule was in error, the Court wrote, because it required the trial judge to focus on the strength of the prosecution's case instead of the probative value or the potential adverse effects of admitting the defense evidence of third-party guilt. The Court also believed that, as applied in this case, the rule did not seem to require any substantial examination of the credibility of the prosecution's witnesses or the reliability of its evidence. Holmes had argued that the forensic evidence was so unreliable that it should not have been admitted, yet in its evaluation of the "strength" of that evidence, the South Carolina Supreme Court made no mention of these defense challenges.
The Court stated that the rule was no more logical than if it were to instead exclude the prosecutor's evidence of the defendant's guilt if the defendant were able to present evidence that, if believed, strongly supported a not guilty verdict. "The point is that, by evaluating the strength of only one party's evidence, no logical conclusion can be reached regarding the strength of contrary evidence offered by the other side to rebut or cast doubt."  The Court therefore found the rule to be "arbitrary" and in violation of a criminal defendant's right to have "a meaningful opportunity to present a complete defense".
 Footnotes 
External links
 Transcript of oral argument (.pdf)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:Legal history of South Carolina
"""

From "Holmes v. United States" ==> """
Holmes v. United States, 391 U.S. 936 (1968), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States denied a petition for writ of certiorari to a Jehovah's Witnesses minister who asked the Court to decide whether a draft of men into the Armed Forces in times of peace is constitutionally permissible.. The minister argued that, in the absence of a declaration of war, a draft was not authorized and was equivalent to involuntary servitude.
Facts of the case
Albert H. Holmes was classified in August 1965 as a conscientious objector by his Selective Service Appeal Board. Section 6(j) of the Universal Military Training and Service Act of 1948 stated that a conscientious objector who, like petitioner, is also opposed to noncombatant military service, may in lieu of induction "be ordered by his local board ... to perform ... such civilian work contributing to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest as the local board may deem appropriate." Beginning in October 1965 Holmes exchanged a series of letters with his local board in which the Board explained to Holmes the types of civilian work available and Holmes asserted his religious scruples against serving the United States Government in any capacity, including civilian work programs. Holmes reiterated this position in a personal meeting with his local board. 
On February 7, 1966, the Board sent Holmes an order to report on February 21 to an Illinois state hospital for civilian work assignment. However, on the day he was due to report, Holmes notified the Board that he refused to do so for religious reasons.
Prior history
Holmes was charged with willful failure to report as ordered, in violation of 12(a) of the Selective Service Act. At his nonjury trial Holmes moved for judgment of acquittal. That motion was denied, Holmes was convicted and sentenced to three years imprisonment, and the Court of Appeals affirmed, one judge dissenting.United States v. Holmes, 
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:1968 in United States case law
Category:Conscription in the United States
Category:1968 in religion
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
"""

From "Holt v. Hobbs" ==> """
Holt v. Hobbs, 574 U.S. 352 (2015), was an American legal case in which the Supreme Court unanimously ruled that an Arkansas prison policy which prohibited a Muslim prisoner from growing a short beard in accordance with his religious beliefs violated the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act (RLUIPA).
Background
Gregory Holt (also known as Abdul Maalik Muhammad) was a prisoner in the Arkansas Department of Corrections. Holt was also a Muslim who believed, based on hadith, that his faith obliged him to leave his beard entirely uncut.  However, Arkansas policy prohibited inmates to grow any beards (except to a length of a quarter inch when medically required).
Holt requested an exemption from the no-beards policy through the prison grievance process.  Based upon a case ordering California officials to allow Muslim prisoners to grow a half-inch beard, Holt requested permission to grow a half-inch beard only, as a "compromise". His request was rejected.
In lower courts
Holt then filed a motion in court to require Arkansas allow him to grow a half-inch beard, arguing that he deserved an exception under the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act.  He argued pro se that he was entitled to an exemption because Arkansas's policy was not, as required under RLUIPA, the "least restrictive means" for Arkansas to further its interests.
The magistrate initially recommended the motion be denied, but the District Court temporarily granted his request and sent the matter back to the magistrate for a hearing.  At the hearing, Holt testified that it was impossible to hide anything in his beard.  Two prison officials testified in response that inmates could hide contraband in half-inch beards, that an escaped prisoner with a beard could change his appearance by shaving his beard, and that it would be difficult to consistently measure half-inch beards.  The magistrate ultimately deferred to the judgment of the prison officials, relying on Eighth Circuit precedent, and recommended that Holt's motion be denied.  The District Court adopted the magistrate's recommendations, and the Eighth Circuit affirmed.
Holt then filed a pro se petition for a writ of certiorari and a request to proceed in forma pauperis. On March 3, 2014, the Supreme Court agreed to hear the case.
Supreme Court decision
The majority opinion written by Alito said that RLUIPA does not require a prison to grant religious exemptions simply because a prisoner asks or because other prisons do.. However, Arkansas officials offered no evidence that a short beard presented security risks or could serve as a hiding place for contraband, as the officials argued. Arkansas had not overcome the high hurdles set by the law: that policymakers may not burden a person’s exercise of religion unless they can show a compelling governmental interest and that the policy was the least-restrictive means of achieving that goal. In a concurrence, Justice Ginsburg, contrasting the case with Burwell v. Hobby Lobby, said accommodating Holt’s request "would not detrimentally affect others who do not share petitioner's belief." In a separate concurrence, Justice Sotomayor disagreed with the majority's application of RLUIPA, but did agree that Arkansas officials did not adequately respond to Holt's request to keep a beard.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 574
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:2015 in United States case law
"""

From "Home Building & Loan Ass'n v. Blaisdell" ==> """
__NOTOC__
Home Building & Loan Association v. Blaisdell, 290 U.S. 398 (1934), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court holding that Minnesota's suspension of creditors' remedies was not in violation of the Contract Clause of the United States Constitution.. Blaisdell was decided during the depth of the Great Depression and has been criticized by modern conservative and libertarian commentators.
Background and decision
In 1933, in response to a large number of home foreclosures, Minnesota, like many other states at the time, extended the time available for mortgagors to redeem their mortgages from foreclosure. The appellee owned a lot in Minneapolis that was in the foreclosure process. The extension had the effect of enlarging the mortgagor's estate contrary to the terms of the contract.
The Supreme Court upheld the statute, reasoning that the emergency conditions created by the Great Depression "may justify the exercise of [the State's] continuing and dominant protective power notwithstanding interference with contracts."Blaisdell, 290 U.S. 398, at 437. Blaisdell was the first time the court extended the emergency exception to purely economic emergencies.
In the holding, Justices Hughes and Roberts sided with the Three Musketeers (Supreme Court). The Four Horsemen of Reaction came down on the other side of the ruling.
While the Blaisdell judgment itself might have been held to apply only in limited instances of economic emergency, by the late 1930s the emergency exception doctrine had expanded dramatically.
Criticism
Adherents of the Chicago school of economics have characterized Blaisdell among the Court precedents that have diminished constitutional protection of individual property rights. Richard Epstein's (the Laurence A. Tisch Professor of Law at the New York University School of Law and Adjunct Scholar at the American libertarian think tank Cato Institute) criticisms have been some of the most vocal:
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 290
 Gold Clause Cases (1935)
 Constitutional challenges to the New Deal
References
Further reading
 Fliter, John A. and Derek S. Hoff (2012). Fighting Foreclosure: The Blaisdell Case, the Contract Clause, and the Great Depression. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:1934 in United States case law
Category:Contract Clause case law
Category:Great Depression in the United States
Category:Legal history of Minnesota
Category:History of Minneapolis
Category:Foreclosure
Category:Constitutional challenges to the New Deal
"""

From "Home Depot U. S. A., Inc. v. Jackson" ==> """
Home Depot U. S. A., Inc. v. Jackson, 587 U.S. ___ (2019), was a United States Supreme Court case which determined that a third-party defendant to a counterclaim submitted in a state-court civil action cannot remove their case to federal court.  The Court explained, in a 5–4 decision, that although a third-party counterclaim defendant is a "defendant to a claim," removal can only be performed by the defendant to a "civil action."Home Depot U. S. A., Inc. v. Jackson, 139 S.Ct. 1743, 1744 (2019).  And this holds true even when the counterclaim is in the form of a class action.  The Class Action Fairness Act of 2005 permits removal by "any defendant to a class action" but this does not extend removal rights to a third-party counterclaim defendant because they are not a defendant to the original case.Home Depot, 139 S.Ct., at 1745.28 U.S.C. §1453(b).
Although the decision technically only governs what court hears—rather than the actual outcome of—a particular case, the ruling has been described as being "pro-consumer" because of its potentially broader implications.  The practical effect of the Court's holding is to make it "more difficult for class action defendants to transfer their cases from plaintiff-friendly state courts to more business-friendly federal courts."  As such, while the case theoretically only deals with venue, it may in practice benefit consumers with plausible claims against corporations.
Justice Samuel Alito, in the dissenting opinion, argued that a plaintiff who brings a lawsuit in their "own state's courts might ... enjoy ... a home court advantage against outsiders."Home Depot, 139 S.Ct., at 1751 (Alito, J., dissenting).  To that end, he explained, Congress opened the "federal courts to certain disputes between citizens of different states."  While plaintiffs could take this option by simply filing their case in federal court, defendants did not have control over where a case was filed.  So defendants were given the right of removal, which could be invoked to transfer a case from state to federal court.  By denying removal here, Justice Alito argued, the majority had denied the defendant a "neutral forum."
 Legal background 
Diversity jurisdiction refers to the jurisdiction of the federal courts over cases which involve citizens from multiple states.  The purpose of such jurisdiction is to protect "litigants against potential prejudice in state courts" stemming from them being citizens of another state.  For diversity jurisdiction to apply, however, there must be "complete diversity," such that "in cases with multiple parties no plaintiff could share citizenship with any defendant."  There are two ways a case in diversity could end up in federal court: either the plaintiff files it there or the defendant invokes the right of removal after the plaintiff files the case in federal court.  This case concerns the right of removal and, more specifically, who is entitled to invoke it and under what circumstances.
 Removal to federal court 
As relevant here, there are two laws which govern removal to federal court: 28 U.S.C. §1441 (the "general removal statute") and the Class Action Fairness Act of 2005 ("CAFA").Class Action Fairness Act of 2005, Pub. L. No. 109-2, at https://www.congress.gov/109/plaws/publ2/PLAW-109publ2.pdf.  The first provides for the removal of "any civil action over which a federal court would have original jurisdiction."28 U.S.C. §1441(a).  But such removal is only by "the defendant or the defendants" acting collectively.  CAFA, on the other hand, authorizes the removal of a "class action" by "any defendant without the consent of all defendants."
The scope of the removal statutes is considered important because the forum a case is heard in can effect not just the outcome of the case itself but also what legal rules apply throughout the proceedings.  For example, the Federal Judicial Center has noted the "establishment by federal judges of rules of decision that diverged from those of the state courts."  And "federal courts are widely considered to be more business-friendly than state courts."  As a result, removal to federal court is a "typical corporate tactic."
CAFA was enacted in response to the failure of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act, which had targeted "perceived abuses of the class-action vehicle in litigation involving nationally traded securities, including spurious lawsuits, vexatious discovery requests, and manipulation by class action lawyers of the clients whom they ... represent."Home Depot, 139 S.Ct., at 1752 (Alito, J., dissenting).Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Inc. v. Dabit, 547 U.S. 71, 81 (2006).  These abuses, Congress concluded, "often forced" companies to "enter extortionate settlements in frivolous cases, just to avoid the litigation costs."  The Reform Act responded to these perceived problems by limiting possible money awards from class actions as well as curbing the recoverable attorney's fees from such suits.  The Act also mandated "sanctions for frivolous litigation" and paused "discovery pending resolution of any motion to dismiss."
alt=A picture of the Frank E. Moss Federal Courthouse.|left|thumb|220x220px|Businesses viewed federal courts as more sympathetic forums
Because the Reform Act tilted the federal playing-field decisively in favor of corporate defendants, consumer lawyers "found a workaround."  Litigants could avoid the Reform Act's restrictions by simply pursuing their case in state court instead.  Once their case made its way to state court, because diversity jurisdiction did not apply in the absence of complete diversity, plaintiffs could block federal removal by simply adding an "in-state defendant."  Prior to the Reform Act, "state-court litigation of ... class actions had been rare," but "within a decade state courts were handling most such cases."Merrill Lynch, 547 U.S., at 82.S. Rep. No. 109-14, p. 4 (2005).  CAFA sought to change this by making it "easier for defendants to remove to federal courts" without the support of every defendant. This meant that an out-of-state defendant could remove a class action even if there was an in-state defendant who could not.
 Third-party counterclaim 
To circumvent CAFA's more generous removal provisions, consumer lawyers devised yet another tactic.  This approach involved bootstrapping a class action in the form of a third-party counterclaim to an already-existing lawsuit against a consumer.  For example, when a consumer is sued for an unpaid bill relating to the business they intend to sue, they would file a third-party countercomplaint against that business containing the claim they originally planned to sue the business for.  The theory supporting this approach was that the third-party defendant would be unable to remove the case because, although they were a defendant to a "claim," they were not a defendant to the original "civil action."Home Depot, 139 S.Ct., at 1754 (Alito, J., dissenting).  Corporate lawyers fought back against this strategy by asserting that CAFA expanded who was eligible to remove a class action to the category of "any defendant."  And because, in their view, a third-party counterclaim defendant "qualifie[d] as one of 'the defendants' for purposes of removal," they reasoned that "such a party qualifies as 'any defendant' for purposes of [CAFA]."Carrington, Sarah E (Nov. 9, 2018).  Merits Brief for Home Depot in No. 17-1471, p. 13.  That disagreement gave rise to this Supreme Court case.
 Background 
This case began in June 2016 when Citibank filed a debt-collection lawsuit against George Jackson, a North Carolina man, in North Carolina state court.  The lawsuit alleged that Jackson had failed to make required payments "incurred on a Home Depot credit card."Home Depot, 139 S.Ct., at 1747.  Jackson responded by filing a countercomplaint, which included claims against Citibank, as well as third-party class action claims against Home Depot—a corporation headquartered and domiciled out-of-state—and Carolina Water Systems, an in-state corporation.
In his countercomplaint, Jackson alleged that Home Depot and Carolina Water Systems had conspired to "induce homeowners to buy water treatment systems at inflated prices."  On a legal level, Jackson charged that this scheme involved unlawful referral sales and deceptive and unfair trade practices in violation of state law.Gen. Stat. Ann. §§ 25A-37, 75-1.1 (N. Cal. 2013)  Jackson's claim against Citibank was that it was jointly and severally liable for this scheme and that "his obligations under the sale were null and void."
In September 2016, Citibank agreed to "dismiss its claims against Jackson."  A month after that, Home Depot removed the case to federal court, invoking various provisions of federal law, including the general removal statute and CAFA.28 U.S.C. §1332.28 U.S.C. §1446.28 U.S.C. §1453.  Jackson filed a motion to remand the case to state court, contending that a third-party defendant was not permitted to remove a case to federal court.  The District Court agreed and remanded the case to the state court.  The Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit affirmed.
 Supreme Court 
On April 23, 2018, lawyers for Home Depot filed a petition for a writ of certiorari, presenting the question: "Whether an original defendant to a class-action claim can remove the class action if it otherwise satisfies the jurisdictional requirements of the Class Action Fairness Act when the class action was originally asserted as a counterclaim against a co-defendant."Carrington, Sarah E (Apr. 23, 2018). Petition for Certiorari in No. 17-1471, at https://www.supremecourt.gov/DocketPDF/17/17-1471/44281/20180423113333374_Home%20Depot%20Petition.pdf.  In their petition, the lawyers argued that a third-party counterclaim defendant is a "defendant" permitted to remove a case to federal court under the general removal statute, and that, in any event, CAFA authorizes removal by "any defendant," which includes third-party counterclaim defendants.  Jackson's attorneys filed a brief opposing certiorari on June 25, 2018.  In their brief, they argued the Court should not intervene because every court of appeals to consider the question to that point had agreed with their position, meaning there was no circuit split to resolve.Warwick, Brian (June 25, 2018).  Brief in Opposition in No. 17-1471, p. 11, at https://www.supremecourt.gov/DocketPDF/17/17-1471/51234/20180625145126000_17-1471%20Home%20Depot%20v.%20Jackson%20Brief%20in%20Opposition.pdf.  They further argued that the decisions of the appeals courts were consistent with relevant Supreme Court precedent, weakening the case for review.Brief in Opposition, p. 18.  After the petitioner filed a reply to Jackson's brief on July 10, the Court granted certiorari on September 27.
 Oral arguments 
The Court heard arguments in this case on January 25, 2019.  William P. Barnette appeared on behalf of the petitioner, Home Depot, and began by observing that Home Depot was "just a defendant," because Congress established a dichotomy between the two types of parties to a case: plaintiffs and defendants.  As Home Depot was not a plaintiff, Barnette reasoned, they must be a defendant.  As such, he contended that they were within the scope of both CAFA and the general removal statute.  Barnette made this argument to get around an earlier decision of the Court (Shamrock Oil & Gas Corporation v. Sheets), which concerned whether a regular counterclaim defendant could remove their claim to federal court.Transcript of Oral Argument in No. 17-1471, p. 4, at https://www.supremecourt.gov/oral_arguments/argument_transcripts/2018/17-1471_2cp3.pdf.  In Shamrock Oil, the Court concluded that removal was not permitted because the counterclaim defendant was the original plaintiff and therefore the one who originally chose to file the case in state court.  Barnette tried to distinguish Shamrock Oil by arguing that while the counterclaim defendant in that case was the original plaintiff (and therefore not a defendant), Home Depot was not an original party to this case: it only became a party as a defendant to the counterclaim.  Hence, his observation that Home Depot was "just a defendant."
Justice Sonia Sotomayor questioned Barnette's reasoning.  She pointed out that, "putting this outside the class action setting, ... all defendants have to agree to removal" and Jackson was also a defendant in this action.  She wondered why Home Depot therefore would not "need Jackson's approval to remove."  Barnette replied that the drafters of the general removal statute wanted to make sure that every side would "have one shot at a ... federal forum" and would not have wanted to give a counterclaim plaintiff a veto over removal by a counterclaim defendant.Transcript of Oral Argument, p. 5.  Justice Sotomayor doubted this interpretation, noting that the law actually enacted by the drafters says that defendants only "have a shot at removal" if "all defendants ... agree."  Barnette justified his position by asserting that the counterclaim plaintiff was a "defendant" only to the original action, but that the third-party counterclaim was effectively a separate action.  Justice Neil Gorsuch asked how "the word 'defendant' expands and contracts like that," so as to include the original defendant only for certain purposes.Transcript of Oral Argument, p. 8.  Barnette argued that a defendant who files a counterclaim "steps into the role of plaintiff" and ceases to be a defendant for those purposes.Transcript of Oral Argument, p. 10.  In the end, Barnette's position was that the Court must evaluate who is a "defendant" for purposes of removal claim by claim.
After Barnette concluded, F. Paul Bland began his argument for the respondent.  Bland contended that the relevant section of the general removal statute spoke of "civil actions" while other sections, which were not at issue in this case, spoke of "claims."Transcript of Oral Argument, p. 34.  In Bland's view, this discrepancy was proof that if the general removal statute meant to adopt Barnette's claim-by-claim interpretation, it would have said so by referring to "claims," not "civil actions."  
Chief Justice John Roberts criticized this view, suggesting that whenever one party is suing another party, including in the case of a counterclaim, "even if you don't think that's a civil action properly conceived, it's certainly a proceeding of some kind."  Bland replied that while it may be a proceeding of some kind, removal is only available in the case of a "civil action."  Bland also argued that removal would not apply because the initial complaint by Citibank against Jackson was not within the "original jurisdiction" of the federal courts, and only a case within such jurisdiction can be removed.Transcript of Oral Argument, p. 39.  Justice Alito asked if the case would have qualified for removal if the counterclaim was in the original complaint, and Bland confirmed it would have.Transcript of Oral Argument, p. 38.  But Bland, in responding to a question from Justice Elena Kagan, agreed that original jurisdiction is determined "at the beginning," so a later counterclaim cannot create original jurisdiction.
Later in the argument, Justice Brett Kavanaugh asked Bland whether Home Depot was a "defendant" under CAFA.  Bland replied that it was not because it was a "third-party claim defendant."Transcript of Oral Argument, p. 55.  Justice Kavanaugh criticized this distinction, pointing out that CAFA encompasses "any defendant."  Bland, however, argued that the phrase "defendant" had a fixed meaning under the general removal statute which did not include third-party counterclaim defendants and inserting the word "any" could not change the meaning of "defendant."  As an analogy, he referred to the phrase "any rabbit," and pointed out that the use of "any" does not "mean that a weasel or a gerbil becomes a rabbit."Transcript of Oral Argument, p. 56.  Chief Justice Roberts questioned the analogy, noting that while those other animals would not become rabbits, it "still means that a brown rabbit is a rabbit" and Bland himself had agreed that a third-party counterclaim defendant was a "type of defendant."  Bland finally responded that a third-party counterclaim defendant was a "defendant in a colloquial way," but not under the general removal statute or, by extension, CAFA.
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg was not present for oral arguments in this case and Justice Clarence Thomas did not ask any questions.
 Majority opinion 
alt=Photo of Justice Thomas|thumb|299x299px|Justice Thomas delivered the opinion of the Court
Justice Thomas wrote the majority opinion, joined by Justices Ginsburg, Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan.  The opinion proceeds in three main parts, with Thomas first describing the case's legal backdrop, then reviewing the general removal statute and CAFA in turn.  In the first part, Thomas explains that the "federal courts are courts of limited jurisdiction."Home Depot, 139 S.Ct., at 1746.  As an initial matter, the Constitution "delineates the character of the controversies over which federal judicial authority may extend" and then the inferior courts are further limited "to those subjects encompassed within a statutory grant of jurisdiction."  Accordingly, for a federal court to exercise jurisdiction, there must at a minimum be a statutory basis for its jurisdiction.  These principles set the stage for the Court's analysis because they assigned the burden of persuasion.  To succeed, Home Depot would have needed to convince the Court that either the general removal statute or CAFA authorized removal.  
In the second part, Thomas concluded that the general removal statute did not authorize removal by Home Depot.  Although he agreed with Home Depot and the dissenting Justices that it was "plausible" to count Home Depot as a "defendant" under the general removal statute, he did not believe this was the "best" way to read the statute.Home Depot, 139 S.Ct., at 1748.  Focusing on the text and structure of the statute and invoking as support a book written by Justice Antonin Scalia, Thomas reasoned that the broader context of the statute excluded "any counterclaim defendant, including parties brought into the lawsuit for the first time by the counterclaim."  The general removal statute authorizes the removal of any "civil action" over which the federal courts have "original jurisdiction," provided the defendant to that action opts to remove it.  To determine whether the federal courts have original jurisdiction over a civil action, Thomas explained, the courts evaluate "whether the plaintiff could have filed its operative complaint in federal court either because it raises claims arising under federal law or because it falls within the court's diversity jurisdiction."  The defendant to a counterclaim is not the defendant to the operative complaint, which means that they are outside the scope of the general removal statute.  
In further support of that conclusion, Thomas pointed to other uses of "defendant" in related contexts.  For example, Thomas noted that Rule 14 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, which governs "Third-Party Practice," distinguishes between "'the plaintiff,' a 'defendant' who becomes the 'third-party plaintiff,' and 'the third-party defendant' sued by the original defendant."Home Depot, 139 S.Ct., at 1749.  Similarly, the language of Rule 12 "distinguishes between defendants and counterclaim defendants."  In light of all this, Thomas believed it was unlikely Congress meant for "defendant" in the general removal statute to include third-party counterclaim defendants.  
Thomas next turned to CAFA, concluding that Congress's use of "any defendant" did not change who constitutes a "defendant" for purposes of removal.  Thomas reasoned that Congress did not "expand the types of parties eligible to remove a class action," and instead merely clarified that "certain limitations on removal that might otherwise apply do not limit removal under [CAFA]."Home Depot, 139 S.Ct., at 1750.  Thomas also noted that because the phrase "defendant" is used in a number of other places across the removal statutes, accepting Home Depot's interpretation would result in some of those provisions becoming "incoherent."Home Depot, 139 S.Ct., at 1751.  Finally, Thomas rejected the argument that the Court should interpret the statute to prevent defendants from using "the statute as a 'tactic' to prevent removal," observing that the tactic was a "consequence of the statute Congress wrote" and could only be changed by Congress.
 Dissenting opinion 
alt=Photo of Justice Alito|thumb|288x288px|Justice Alito wrote the dissenting opinion
Justice Alito wrote the dissenting opinion, joined by Chief Justice Roberts, and Justices Gorsuch and Kavanaugh.  In his opinion, Alito argues that CAFA's use of "any defendant" expanded the reach of the general removal statute to third-party class-action counterclaim defendants, that the distinction between third-party counterclaim defendants and regular defendants is "irrational," and that, by accepting Jackson's argument, the Court had wrongly given its blessing to a "tactic" which allowed consumer attorneys to deny businesses access to a "neutral forum."
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 587
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States class action case law
"""

From "Home Insurance Co. v. Dick" ==> """
Home Insurance Co. v. Dick, 281 U.S. 397 (1930), was one of the earliest conflict of laws cases in which the United States Supreme Court held that the U.S. Constitution imposes certain limitations on the ability of states to apply their own law to events occurring in other states..
Facts
In this case, C. J. Dick was a resident of Texas, but was living in Mexico, where he was operating a tugboat for a Mexican company. The tugboat was lost in a fire, and Dick  returned to Texas to file a lawsuit against two New York-based reinsurers of the Mexican corporation that owned the boat. Later analysts have questioned whether the true facts of the case were really before the courts as it reached various levels of appeal:
Home Insurance Co. sought to dismiss the suit because Dick had waited more than a year to file the lawsuit, and a clause in the Home Insurance Co. insurance contract required that any action against it had to be brought within a year of the injury. Although this provision was valid under Mexican law, the Texas courts applied a Texas state law which deemed such clauses invalid unless they provided at least two years for the claimant to file a lawsuit.
Opinion of the Court
The Court, in a unanimous opinion by Justice Brandeis, held that the state of Texas has no power to affect contracts made outside the state, and having no relation to anything done or to be done within the state. The state therefore could not constitutionally apply its own rule invalidating contract clauses that required any statute of limitations under two years to a contract that had no relation to Texas beyond the fact that the plaintiff was a Texas resident. These contacts were insufficient to satisfy the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
The Supreme Court also rejected a number of defenses raised by Dick. First, the Court rejected claims that the state of Texas had a public policy interest in the outcome of the case, noting that Home Insurance Co. was basically dragged into the Texas courts against its will, and for a matter that did not involve an injury occurring in Texas or a party insured in Texas.
Second, the Court rejected the argument that it lacked subject matter jurisdiction for want of a federal question over a matter of local law. The Court rejected this argument because the case did not involve a local interpretation of the contract, but application of a law external to the contract itself.
Finally Dick contended that the Constitution does not require states to recognize laws of foreign countries. The court rejected this argument because the appeal raised a due process claim, not a claim under the Full Faith and Credit Clause. The court noted that due process applies to aliens, and in any case that the defendant here was a New York company.
Later developments
The doctrine thereafter continued to steadily develop in a series of cases over the following decades. Within a few decades after the decision, the Supreme Court had also enunciated doctrines that would largely foreclose personal jurisdiction over the defendant in cases such as this.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:1930 in United States case law
Category:Conflict of laws case law
"""

From "Honda Motor Co. v. Oberg" ==> """
Honda Motor Company v. Oberg, 512 U.S. 415 (1994), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that an amendment to the Oregon state constitution disallowing judicial review of the size of punitive damages was a violation of due process.Varat, J.D. et al.  Constitutional Law Cases and Materials, Concise Thirteenth Edition.  Foundation Press, New York, NY: 2009, p. 358
Decision
In a products liability action, Honda was found liable for injuries received by the plaintiff in an ATV accident.  Honda was liable for a $5 million punitive damage award, and both the state appellate court and the Oregon Supreme Court declined to review the award for excessiveness based on an amendment to the Oregon constitution.  The Supreme Court of United States held that the amendment to the Oregon constitution violated due process.  The Court held that judicial review of punitive damage awards for excessiveness was a long-standing common law tradition that was critical in protecting against arbitrary deprivations of property, and that Oregon had not instituted a substitute procedure to maintain these protections.Varat, p. 358
See also
 Geier v. American Honda Motor Company
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 512
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1994 in United States case law
Category:United States tort case law
Category:ATVs
Category:Honda
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Hope v. Pelzer" ==> """
Hope v. Pelzer, 536 U.S. 730 (2002), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that the defense of qualified immunity, under which government actors may not be sued for actions they take in connection with their offices, did not apply to a lawsuit challenging the Alabama Department of Corrections's use of the "hitching post", a punishment whereby inmates were immobilized for long periods of time. 
At issue in Hope v. Pelzer was the question of whether qualified immunity applied in the case of punishment exceeding the standards of cruel and unusual punishment. The first question was whether the use of the hitching post was cruel and unusual in the twentieth century. The second question, depending on a yes answer to the first, was whether the guards were acting as agents of the state, and therefore not personally liable.
The Court opined that a hitching post was generally cruel and unusual, applying 20th century standards that probably would not have applied in 1789. The second question, and the one that the Court ruled upon, was whether the guards could claim qualified immunity. The Court let Hope sue the guards in District Court. In 2005, that court found that there was insufficient evidence to prove that in this particular case the named guards had meted cruel and unusual punishment.
 Background 
In 1995, Alabama's prisons employed chain gangs and the hitching post.  A hitching post is a "horizontal bar made of sturdy, nonflexible material placed between 45 and 57 inches from the ground.  Inmates are handcuffed to the hitching post in a standing position and remain standing the entire time they are placed on the post.  Most inmates are shackled to the hitching post with their two hands relatively close together and at face level."  "The most repeated complaint about the hitching post was the strain it produced on inmates' muscles by forcing them to remain in a standing position with their arms raised in a stationary position [sic] for a long period of time.  In addition to their exposure to sunburn, dehydration, and muscle aches, the inmates are also placed in substantial pain when the sun heats the handcuffs that shackle them to the hitching post, or heats the hitching post itself."  In a related case, several other inmates "described the way in which the handcuffs burned and chafed their skin during their placement on the post."
Larry Hope, an inmate at Limestone Prison, was punished by the hitching post on two occasions.  On May 11, 1995, Hope was working on a chain gang near an interstate highway when he got into an argument with another inmate.  Both men were chained to the hitching post.  Because Hope was only slightly taller than the hitching post, his arms were above shoulder height and grew tired from being handcuffed so high.  Whenever he tried to move his arms to improve his circulation, the handcuffs cut into his wrists.  Guards came by every 15 minutes to offer him water and a bathroom break, and Hope's responses were recorded in a log.  Hope was let go two hours later when it was determined that the other man initiated the argument.
On June 7, 1995, however, Hope's punishment was more severe.  Hope had fallen asleep during the bus ride out to the work site and was "less than prompt" in getting off the bus once it arrived there.  Hope got into a fight with a guard, during which four other guards intervened and subdued Hope.  The guards took Hope back to Limestone and put him on the hitching post for seven hours.  The guards forced Hope to remove his shirt, and the sun burned his skin.  He received water only once or twice during the day and had no bathroom breaks.  At one point, one of the guards taunted him by first allowing some dogs to drink some water before bringing the water closer to him and then spilling it on the ground.
Hope sued three guards under 42 U.S.C. § 1983—the three guards involved in the May incident, one of whom was also involved in the June incident.  Without deciding whether "the very act of placing him on a restraining bar for a period of hours as a form of punishment" violated the Eighth Amendment, the district court determined that the guards were entitled to qualified immunity, and entered judgment in their favor.  The Eleventh Circuit determined that the use of the hitching post was cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the Eighth Amendment.  Nevertheless, it affirmed the grant of qualified immunity because, in its view, the hitching post was not materially similar to other forms of punishment with respect to which it was "clearly established" that they were cruel and unusual.
Majority opinion
In determining whether a defendant in a civil rights lawsuit should receive qualified immunity, the first question to ask is whether the plaintiff has alleged a constitutional violation.  On the facts presented in this case, the Court concluded that Alabama's use of the hitching post violated the Eighth Amendment prohibition on cruel and unusual punishment.  The "unnecessary and wanton infliction of pain constitutes cruel and unusual punishment," and "among unnecessary and wanton inflictions of pain are those that are totally without penological justification."  And the actions of prison officials lack penological justification if they act with deliberate indifference to the health or safety of an inmate.  Here it was "obvious" that the Alabama prison guards were deliberately indifferent to Hope's health or safety.  Once Hope had been transported back to the prison, concerns about safety had been addressed.  There was no emergency situation at hand, yet the prison guards "knowingly subjected [Hope] to a substantial risk of physical harm, to unnecessary risk of physical pain caused by the handcuffs and the restricted position of confinement for a 7-hour period, to unnecessary exposure to the heat of the sun, to prolonged thirst and taunting, and to a deprivation of bathroom breaks that caused a risk of particular discomfort and humiliation."  This was a basic violation of the "dignity of man", which amounts to "gratuitous infliction of wanton and unnecessary pain" prohibited by the law.
Even if the plaintiff has made out a constitutional violation, the defendant may still be entitled to qualified immunity if his actions "did not violate clearly established... rights of which a reasonable person would have known."  The Eleventh Circuit interpreted this standard rigidly, requiring the clearly established right to be "materially similar" to the facts presented by the plaintiff in this case.  The Court rejected this approach.
Defendants in civil rights lawsuits, just like defendants in criminal cases, are entitled to fair warning that their conduct violates the law.  The Court had previously held that cases establishing a constitutional right need not be "fundamentally similar" to the case at hand before rejecting qualified immunity; hence, the Eleventh Circuit's "materially similar" requirement was not the correct one to apply.  Rather, the standard was "whether the state of the law in 1995 gave respondents fair warning that the alleged treatment of Hope was unconstitutional."
The Alabama prison guards' use of the hitching post was "arguably" such an "obvious" violation of Hope's Eighth Amendment rights that the Court's prior cases put the guards on notice that using the hitching post would violate the Eighth Amendment.  Indeed, the U.S. Department of Justice had so advised the Alabama Department of Corrections.  Furthermore, Fifth Circuit precedent that was binding on the state of Alabama—forbidding "handcuffing inmates to the fence and to cells for long periods of time, and forcing inmates to stand, sit, or lie on crates, stumps, or otherwise maintain awkward positions for prolonged periods"—should have notified the guards that using the hitching post violated the Eighth Amendment.  Finally, an Alabama Department of Corrections regulation required guards to maintain a log of the inmate's needs for water and bathroom breaks while tied to the hitching post, and required the guards to release the inmate if he told them he was ready to return to work.  However, evidence in this case showed that the guards did not maintain such a log during the June incident, and evidence in a related case showed that Alabama prison guards routinely disregarded the regulation's recordkeeping requirement and release conditions.  "A course of conduct that tends to prove that the requirement was merely a sham, or that respondents could ignore it with impunity, provides equally strong support for the conclusion that they were fully aware of the wrongful character of their conduct."
Dissenting opinion
Justice Thomas identified two principal defects in Hope's case that led him to conclude that the prison guards Hope sued were entitled to qualified immunity.  First, the three guards Hope sued were not directly involved in the June incident, the one the Court found to be most disagreeable.  Two of them were not even present at the time, and the third's sole contribution to the injury Hope alleged was the act of attaching Hope to the "restraining bar".  As against the defendants Hope himself named in this suit, then, he did not allege that they were the cause of his injuries, and thus Hope's complaint was, in Thomas's view, deficient.
In light of these deficiencies, Thomas concluded that it was "far from obvious" that the actions of these three guards violated the Eighth Amendment.  The question Thomas asked was whether in 1995 it was obvious that the "mere act of cuffing petitioner to the restraining bar... violated the Eighth Amendment."  In Thomas's view, no prior litigation involving Alabama's use of the restraining bar would have put a reasonable prison guard on notice that the mere act of attaching a prisoner to it would violate the Eighth Amendment.  The three federal district courts in Alabama had all rejected this contention, as well as the idea endorsed by the majority—that exposure to the elements resulting from an extended stay on the hitching post, coupled with the pain caused by the handcuffed—was the wanton and unnecessary infliction of pain.  Hope did not allege that the mere act of attaching him to the restraining bar "imposed a substantial risk of serious harm upon him".  Nor was it, in light of the district courts' conclusion, "obvious" that this act would have caused Hope harm.  There was no evidence that these particular guards had read the Department of Justice's report.  The Alabama Department of Corrections's regulation specifically authorized guards to use the restraining bar when inmates were disruptive to the work squad.  The fact that the guards did not comply with the recordkeeping requirement of the regulation was beside the point, Justice Thomas believed, because Hope never alleged that the guards' failure to do so caused the Eighth Amendment violation.  Thomas also read binding Fifth and Eleventh Circuit precedent merely to prohibit "malicious and sadistic" conduct by guards.  While handcuffing prisoners to fences for "long periods of time" could be considered malicious and sadistic under these binding precedents, it was not clear to Justice Thomas whether 7 hours counted as a "long period of time" under this precedent.  Finally, "deliberate indifference" means that the prison official knew of and then disregarded an excessive risk to health and safety, and there was no evidence that these guards knew that merely attaching Hope to the restraining bar posed such a risk.
Subsequent lawsuit
In November 2005, a Judge ruled that Larry Hope failed to prove that his treatment in prison amounted to cruel and unusual punishment, and the case was dismissed.
References
External links
  Transcript of oral argument
  Press release from the Southern Poverty Law Center
  Press release of the ACLU
  Amicus brief of the ACLU
  Amicus brief of the Solicitor General
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2002 in United States case law
"""

From "Horne v. Department of Agriculture" ==> """
Horne v. Department of Agriculture, 569 U.S. 513 (2013); 576 U.S. 350, 135 S. Ct. 2419 (2015), were a pair of United States Supreme Court cases in which the Court established that the takings clause of the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution applies to personal property. The cases arose out of a dispute involving the National Raisin Reserve, when a farmer challenged a rule that required farmers to keep a portion of their crops off the market. In Horne I the Court held that the plaintiff had standing to sue for violation of the United States Constitution’s takings clause.Horne v. Dept. of Agriculture,  ("Horne I"). In Horne II the Court held that the National Raisin Reserve was an unconstitutional violation of the takings clause.Horne v. Dept. of Agriculture, , 135 S. Ct. 2419 (2015) ("Horne II").
Background
National Raisin Reserve
During the Great Depression raisin prices dropped over 80%.Horne v. USDA, 673 F.3d 1071, 1074 (9th Cir. 2012) (citing ).  Congress reacted by passing the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937 ("AMAA"). The AMAA allows United States Department of Agriculture ("USDA") to issue marketing orders and agreements holding a portion of harvests in reserve so as to inflate prices. Authority to determine the annual portion of "reserve tonnage" raisins that are held by the government and the "free tonnage" raisins that owners may sell on the open market has been delegated by USDA to the Raisin Administrative Committee, a body composed of raisin industry representatives appointed by the Secretary of Agriculture. The raisin reserve often collects nearly half of raisins grown, with the raisin reserve being over 30% of total raisins for six out of the last ten years. The Raisin Committee then sells the reserve raisins on noncompetitive markets for a variety of public purposes such as increasing exports, rewarding favored foreign governments, feeding schoolchildren, or even giving the reserve raisins back to growers if they agree to cut back their production. Sale proceeds that remain after funding Raisin Committee operations and subsidizing exporters are given to the owner of the raisins.  This amount is often zero.
Initial dispute with Raisin Committee
Marvin Horne, a raisin grower operating outside Kerman, California, did not want to give any of his raisins to the Raisin Committee. Because the raisin reserve is not collected from growers but from the raisin handlers who sell raisins directly to buyers, Horne restructured his farm to act as both a grower and a handler. He then contended that the reserve requirement no longer applied to him. However, the Raisin Committee disagreed. When the Committee sent its trucks to collect Horne's raisins Horne refused to allow them onto his property. The Committee then fined Horne $680,000, the value of the raisins plus a penalty. Horne then filed suit in federal court, complaining that the raisin reserve violated the U.S. Constitution. Unconvinced, Fresno federal district Judge Lawrence Joseph O'Neill granted summary judgment to the United States Department of Agriculture.Horne v. USDA, No. 1:08-cv-01549, 2009 WL 4895362, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 115464 (E.D. Cal. Dec. 11, 2009). Horne appealed, but a panel of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed, finding that the district court did not even have jurisdiction to hear the constitutional claim.Horne, 673 F.3d at 1080. Horne petitioned the United States Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari, which was granted. Former Tenth Circuit Judge and Stanford Law Professor Michael McConnell argued before the Court on behalf of Horne.
Horne I
In a unanimous opinion by Justice Clarence Thomas, the Court held that the Ninth Circuit had jurisdiction to consider Horne's case. The Court first ruled that Horne's attempt to avoid the AMAA by restructuring his farm as a combined raisin grower and handler was ineffective. However, because the law applies to Horne, his challenge to the raisin reserve was ripe.Horne I,  569 U.S. at 525 (distinguishing ). Justice Thomas also concluded that the Tucker Act did not require Horne to sue in the Court of Federal Claims because the AMAA has a comprehensive regulatory scheme.Horne I,  569 U.S. at 522 (citing ).  Consequently, Justice Thomas held the case should be remanded to the Ninth Circuit to consider the merits of Horne's takings claim.
Horne II
On remand the same panel of the Ninth Circuit found that there had been no taking because the takings clause protects personal property, like raisins, less than real property.  Again, Horne petitioned for a writ of certiorari and, again, the petition was granted.  Professor McConnell returned to argue the case for Horne but Deputy U.S. Solicitor General Edwin Kneedler now argued for the Government.
Opinion of the Court
Writing for a majority of the Court, Chief Justice John Roberts held that the Fifth Amendment requires the government and its agencies to pay just compensation when they take personal property from citizens. Chief Justice Roberts began his analysis by tracing the history of personal property from the protection of farmers’ corn in the 1215 Magna Carta,Horne II, 135 S. Ct. at 2426 (citing Cl. 28 (1215), in W. McKechnie, Magna Carta, A Commentary on the Great Charter of King John 329 (2d ed. 1914)). to the 1641 Massachusetts Body of Liberties,Horne II, 135 S. Ct. at 2426 (citing Massachusetts Body of Liberties ¶8, in R. Perry, Sources of Our Liberties 149 (1978)). to a 1778 editorial by John Jay.Horne II, 135 S. Ct. at 2426 (citing A Hint to the Legislature of the State of New York (1778), in John Jay, The Making of a Revolutionary 461–463 (R. Morris ed. 1975)). Chief Justice Roberts concluded that personal property has not been given any less protection than real property for at least 800 years and that the physical appropriation of property gives rise to a per se taking. Applying this rule, Chief Justice Roberts held that the raisin reserve requirement constituted a physical taking because the government would physically seize the growers’ raisins. Chief Justice Roberts also held the payout from raisin reserve sales do not change the takings analysis because courts only consider potential remaining uses of property when evaluating regulatory takings, not physical takings.
Chief Justice Roberts rejected Justice Sonia Sotomayor’s contention that the raisin reserve requirement is a mere condition on the privilege of being in the raisin market. Rather, Chief Justice Roberts held that selling produce "is not a special government benefit that the Government may hold hostage." To support this assertion, Chief Justice Roberts cited a footnote in Loretto v. Teleprompter Manhattan CATV Corp., which theorized forfeiting rent payments would not be a mere condition on the privilege of being a landlord. Chief Justice Roberts also refused to apply the Tucker Act because that question was already resolved in Horne I.  Finally, Chief Justice Roberts refused to remand the case back to a lower court to decide the amount of compensation to which Horne would be entitled because just compensation for a physical takings is the market value of the property taken, and the Government had already calculated that value when it fined Horne.
Concurring opinion of Justice Thomas
Justice Thomas wrote a separate concurring opinion in which he noted that he still thinks Kelo v. New London was wrongly decided and that the reserve raisins probably were not validly taken for a public use. He argued that remand, therefore, would be "fruitless" because just compensation is only calculated for valid takings.
Concurrence and dissenting opinion of Justice Breyer
Justice Stephen Breyer, along with Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Justice Elena Kagan, joined the portion of the majority's opinion that held the raisin reserve requirement constituted a physical taking. However, Justice Breyer argued the case should be remanded to calculate just compensation. Justice Breyer argued that the value of the fine may not be an appropriate method of valuing the raisins, because there can be no takings if the benefit Horne received from the price inflation was more valuable than the cost of the seized raisins. Furthermore, Justice Breyer argued that if Horne received a net benefit from the marketing order, then he could not be excused from paying the fine for violating the order.
Dissenting opinion of Justice Sotomayor
Justice Sotomayor wrote a dissenting opinion in which she argued that the seizure of Horne's raisins did not constitute a taking. The ad hoc inquiry that governs regulatory takings, she argued, is only subject to stricter review in the "three narrow categories" of zoning permit exactions, deprivations of all economically beneficial use, and permanent physical occupations. Justice Sotomayor claimed there can only be a physical takings if the owner is absolutely dispossessed of all of her ownership interest. Requiring raisin growers to physically give their crop to the government reserve may be "downright silly", but she argued it is not absolute dispossession because the government may later decide to payout some of the reserve raisin sales to the growers. Justice Sotomayor also contended the raisin reserve is not a taking because selling raisins is a government benefit. While she "could not agree more" with the Court that raisins "are not dangerous pesticides; they are a healthy snack", she still believes that even without safety concerns, the privilege of selling raisins are a government benefit subject to government conditions.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 569
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 576
References
External links
 Scotusblog.com (Horne I)
 Scotusblog.com (Horne II)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:United States Department of Agriculture
Category:Strategic reserves of the United States
Category:Raisins
"""

From "Horne v. Flores" ==> """
Horne v. Flores, 557 U.S. 433 (2009), is a case in which the United States Supreme Court remanded the case to determine whether Arizona's general education funding budget supports Equal Educational Opportunities Act of 1974 (EEOA)-compliant English Language Learner (ELL) programming.
Background
The case was brought in 1992 by English Language Learner (ELL) students against the state board of education and state superintendent on the grounds that the Nogales Unified School District had failed to teach the students English, which was vital to their success.  The case is styled after the plaintiff, Miriam Flores, one of the parents involved in the case, and the defendant, Thomas Horne, the Arizona Superintendent of Public Instruction. 
In 2000, after almost eight years of pretrial proceedings and settling of various claims, the federal district court in Arizona held that the state was violating the Equal Educational Opportunity Act because the amount of funding it allocated for the special needs of ELL students was arbitrary and not related to the actual funding needed to cover the costs of ELL instruction in the plaintiffs' school district.
Opinion of the Court
On June 25, 2009, the United States Supreme Court overturned the decision of the state court, deciding in favor of Horne, and allowing the state to determine its own requirements with regards to ELL instruction. Justice Alito wrote the opinion for the 5-4 majority.  The opinion held that in evaluating the actions of the state attention should focus on student outcomes rather than on spending and inputs to schools.To support this, the majority opinion relied on the arguments in Eric A. Hanushek and Alfred A. Lindseth (2009), Schoolhouses, courthouses, and statehouses:  Solving the funding-achievement puzzle in America's public schools (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press).
Dissent
Justice Breyer, joined by Justice Stevens, Justice Souter, and Justice Ginsburg. Justice Breyer argued that the lower courts did fairly consider every change in circumstances that the parties called to their attention, and that the majority opinion risks denying schoolchildren the English language instruction necessary to overcome language barriers that impede equal participation.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 557
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States education case law
Category:Linguistic rights
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:2009 in education
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Horton v. California" ==> """
Horton v. California, 496 U.S. 128 (1990), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the Fourth Amendment does not prohibit the warrantless seizure of evidence which is in plain view. The discovery of the evidence does not have to be inadvertent, although that is a characteristic of most legitimate plain-view seizures. The opinion clarified the plain view doctrine of the Court's Fourth Amendment analysis.
Background
As he entered his garage Erwin Wallaker was robbed of jewelry and cash by two men, one armed with a machine gun and one with a stun gun.Horton v. California, ; ,  183 (2008); B. J. George, Jr., United States Supreme Court 1989-1990 Term: Criminal Law Decisions, 35  479, 492 (1990). Wallaker heard enough of the robbers conversation to identify Horton's voice., at 183. The police submitted a request for a warrant to search for both weapons and the proceeds of the robbery, but the magistrate who issued the warrant only authorized a search for the proceeds of the robbery.Horton, 496 U.S. at 130-31; , at 183; ,  437 (2015); George, 35  at 492. During the subsequent search, the police found weapons and other items which were not listed on the warrant.Horton, 496 U.S. at 131; , at 437. None of the stolen property was found.Horton, 496 U.S. at 131; , at 437.
Lower courts
Horton was charged with the robbery and moved to suppress the weapons as being illegally seized.Horton, 496 U.S. at 131; George, 35  at 492. The police officer, Sergeant LaRault, testified that he was looking for any evidence that would show that Horton had committed the robbery.Horton, 496 U.S. at 131; , at 183; , at 437. The trial court, relying on a California Supreme Court case, North v. Superior Court,North v. Superior Court, . refused to suppress the weapons, and Horton was convicted.Horton, 496 U.S. at 131; , at 183; George, 35  at 492. The California Court of Appeals affirmed, and the California Supreme Court denied review.Horton, 496 U.S. at 131; George, 35  at 492.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|170px|left|Justice John P. Stevens, author of the majority opinion.
Justice John Paul Stevens delivered the opinion of the Court in a 7–2 vote affirming the judgment of the California Court of Appeals.Horton, 496 U.S. at 142; George, 35  at 492. He first noted that the Fourth Amendment protected property against both search and seizure.Horton, 496 U.S. at 133. In Arizona v. HicksArizona v. Hicks, . (1987), the Court had determined that if an object was in "plain view", then it did not involve any expectation of privacy that would prevent it from being "searched" or "seized".Horton, 496 U.S. at 133. The issue here was whether Justice Stewart's opinion in Coolidge v. New Hampshire (1971) required that the plain view be inadvertent, with Justice Stevens noting that it was not binding precedent.Horton, 496 U.S. at 136. First, the nature of the object being evidence must be readily apparent.Horton, 496 U.S. at 136; , at 177. A requirement for any warrantless seizure is that "the officer be lawfully located in a place from which the object can be plainly seen, but he or she must also have a lawful right of access to the object itself."Horton, 496 U.S. at 137; , at 177; George, 35  at 494.
thumb|170px|right|Justice William J. Brennan, Jr., author of the dissenting opinion.
Justice Stevens also looked at the dissent from Coolidge, where Justice White had said:
Let us suppose officers secure a warrant to search a house for a rifle. While staying well within the range of a rifle search, they discover two photographs of the murder victim, both in plain sight in the bedroom. Assume also that the discovery of the one photograph was inadvertent but finding the other was anticipated. The Court would permit the seizure of only one of the photographs. But in terms of the 'minor' peril to Fourth Amendment values there is surely no difference between these two photographs: the interference with possession is the same in each case and the officers' appraisal of the photograph they expected to see is no less reliable than their judgment about the other. And in both situations the actual inconvenience and danger to evidence remain identical if the officers must depart and secure a warrant.Horton, 496 U.S. at 139 (citing Coolidge, 403 U.S. at 516 (White, J., dissenting)); see also George, 35  at 493 n.70.
Justice Stevens stated that he preferred an objective test rather than a subjective test, and noted that every place that was searched was authorized to be searched under the warrant.Horton, 496 U.S. at 138, 142; , at 184; George, 35  at 492.
Dissent
Justice Brennan, joined by Justice Marshall, dissented from the Court's opinion. He believed that Justice Stewart's opinion in Coolidge was the correct interpretation of the plain view doctrine.Horton, 496 U.S. at 142 (Brennan, J., dissenting). Brennan noted that a warrantless search was per se unreasonable unless it met a warrant exception.Horton, 496 U.S. at 143-44 (Brennan, J., dissenting). A warrant had to describe, with particularity, the items to be searched for and seized.Horton, 496 U.S. at 144 (Brennan, J., dissenting). He believed that unless the discovery of the evidence in plain view was inadvertent, as Justice Stewart had outlined the doctrine in Coolidge, it would excuse officers who do not have a warrant that describes the items to be seized with the required particularity.Horton, 496 U.S. at 144-45 (Brennan, J., dissenting); see e.g. Catherine T. Clarke, Fifth Circuit Symposium: Criminal Law and Procedure, 36  753 (1990) (noting that the majority rejected J. Brennan's position).
Justice Brennan also believed that the majority's opinion only addressed the privacy issue of a person's property, and ignored the possessory issues.Horton, 496 U.S. at 147 (Brennan, J., dissenting). He claimed that this could lead to pretext searches, which in his view should be suppressed.Horton, 496 U.S. at 147 (Brennan, J., dissenting).
Subsequent developments
Expansion of plain view doctrine
Scholars immediately commented that the decision might be "one of the most functionally expansive decisions" reached that session.George, 35  at 490-91.
Computer searches
The use of the Horton plain view doctrine has had an unintended consequence in searches of electronically stored information (ESI), effectively turning searches of ESI into general searches., at 177.
Notes
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1990 in United States case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1990 in California
Category:Legal history of California
"""

From "Hortonville Joint School District No. 1 v. Hortonville Education Association" ==> """
Hortonville Joint School District No. 1 v. Hortonville Education Association, 426 U.S. 482 (1976), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that a public school board did not violate the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution when it fired teachers who went on strike after contract negotiations with the board broke down.Hortonville Joint School Dist. No. 1 v. Hortonville Ed. Assn., .
Background
In 1974, members of the teacher's union in the Hortonville Area School District in Wisconsin went on strike after contract negotiations broke down with the district's School Board.Hortonville Joint School Dist., 426 U.S. at 484. However, Wisconsin law "prohibited the strike".Hortonville Joint School Dist., 426 U.S. at 484, 488. The district's superintendent asked the striking teachers to return to work, but none of the striking teachers returned.Hortonville Joint School Dist., 426 U.S. at 484 (noting that classes were conducted "with substitute teachers on March 26 and 27" of that year). One week later, the Board conducted disciplinary proceedings and voted to terminate the employment of the striking teachers.Hortonville Joint School Dist., 426 U.S. at 484-85. The teachers objected to the firing and filed a lawsuit in state court in which they argued that the Board's decision violated the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution.Hortonville Joint School Dist., 426 U.S. at 484-85 (noting that the day after Board's decision to terminate the teachers, the Board "invited all teachers on strike to reapply for teaching positions. One teacher accepted the invitation and returned to work; the Board hired replacements to fill the remaining positions."). The trial court rejected the teachers' arguments, but on appeal, the Supreme Court of Wisconsin ruled that that "Federal Constitution required that the teachers' conduct and the Board's response be evaluated by an impartial decisionmaker other than the Board."Hortonville Joint School Dist., 426 U.S. at 485-86. The Supreme Court of the United States granted certiorari to determine whether the Board's actions violate the Fourteenth Amendment's due process clause.Hortonville Joint School Dist., 426 U.S. at 487.
Opinion of the Court
Writing for a majority of the Court, Chief Justice Warren Burger held that "the Board's prior role as negotiator does not disqualify it to decide that the public interest in maintaining uninterrupted classroom work required that teachers striking in violation of state law be discharged."Hortonville Joint School Dist., 426 U.S. at 494. Chief Justice Burger concluded that the Board's decision did not violate due process because the decision to terminate the teachers was not "infected by the sort of bias that we have held to disqualify other decisionmakers as a matter of federal due process."Hortonville Joint School Dist., 426 U.S. at 496. 
Justice Stewart's dissenting opinion
Associate Justice Potter Stewart wrote a dissenting opinion in which he argued that the Board's decision to terminate the teachers violated the Fourteenth Amendment's due process clause because "the Board members were not impartial decisionmakers."Hortonville Joint School Dist., 426 U.S. at 497 (Stewart, J., dissenting). Citing Withrow v. Larkin, Justice Stewart argued that "[i]t is now well established that a biased decisionmaker [is] constitutionally unacceptable [and] our system of law has always endeavored to prevent even the probability of unfairness."Hortonville Joint School Dist., 426 U.S. at 497 (Stewart, J., dissenting) (internal citations and quotations omitted) (modification in Justice Stewart's opinion).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 426
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Wisconsin
Category:Outagamie County, Wisconsin
"""

From "Hosanna-Tabor Evangelical Lutheran Church & School v. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission" ==> """
Hosanna-Tabor Evangelical Lutheran Church and School v. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 565 U.S. 171 (2012), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the court unanimously ruled that federal discrimination laws do not apply to religious organizations' selection of religious leaders..
 Background 
In 1999, Cheryl Perich started teaching at Hosanna-Tabor Evangelical Lutheran Church and School, an affiliate of the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod in Redford, Michigan.  In addition to other duties, Perich led students in prayer and taught a religion class several days a week. In 2004, Perich left on disability and was diagnosed with narcolepsy. In 2005, after she was cleared by her doctors to go back to work, the school told her that it already hired someone else. Perich threatened to file suit, and the school promptly fired her for "insubordination and disruptive behavior". Perich sued for unlawful dismissal under the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act.
 Opinion of the Court 
All nine Supreme Court justices agreed with the decision written by Chief Justice John Roberts that "the Establishment Clause prevents the Government from appointing ministers, and the Free Exercise Clause prevents it from interfering with the freedom of religious groups to select their own". Moreover, because the respondent, in this case, was a minister within the meaning of the ministerial exception, the First Amendment requires dismissal of her employment discrimination suit against her religious employer. The decision explicitly left open the question of whether religious organizations could be sued for other reasons: "We express no view on whether the exception bars other types of suits, including actions by employees alleging breach of contract or tortious conduct". The Court also developed multiple factors to determine whether an employee qualifies as a minister within the meaning of the ministerial exception. These factors include how the school viewed the employee, the employee's title, and whether the employee's duties included important religious functions.
 Concurrences 
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a concurrence, in which he eschewed the use of any specific test for determining who qualifies as a minister, writing that he would like to "defer to a religious organization's good-faith understanding of who qualifies as a minister".
Justice Samuel Alito wrote a concurring opinion, which Elena Kagan joined, stating that the word "minister" used in the decision should extend to similar titles for other religions such as rabbi for Judaism or imam in Islam.
 Reaction 
 Support 
The Family Research Council expressed support for the decision. In a press release, a spokesperson for the organization stated: "We are pleased that the Supreme Court rejected the Obama administration's profoundly troubling claim of power over churches, and glad to see that the Supreme Court has stayed out of the Lutheran Church's affairs and allowed its internal rules as a body of believers to stand." (While FRC criticized the "Obama Administration", President Obama actually made no comment on the case, which was one the government began under the George W. Bush Administration. However, the Obama Administration, namely the Justice Department, did in fact file an opposition brief that asserted the ministerial exemption should be severely limited). Five days following the decision, Mitt Romney praised the decision saying, "We are very fortunate [to have people] who are willing to stand up for religious tolerance and religious liberty and the First Amendment of this Constitution in this country."
 Criticism 
In a January 12, 2012, editorial, the New York Times concluded that the decision gave "sweeping deference to churches" which "does not serve [churches] or society wisely":
Although the court does not provide much guidance on how to proceed in future lawsuits against churches as employers, the ruling has broad sweep. It abandons the court's longtime practice of balancing the interest in the free exercise of religion against important government interests, like protection against workplace bias or retaliation. With a balancing test, courts consider whether a general law, if applied to a religious institution, would inhibit its freedom more broadly than justified, and, in those circumstances, courts could exempt the church.
In her brief, Ms. Perich warned that expanding the ministerial exception to include workers like her would allow a religious organization, for example, to retaliate against a teacher for reporting sexual abuse of a student to the government.
 Impact 
In 2014, the Archdiocese of Cincinnati ordered its 2,000 teachers regardless of religion to sign a "detailed morality clause" that critics say focuses on "pelvic issues." The new contracts forbid teachers from living together, having sex outside of marriage, using in-vitro fertilization or surrogacy, exhibiting a gay "lifestyle" or any speech expressing support for these things.
Two cases originating from the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit have challenged the applicability of Hossana-Tabor to teachers at religious schools who have ministerial duties but lack the title or training expected for such a position, leading to the Supreme Court case Our Lady of Guadalupe School v. Morrissey-Berru. The July 2020 ruling on those cases relied on Hosanna-Tabor to conclude in favor of the schools against the teachers.
The Obama Administration's case was argued by Leondra Kruger, who at the time worked under Solicitor General Donald Verrilli. In 2022, as a candidate for the Supreme Court, this led to questions about her views on freedom of religion.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 565
 First English Evangelical Lutheran Church v. Los Angeles County (1987)
 References 
 External links 
Hosanna-Tabor Evangelical Lutheran Church and School v. EEOC at americanbar.org
Category:2012 in United States case law
Category:Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:Ministerial exception case law
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:United States employment discrimination case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2012 in religion
Category:Wayne County, Michigan
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Narcolepsy
Category:Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
Category:Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod
Category:United States disability case law
"""

From "Hotchkiss v. Greenwood" ==> """
Hotchkiss v. Greenwood, 52 U.S. (11 How.) 248 (1851), was a United States Supreme Court decision credited with introducing into United States patent law the concept of non-obviousness as a patentability requirement,See, e.g.,  ("We conclude that the section [§ 103] was intended merely as a codification of judicial precedents embracing the Hotchkiss condition, with congressional directions that inquiries into the obviousness of the subject matter sought to be patented are a prerequisite to patentability."). as well as stating the applicable legal standard for determining its presence or absence in a claimed invention. 
The test of the Hotchkiss case may be described as: whether, at the time the claimed invention was made, the differences between the features of the claimed invention and the things that persons skilled in the relevant art already knew were such that it would have been within the level of skill of an ordinary artisan in that art to combine those known features to make the claimed invention.See, e.g.,  94 (2004). 
More specifically, as stated in the Hotchkiss opinion, itself:
Unless more ingenuity and skill . . . were required . . . than were possessed by an ordinary mechanic acquainted with the business, there was an absence of that degree of skill and ingenuity which constitute essential elements of every invention. In other words, the improvement is the work of the skillful mechanic, not that of the inventor.Hotchkiss, 52 U.S. at 267.
Background
John G. Hotchkiss, John A. Davenport, and John W. Quincy obtained U.S. Patent No. 2197, on making or manufacturing knobs of potter's clay or porcelain. The patent asserted that they:
invented an improved method of making knobs for locks, doors, cabinet furniture, and for all other purposes for which wood and metal, or other material knobs, are used. This improvement consists in making said knobs of potter's clay, such as is used in any species of pottery; also of porcelain; the operation is the same as in pottery, by molding, turning, and burning and glazing; . . . the modes of fitting them for their application to doors, locks, furniture, and other uses, will be . . . chiefly predicated on one principle, that of having the cavity in which the screw or shank is inserted, by which they are fastened, largest at the bottom of its depth, in form of a dovetail, and a screw formed therein by pouring in metal in a fused state.Hotchkiss v. Greenwood, 52 U.S. (11 How.) 248, 264 (1851).
thumb|right|225px|The patented doorknob – from U.S. Pat. No. 2197
The clay or porcelain knob, by itself, was apparently known and used in the United States prior to the invention and patent, and the shank and spindle, by which the knob is attached, including the use of the dovetail and the infusions of melted metal, were also so known and used. But the shank and spindle, the inventors contended, had never before been attached to a knob made of potter's clay or porcelain (rather than to a metal or wooden knob).Id.
Lower court ruling
thumb|150px|Justice John McLean – 1849
In Hotchkiss v. Greenwood, 12 F. Cas. 551 (C.C.D. Ohio 1848), the circuit court for Ohio upheld a jury verdict for the defendants. Justice John McLean, sitting as circuit justice, presided. The most controversial issue, subsequently the subject of the appeal, was plaintiffs' request for a charge to the jury, which McLean refused, to the effect that:
[If the] shank and spindle had never before been attached to a knob made of potter's clay or porcelain, and if it required skill and thought and invention to attach the said knob of clay to the metal shank and spindle, so that the same would unite firmly, and make a solid and substantial article of manufacture, and if the said knob of clay or porcelain so attached were an article better and cheaper than the knob theretofore manufactured of metal or other materials, that the patent was valid.Hotchkiss v. Greenwood, 52 U.S. at 264.
McLean, on the contrary instructed the jury:
[I]f knobs of the same form, and for the same purposes with that described by the plaintiffs in their [patent] specifications, made of metal or other material, had been known and used in the United States prior to the alleged invention and patent of the plaintiffs, and if the spindle and shank, in the form used by the plaintiffs, had before that time been publicly known and used in the United States, and had been theretofore attached to metallic knobs by means of the dovetail and the infusions of melted metal, as the same is directed in the specification of the plaintiffs to be attached to the knob of potter's clay or porcelain, so that if the knob of clay or porcelain is the mere substitution of one material for another, and the spindle and shank be such as were theretofore in common use, and the mode of connecting them to the knob by dovetail be the same that was theretofore in use in the United States, the material being in common use, and no other ingenuity or skill being necessary to construct the knob than that of an ordinary mechanic acquainted with the business, the patent is void, and the plaintiffs are not entitled to recover.Id.
Supreme Court ruling
thumb|right|200px|Justice Samuel Nelson
Justice Samuel Nelson delivered the opinion for an 8-1 Court. Justice Levi Woodbury dissented.
Majority opinion
Counsel for the plaintiffs conceded that "knobs had been in use many hundred years; potter's ware and porcelain, many thousand," but insisted that "no one ever before succeeded in uniting the clay and the iron so as to make of the two a substantial and useful article," because there "are many difficulties in uniting them," and it required skill and thought and invention to unite them." Moreover, the new doorknobs were "cheaper and better than any like article ever before known." They were a great commercial success and are replacing metal knob everywhere.Hotchkiss v. Greenwood, 52 U.S. (11 How.) 248, 264 (1851).
The Court found these arguments unavailing. It was established "that knobs of metal, wood, etc., connected with a shank and spindle, in the mode and by the means used by the patentees in their manufacture, had been before known, and were in public use." Clay doorknobs were old too. Hence, "the only novelty which could be claimed on their part was the adaptation of this old contrivance to knobs of potter's clay or porcelain; in other words, the novelty consisted in the substitution of the clay knob in the place of one made of metal or wood."52 U.S. at 265.
Therefore, McLean's charge to the jury was correct, "for unless more ingenuity and skill in applying the old method of fastening the shank and the knob were required in the application of it to the clay or porcelain knob than were possessed by an ordinary mechanic acquainted with the business, there was an absence of that degree of skill and ingenuity which constitute essential elements of every invention." The patent is invalid because: "In other words, the improvement is the work of the skillful mechanic, not that of the inventor."52 U.S. at 267.
Dissenting opinion
thumb|right|200px|Justice Levi Woodbury
Justice Woodbury disagreed. He focused on the last aspect of the rejected charge. The patentees sought an instruction that "if the said knob of clay or porcelain so attached were an article better and cheaper than the knob theretofore manufactured of metal or other materials, the patent was valid." He considered the "ordinary mechanic" test incorrect for determining whether the claimed invention was patentable, "whereas in my view the true test of its being patentable was, if the invention was new, and better and cheaper than what preceded it."52 U.S. at 268. If the new device
was in truth better and cheaper than what had preceded it for this purpose, it would surely be an improvement. It would be neither frivolous nor useless, and under all the circumstances it is manifest that the skill necessary to construct it, on which both the court below and the Court here rely, is an immaterial inquiry, or it is entirely subordinate to the question whether the invention was not cheaper and better.52 U.S. at 269.
Woodbury concluded: "And why is not he a benefactor to the community, and to be encouraged by protection, who invents a use of so cheap an earth as clay for knobs, or in a new form or combination, by which the community are largely gainers?"52 U.S. at 271–72.
Post-Hotchkiss developments
In the 1875 decision Reckendorfer v. Faber,92 U.S. 347 (1875). the Court considered and reaffirmed the Hotchkiss decision. The Court described the invention in these terms:
The claim is simply of the combination of the lead and india-rubber in the holder of a drawing-pencil; in other words, the use of an ordinary lead pencil, in one end of which, and for about one-fourth of its length, is inserted a strip of india-rubber, glued to one side of the pencil.92 U.S. at 355.
Like Hotchkiss's doorknob, the eraser glued to a pencil was the product of mere mechanical skill and therefore unpatentable:
An instrument or manufacture which is the result of mechanical skill merely is not patentable. Mechanical skill is one thing; invention is a different thing. Perfection of workmanship, however much it may increase the convenience, extend the use, or diminish expense, is not patentable.92 U.S. at 356-57.
Similarly in 1883 in Atlantic Works v. Brady, the Court used language like that of Hotchkiss in invalidating a patent: "It was never the object of those laws to grant a monopoly for every trifling device, every shadow of a shade of an idea, which would naturally and spontaneously occur to any skilled mechanic or operator in the ordinary progress of manufactures."Atlantic Works v. Brady, 107 U.S. 192, 199–200 (1883). 
In the 1891 decision in Magowan v. New York Belting & Packing Co., the Court again echoed Hotchkiss – in upholding a patent as valid: "[Wihat Gately did was not merely the work of a skilled mechanic, who applied only his common knowledge and experience, and perceived the reason of the failure of [previous inventions], and supplied what was obviously wanting; and that the present case involves . . . the creative work of the inventive faculty."141 U.S. 332, 343 (1891).
In Mast, Foos, & Co. v. Stover Mfg. Co., a few years later, the Court used the Hotchkiss "skillful mechanic" test to invalidate  patent, and explained what a skilled mechanic is presumed to know – namely, all of the relevant prior art:
The line between invention and mechanical skill is often an exceedingly difficult one to draw, but in view of the state of the art as heretofore shown, we cannot say that the application of this old device to a use which was only new in the particular machine to which it was applied was anything more than would have been suggested to an intelligent mechanic who had before him the patents to which we have called attention. While it is entirely true that the fact that this change had not occurred to any mechanic familiar with windmills is evidence of something more than mechanical skill in the person who did discover it, it is probable that no one of these was fully aware of the state of the art and the prior devices, but, as before stated, in determining the question of invention, we must presume the patentee was fully informed of everything which preceded him, whether such were the actual fact or not.177 U.S. 485, 493–94 (1900).
The Court's standard for what was ordinary mechanical skill rose and fell over the years, but began to become more strict after the Great Depression and New Deal. Thus, in Cuno Engineering Corp. v. Automatic Devices Corp. in 1941, the Court veered away from Hotchkiss to invalidate an automatic cigarette lighter for cars that used a thermostat to pop out the lighter so that the user did not have to hold it in place in the socket until it heated sufficiently. In the Second Circuit, Judge Learned Hand had held the device patentable, ruling in an echo of Hotchkiss, "If patents are to go to those who contribute new appliances that are beyond the limited imagination of the ordinary skilled person, this invention seems to us to merit a patent."Automatic Devices Corp. v. Cuno Eng'g Corp., 117 F.2d 361, 364 (2d Cir. 1941). On appeal, the Court's opinion (per Douglas, J.) applied Hotchkiss differently to the facts:
Since Hotchkiss v. Greenwood, decided in 1851, it has been recognized that if an improvement is to obtain the privileged position of a patent more Ingenuity must be involved than the work of a mechanic skilled in the art. . . . The principle of the Hotchkiss case applies to the adaptation or combination of old or well known devices for new uses.Cuno Eng'g Corp. v. Automatic Devices Corp., 314 U.S. 84, 90–91 (1941).
Then the Cuno Court revived Reckendorfer mixed with Atlantic Works mixed with Hotchkiss, by adding:
[T]he new device, however useful it may be, must reveal the flash of creative genius not merely the skill of the calling. If it fails, it has not established its right to a private grant on the public domain . . . We cannot conclude that his skill in making this contribution reached the level of inventive genius which the Constitution authorizes Congress to reward. . . . Ingenuity was required to effect the adaptation, but no more than that to be expected of a mechanic skilled in the art. Strict application of that test is necessary lest in the constant demand for new appliances the heavy hand of tribute be laid on each slight technological advance in an art.314 U.S. at 91–92.
Subsequent cases in this period used similar language.See. e.g., Jungersen v. Ostby & Barton Co., 335 U.S. 560, 566 (1949) ("Where centrifugal force was common as a means of introducing molten metal into the secondary mould, its use in an intermediate step to force molten wax into the primary mould was not an exemplification of inventive genius such as is necessary to render the patent valid.").
In 1952 came Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co. v. Supermarket Equipment Corp.,340 U.S. 147 (1950). the last of the cases preceding the enactment of the 1952 patent act codifying Hotchkiss as the legal standard for patentability. In the A&P case, the claimed invention was a rack or frame with three sides and no top or bottom, which could be used to pull groceries along a counter beside a cash register. All the elements of the claimed combination were old and operated in a similar fashion to how they acted in the past. The Court said:
The conjunction or concert of known elements must contribute something; only when the whole in some way exceeds the sum of its parts is the accumulation of old devices patentable. Elements may, of course, especially in chemistry or electronics, take on some new quality or function from being brought into concert, but this is not a usual result of uniting elements old in mechanics. This case is wanting in any unusual or surprising consequences from the unification of the elements here concerned, and there is nothing to indicate that the lower courts scrutinized the claims in the light of this rather severe test.340 U.S. at 152.
In a concurring opinion, Justice Douglas collected a list of cases in which the Court had interpreted the Hotchkiss test for invention to require a level of skill embodying "inventive genius":
 Reckendorfer v. Faber, 92 U. S. 347, 357 – "Genius or invention"
 Smith v. Whitman Saddle Co., 148 U.S. 674, 681 – "Intuitive genius"
 Potts v. Creager, 155 U.S. 597, 607 – "Inventive genius"
 Concrete Appliances Co. v. Gomery, 269 U.S. 177, 185 "Inventive genius
 Mantle Lamp Co. of America v. Aluminum Products Co., 301 U.S. 544, 546 
 Cuno Engineering Corp. v. Automatic Devices Corp., 314 U.S. 84, 91 – "the flash of creative genius, not merely the skill of the calling."
One commentator characterized the 1930–1952 period as "contain[ing] the Supreme Court's most critical attitude towards patents and patent
monopolies."George M. Sirilla, 35 U.S.C. 103: From Hotchkiss to Hand to Rich, the Obvious Patent Law Hall-of-Famers, 32 J.  437, 487 (1999). It was immediately followed by an amendment of the patent laws to codify a "nonobviousness" standard based on Hotchkiss to replace the "invention" standard previously used and intended to limit the requirement of genius.
1952 codification of Hotchkiss
As explained in the Supreme Court's opinion in Dawson Chemical Co. v. Rohm & Haas Co., the patent bar vigorously lobbied for a rollback of the Supreme Court decisions of the pre-1952 period or at least of the language that they used. Eventually it succeeded in persuading Congress to enact 35 U.S.C. § 103 as part of a codification of patent law, establishing the requirement of nonobviousness for patentability, using the language of Hotchkiss.
The new section provided:
A patent for a claimed invention may not be obtained, notwithstanding that the claimed invention is not identically disclosed as set forth in section 102, if the differences between the claimed invention and the prior art are such that the claimed invention as a whole would have been obvious before the effective filing date of the claimed invention to a person having ordinary skill in the art to which the claimed invention pertains. Patentability shall not be negated by the manner in which the invention was made.
The legislative history of new § 103 is discussed in Graham v. John Deere Co., discussed in the following section.
Supreme Court rulings from Graham to KSR
Graham
The first Supreme Court decision interpreting the 1952 codification of Hotchkiss was Graham v. John Deere Co.,383 U.S. 1 (1966). in which the Court explained that the inherent problem in formulating conditions for patentability "was to develop some means of weeding out those inventions which would not be disclosed or devised but for the inducement of a patent." The Court added that "Hotchkiss, by positing the condition that a patentable invention evidence more ingenuity and skill than that possessed by an ordinary mechanic acquainted with the business, merely distinguished between new and useful innovations that were capable of sustaining a patent and those that were not."Id. at 11. But the Hotchkiss test merely "laid the cornerstone of the judicial evolution" necessary to define the conditions for patentability.Id. The value of the Hotchkiss formulation was "in its functional approach to questions of patentability. In practice, Hotchkiss has required a comparison between the subject matter of the patent, or patent application, and the background skill of the calling. It has been from this comparison that patentability was in each case determined."Id. at 12.
According to the Graham decision, the major distinction between the language of Hotchkiss and that of § 103 "is that Congress has emphasized 'nonobviousness' as the operative test of the section, rather than the less definite 'invention' language of Hotchkiss that Congress thought had led to 'a large variety' of expressions in decisions and writings." The meaning of § 103 is the same as that of court decisions since Hotchkiss "for more than 100 years": A claimed invention may not be patentable even if novel "if the difference between the new thing and what was known before is not considered sufficiently great to warrant a patent."Id. at 14.
The Court then explained that the statutory codification of Hotchkiss did not sweep away 100 years of precedents since Hotchkiss. The Court explained:
 It is undisputed that this section was, for the first time, a statutory expression of an additional requirement for patentability, originally expressed in Hotchkiss. It also seems apparent that Congress intended by the last sentence of § 103 to abolish the test it believed this Court announced in the controversial phrase "flash of creative genius," used in Cuno Engineering Corp. v. Automatic Devices Corp.Id. at 15.
But it would be erroneous, the Court further explained, to accept the contentions "by some of the parties and by several of the amici that the first sentence of §  103 was intended to sweep away judicial precedents and to lower the level of patentability." Rather:
 We believe that this legislative history, as well as other sources, show that the revision was not intended by Congress to change the general level of patentable invention. We conclude that the section was intended merely as a codification of judicial precedents embracing the Hotchkiss condition, with congressional directions that inquiries into the obviousness of the subject matter sought to be patented are a prerequisite to patentability.Id. at 16–17.
The Court concluded its explanation of the meaning of § 103 with this instruction:
[I]t bears repeating that we find no change in the general strictness with which the overall test is to be applied. We have been urged to find in §  103 a relaxed standard, supposedly a congressional reaction to the "increased standard" applied by this Court in its decisions over the last 20 or 30 years. The standard has remained invariable in this Court.Id. at 19.
Anderson's Black Rock
The next Supreme Court obviousness case after Graham was Anderson's-Black Rock, Inc. v. Pavement Salvage Co., in which the Court invalidated a patent on a road-mending device.Anderson's-Black Rock, Inc. v. Pavement Salvage Co., 396 U.S. 57 (1969). The device was a combination of old devices, in which each component performed the same function as it had in the past. The Court concluded:
[W]hile the combination of old elements performed a useful function, it added nothing to the nature and quality of the radiant-heat burner already patented. We conclude further that to those skilled in the art the use of the old elements in combination was not an invention by the obvious-nonobvious standard.396 U.s. 62-63.
Johnston
The next Supreme Court case addressing obviousness was Dann v. Johnston,425 U.S. 219 (1976). in which the Court upheld the rejection of claims to a method of creating records of bank checks for expenditures in different categories, such as rent, wages, cost of materials, etc. so that income taxes could more readily be calculated.  The Court explained that the applicable standard for nonobviousness had not been satisfied:
[T]he mere existence of differences between the prior art and an invention does not establish the invention's nonobviousness. The gap between the prior art and respondent's system is simply not so great as to render the system nonobvious to one reasonably skilled in the art.425 U.S. at 230
Sakraida
Three weeks after Johnston, the Court decided Sakraida v. Ag Pro, Inc. The Court instructed:
It has long been clear that the Constitution requires that there be some "invention" to be entitled to patent protection. Dann v. Johnston. As we explained in Hotchkiss v. Greenwood:
[U]nless more ingenuity and skill . . . were required . . . than were possessed by an ordinary mechanic acquainted with the business, there was an absence of that degree of skill and ingenuity which constitute essential elements of every invention. In other words, the improvement is the work of the skillful mechanic, not that of the inventor.Sakraida v. Ag Pro, Inc., 425 U.S. 273, 279 (1976).
Applying this legal standard, the Court held the patent invalid as obvious under § 103.The Supreme Court next referred to Hotchkiss in passing in Bonito Boats, Inc. v. Thunder Craft Boats, Inc., 489 U.S. 141, 150 (1989), explaining that codification of Hotchkiss reflected "a congressional determination that the purposes behind the Patent Clause are best served by free competition and exploitation of either that which is already available to the public or that which may be readily discerned from publicly available material."
KSR
Three decades later, the Supreme Court most recently revisited the obviousness standard. In KSR International Co. v. Teleflex Inc.,550 U.S. 398 (2007). the Court rejected the Federal Circuit's approach to determining obviousness as insufficiently faithful to the Hotchkiss standard as explained in Graham v. Deere. The Federal Circuit had been using a "rigid" test known as "the 'teaching, suggestion, or motivation' test (TSM test), under which a patent claim is only proved obvious if 'some motivation or suggestion to combine the prior art teachings' can be found in the prior art, the nature of the problem, or the knowledge of a person having ordinary skill in the art."KSR, 550 U.S. at 407. "Throughout this Court's engagement with the question of obviousness," the Court instructed, "our cases have set forth an expansive and flexible approach" based on Hotchkiss and "inconsistent with the way the Court of Appeals applied its TSM test here."KSR, 550 U.S. at 415. The Court also criticized the Federal Circuit's treatment of patents on combinations of old elements in which the elements performed the same function as they always did, thus ignoring the emphasis in Hotchkiss on "functionality," as reaffirmed in Graham.Id.
The Court explained, quoting the A&P Tea case:
For over a half century, the Court has held that a "patent for a combination which only unites old elements with no change in their respective functions . . . obviously withdraws what already is known into the field of its monopoly and diminishes the resources available to skillful men." Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co. This is a principal reason for declining to allow patents for what is obvious. The combination of familiar elements according to known methods is likely to be obvious when it does no more than yield predictable results.KSR, 550 U.S. at 415-16.
Applying these standards, the Court held the patent invalid for obviousness. It concluded by explaining that adherence to the Hotchkiss test is essential: "Were it otherwise patents might stifle, rather than promote, the progress of useful arts." And it admonished that the Federal Circuit had "analyzed the issue in a narrow, rigid manner inconsistent with § 103 and our precedents."KSR, 550 U.S. at 427–28.
References
External links
Category:1850 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
"""

From "Houchins v. KQED, Inc." ==> """
Houchins v. KQED, Inc., 438 U.S. 1 (1978), was a 1978 United States Supreme Court case in which the Court refused to recognize a "right of access", under the First Amendment, to interview particular prisoners..
Procedural history
Sheriff Houchins of Alameda County in California controlled all access to the County Jail. KQED, a local radio and television operator, reported on a prisoner suicide in the jail and included a statement from a staff psychiatrist that living conditions there were responsible for the prisoner's illnesses.
KQED requested to inspect and photograph the jail, but the Sheriff refused. KQED and two local branches of the NAACP sued the Sheriff under 42 U. S. C. § 1983, claiming that the Sheriff's refusal violated the First Amendment.
The District Court issued a preliminary injunction to prevent the Sheriff from outright denying KQED and other news media from visiting the jail and bringing audio and video recording devices.
Sheriff Houchins appealed the order to the Court of Appeals. After his appeal was denied, he appealed to the Supreme Court.
Decision of the Court
The court voted 4-3 in favor of Sheriff Houchins, and reversed and remanded the case back the District Court. Chief Justice Burger wrote the Majority opinion, joined by Justice White and Rehnquist. Justice Stewart concurred with Judgment, while Justice Marshall and Blackmun abstained from the consideration or decision of the case.
 Majority opinion 
Justice Burger held "the media have no special right of access to the Alameda County Jail different from or greater than that accorded the public generally." He based the decision on previous precedent that the First Amendment did not compel either private or public entities to disclose information to the press.
He also declined to expand the First Amendment's on policy grounds. "Whether the government should open penal institutions in the manner sought by respondents is a question of policy which a legislative body might appropriately resolve one way or the other." Information about jail conditions was still available through other channels, "albeit not as conveniently as [KQED] might prefer."
 Concurring opinion by Stewart 
Justice Stewart agreed with the Majority's decision to overturn the District Court's injunction because he felt it was overly broad. However he felt that a more limited injunction should replace it. He also felt that the press should be given the ability to bring audio & video recording equipment, even if the general public was prohibited from doing so, since they are there to convey information to the general public.
Dissent
Justice Stevens wrote the dissent, joined by Justices Brennan and Powell.
The dissent disagreed with the Majority's opinion, and felt that Sheriff Houchins should have continued to be compelled to grant KQED and other news media access to the jail. They felt that the Sheriff had restricted KQED access because he was attempting to hide the conditions. They agreed with the District Court's that "the broad restraints on access were not required by legitimate penological interests." The Sheriff's later changes to his policy to allow for media tours was only instituted after the lawsuit, and still had serious limitations, such as the no camera policy, on the media's ability to gather information.
As a policy matter, the dissent wrote "there is no legitimate penological justification for concealing from citizens the conditions in which their fellow citizens are being confined[]" and "[a]n official prison policy of concealing such knowledge from the public by arbitrarily cutting off the flow of information at its source abridges the freedom of speech and of the press protected by the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the Constitution."
Also, the Dissent criticized the Majority's application of Pell to this case because the prison rule that prevented the Press from speaking to specific prisoners was "not part of an attempt by the State to conceal the conditions in its prisons," but "was an isolated limitation on the efforts of the press to gather information about those conditions[,]" imposed only after disciplinary problems had occurred.
Notes
A 2009 Human Rights Watch report, on prison conditions in the United States, claimed that this means that "the kind of public and media scrutiny that helps prevent abuses of power in other government institutions simply does not operate in places of incarceration."Human Rights Watch, No equal justice: the Prison Litigation Reform Act in the United States, 2009,  p. 45
References
External links
Category:Penal system in California
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:History of Alameda County, California
Category:KQED Inc.
"""

From "House v. Bell" ==> """
House v. Bell, 547 U.S. 518 (2006), is a United States Supreme Court case challenging the permissibility of new DNA forensic evidence that becomes available post-conviction, in capital punishment appeals when those claims have defaulted pursuant to state law..   The Court found that admitting new DNA evidence was in line with Schlup v. Delo (1995),. which allows cases to be reopened in light of new evidence.
 Background 
In 1985, Carolyn Muncey was bludgeoned to death in Luttrell, Tennessee, near Knoxville.  Her body was found on an embankment the following day.  Paul Gregory House, who was a friend of the Munceys, was charged with the murder.  House was on parole and had a prior aggravated sexual assault conviction in Utah.  Based on circumstantial evidence that House was spotted near the embankment, that blood consistent with that of the victim was found on House's jeans, and that semen consistent with House's was found on the victim's nightgown and underwear, House was found guilty at trial with aggravating factors that qualified him for capital punishment.
The Tennessee Supreme Court affirmed House's conviction and sentence, describing the evidence against House as "circumstantial" but "quite strong."  Later, in a state trial court, House filed a pro se petition for post-conviction relief, arguing that he received ineffective assistance of counsel at trial and objecting to certain jury instructions. At a hearing before the same judge who conducted the trial, the court dismissed the petition, deeming House's trial counsel adequate and overruling House's other objections. On appeal House's attorney renewed only the jury-instructions argument and the Tennessee Court of Criminal Appeals affirmed, and both the Tennessee Supreme Court and the Supreme Court of the United States denied review.
House filed a second post-conviction petition in state court reasserting his ineffective-assistance claim. After extensive litigation regarding whether House's claims were procedurally defaulted, the Tennessee Supreme Court held that House's claims were barred under a state statute providing that claims not raised in prior post-conviction proceedings are presumptively waived.
House next sought federal habeas corpus relief, asserting numerous claims of ineffective assistance of counsel and prosecutorial misconduct.
In November 2002, the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit reviewed the case in light of new DNA evidence that might exonerate House. The DNA taken from semen on the victim's clothing matched her husband, and not House.  Additionally, House advanced the theory that the blood found on his jeans was spilled onto them from autopsy samples while the evidence was being transported from Tennessee to the FBI crime lab.  Two witnesses came forward to say that the victim's husband, Hubert Muncey, had confessed to the murder. 
In light of the new evidence, the Court of Appeals referred the case to the Tennessee Supreme Court, asking it to consider how the state law barring consideration of claims not raised in prior post-conviction appeals applies in this situation. In December 2003, the Tennessee Supreme Court refused to consider whether new DNA evidence presented during death penalty appeals necessitates a new trial, and declined to answer other questions posed.  The Tennessee Supreme Court sent the case back to the Federal Court of Appeals.  
The Federal Court of Appeals narrowly rejected House's appeal on October 6, 2004, in an 8-7 decision with strongly worded opinions from the dissenting judges.
On June 28, 2005, the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to take up the case, to reconsider under what circumstances death penalty cases could be reopened in light of new evidence.
 Opinion of the Court 
Generally, claims that have defaulted under state law may not be granted federal habeas corpus review unless the petitioner provides a sufficient explanation for the default and demonstrates that the asserted error prejudiced his or her trial (that is, the error caused a different outcome). This standard, based on the principle of respect for state court judgments, is normally a difficult one for convicted defendants to meet.
The United States Supreme Court recognized a "miscarriage of justice" exception to the above rule for "extraordinary cases" in a 1995 decision, Schlup v. Delo. That decision held that prisoners asserting innocence as a gateway to federal review of defaulted claims must establish that, in light of new evidence, "it is more likely than not that no reasonable juror would have found petitioner guilty beyond a reasonable doubt."
In House v. Bell, the Supreme Court found that House’s arguments based on new DNA and other evidence were sufficient to meet the Schlup standard.
 DNA evidence 
DNA tests established that the semen on Mrs. Muncey's nightgown and underwear came from her husband, Mr. Muncey, not from House. The State argued that since neither sexual contact nor motive were elements of the offense, this evidence would have not affected the jury’s decision to convict House had it been available at trial.  
The Supreme Court disagreed, stating that the new DNA evidence was of "central importance." A jury, informed that fluids on Mrs. Muncey's garments could have come from House, might have found that House traveled to the victim's home and lured her away in order to commit a sexual offense. According to the Court, a jury acting without the assumption that the semen could have come from House would have found it necessary to establish a different motive for her murder.
 Bloodstains 
The other relevant forensic evidence in House’s trial was Mrs. Muncey's blood, found on House's pants.  House's attorneys argued that his pants were contaminated with samples of blood taken during Mrs. Muncey's autopsy.
Expert witnesses testified that Mrs. Muncey's blood samples taken during the autopsy were kept in test tubes without preservation. They said that in such conditions, certain enzymes invariably degrade. The matching blood found on House's pants showed similar enzyme decay, in a way that would not have occurred if the victim's blood had come into contact with House's pants while she was still alive.
Other evidence supported this theory. During the investigation of Mrs. Muncey's murder, the doctor who performed the autopsy passed the vials to two local law enforcement officers who transported it to the FBI, where further testing occurred. The blood was contained in four vials, evidently with neither preservative nor a proper seal. The vials, in turn, were stored in a foam box, but nothing indicates the box was kept cool. Rather, in violation of proper procedure, the foam box was packed in the same cardboard box as other evidence, including House's pants and other clothing. The cardboard box was carried in the officers' car, and transported while they made the 10-hour journey from Tennessee to the FBI lab. Blood vials in hot conditions (such as a car trunk in the summer) can blow open. By the time the blood reached the FBI it had hemolyzed, or spoiled, due to heat exposure. By the time the blood passed from the FBI to a defense expert, roughly a vial and a half were empty, though the agent who had analyzed it testified he used at most a quarter of one vial. Blood, moreover, was found to have seeped onto one corner of the foam box and onto packing gauze inside the box below the vials.
The Supreme Court declared that the bloodstains, as emphasized by the prosecution, seemed strong evidence of House's guilt at trial, but that new evidence raised substantial questions about the blood's origin and its timing.
 A different suspect 
In the post-trial proceedings, House's attorneys presented evidence that Mr. Muncey, the victim's husband, could have been the murderer. House's attorneys produced evidence from multiple sources suggesting that Muncey regularly abused his wife.  Moreover, two witnesses at House's habeas hearing testified that, around the time of House's trial, Muncey had confessed to the crime. One witness recalled that she and "some family members and some friends [were] sitting around drinking" at her trailer when Muncey "just walked in and sit down." Muncey, who had evidently been drinking heavily, began "rambling off . . . talking about what happened to his wife and how it happened and he didn't mean to do it." According to the witness, Muncey "said [he and Mrs. Muncey] had been into [an] argument and he slapped her and she fell and hit her head and it killed her and he didn't mean for it to happen." The witness then said she "freaked out and run him off."
The Supreme Court found this evidence "troubling" but did not decide that it was conclusive. "If considered in isolation, a reasonable jury might well disregard" such testimony, the Court stated. "In combination, however, with the challenges to the blood evidence and the lack of motive with respect to House, the evidence pointing to Mr. Muncey likely would reinforce other doubts as to House's guilt."
 Holding 
Though the Supreme Court did not find that House was conclusively exonerated, it concluded that had the jury heard all the conflicting testimony, it is more likely than not that the reasonable juror would not be convinced of House's guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.  Accordingly, House met the threshold standard set forth in Schlup and House's case was remanded for consideration of the constitutional claims that had defaulted due to state law.
 Subsequent developments 
On remand to the Federal Court of Appeals, House's petition for relief was granted., Capital Defense Weekly He was released from prison several months later in 2006 but returned due to procedural challenges from the state, and held for two more years.Associated Press, "Released from Death Row but Not Exonerated", NBC News News The prosecutor originally said he would retry House and believed that he was involved in the murder, but finally dropped the charges in May 2009. He said that new, more refined DNA tests of forensic evidence pointed to an unknown perpetrator. House spent over 22 years on Tennessee's death row before being released on bond in 2008.
 References 
 External links 
Opinion of the Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit - Decided on October 6, 2004.
A lengthy study of the House case
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States death penalty case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Capital punishment in Tennessee
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:Union County, Tennessee
"""

From "Houston Community College System v. Wilson" ==> """
Houston Community College System v. Wilson, 595 U.S. ___ (2022), is a United States Supreme Court case related to the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.
 Background 
David Buren Wilson was elected a member of the Houston Community College System's board in 2013 who was censured for repeated incidences of what other members of the Board of Trustees deemed to be behavior that was not becoming of an elected official or beneficial to the HCC system. Wilson filed suit claiming that the censure was an offense to his First Amendment rights.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case on April 26, 2021. In a March 24, 2022 decision, the Supreme Court ruled that Wilson's First Amendment rights were not violated by his fellow board members' censure of him because the censure did not result in any hindrance of his ability to exercise his free speech in his capacity as an elected official and member of the public. The opinion cites the fact that the use of censure by elected bodies to address the behavior and actions of their members is a practice with a long history in the United States, and it also states that the censure itself constitutes an exercise of First Amendment rights by Wilson's colleagues on the board who voted to reprimand him.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
"""

From "Houston East & West Texas Railway Co. v. United States" ==> """
Houston East & West Texas Railway Co. v. United States, 234 U.S. 342 (1914), also known as the Shreveport Rate Case, was a decision of the United States Supreme Court expanding the power of the Commerce Clause of the Constitution of the United States. Justice Hughes's majority opinion stated that the federal government's power to regulate interstate commerce also allowed it to regulate purely intrastate commerce in cases where control of the former was not possible without control of the latter. Because the Supreme Court consolidated several related appeals, they are sometimes collectively known as the "Shreveport Rate Cases" although the Supreme Court issued only one ruling.
Background
The Houston East and West Texas Railway Company managed an interstate railway line that ran through Dallas and Marshall, Texas (on the eastern border of Texas), and Shreveport, Louisiana. The freight shipping rates "on wagons" from Marshall to Dallas, a distance of 148 miles, was 36.8 cents, and the rate from Marshall to Shreveport, a distance of 42 miles, was 56 cents; the rates for other goods and from other points in Texas showed a similar imbalance. Shreveport competed with Dallas for shipments from East Texas, but the skewed price structure (mandated by the Texas Railroad CommissionHouston E. & W. T. Ry. Co. v. United States, .), greatly favored shipments to and from Dallas over Shreveport. The Interstate Commerce Commission, acting on a complaint from the Railroad Commission of Louisiana,234 U.S. at 345. found that "an unlawful and undue preference and advantage" was thereby given to the Texas cities,234 U.S. at 347. ordered the company to change the rate structure to end discriminatory pricing.234 U.S. at 348.
The Tenth Amendment reserves for the states or the people all powers not expressly delegated to the federal government.
The US Constitution gives Congress the power to regulate interstate commerce. The regulation of commerce that is completely within a state is not an enumerated power of the federal government. In effect, the Interstate Commerce Commission was attempting to set the rate that the railroad could charge from Dallas to Marshall, a section of rail line completely within the borders of Texas. The issue was thus whether "Congress is impotent to control the intrastate charges of an interstate carrier" or whether Congress could go further or if it was necessary to regulate interstate commerce.
Decision
Associate Justice Charles Evans Hughes, writing for the majority, rejected the railroad's argument, finding that congressional authority "necessarily embraces the right to control... operations in all matters having a close and substantial relation to interstate traffic, to the efficiency of interstate service, and to the maintenance of conditions under which interstate commerce may be conducted upon fair terms."234 U.S. at 351. Regulation of the intrastate line was a means to the end of regulating interstate commerce, and was therefore allowed.
Two justices, Lurton and Pitney, dissented without issuing a written opinion.234 U.S. at 360.
Legacy
The Interstate Commerce Clause has been used to steadily expand the power of the federal government, as almost any aspect of life, especially after the industrial revolution, can in some way be related to interstate commerce. The Shreveport Rate Case was an early example of this expansion.
As a leading case in the ability of governments to regulate activities occurring only within single subdivisions, on the grounds that those activities affect regulation on a larger scale, the Shreveport Rate Cases have been cited in many subsequent rulings, both in the United States and in other countries.E.g., http://vlex.com/search/index?query%5Blc_query%5D=citas%3A%28CITA_LEY_20030320%29
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 234
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:History of Shreveport, Louisiana
Category:1914 in United States case law
Category:Southern Pacific Railroad
Category:Interstate Commerce Commission litigation
Category:Railway litigation in 1914
Category:Railroad Commission of Texas
"""

From "Howard Johnson Co. v. Detroit Local Joint Executive Board" ==> """
Howard Johnson Co. v. Detroit Local Joint Executive Board, 417 U.S. 249 (1974), is a US labor law case that decided that under the Labor Management Relations Act § 301 there can be no obligation on an employer to collectively bargain with employees of a business that has been transferred to him.
Facts
The Howard Johnson Company bought the assets of a restaurant and motor lodge from the Grissoms family that had been running the lodge on its behalf as a franchise. The Grissoms retained the real property and leased it to Howard, and Howard expressly did not assume any of the Grissoms' obligations, including those under a collective agreement. Howard hired 45 of its own staff, but only 9 of the Grissoms' 53 employees and none of the supervisors. The union, the Detroit Local Joint Executive Board of the Hotel Employees and Restaurant Employees Union, said this was a 'lockout' in violation of the Labor Management Relations Act §301, by not hiring all Grissoms' employees back. It sought an injunction for Howard to arbitrate.
The District Court held that Howard was required to arbitrate, but not that all the employees had to be hired back. The Court of Appeal affirmed.
Judgment
Marshall J held Howard was not required to arbitrate because there was no substantial continuity of identity in the workforce, and there was no assumption of the agreement to arbitrate, John Wiley & Sons v. Livingston, 376 U.S. 543, distinguished. Howard had the right not to hire any employees, if it wanted, National Labor Relations Board v. Burns Security Services, 406 U. S. 272, and this right cannot be circumvented by the union asserting its claims in a § 301 suit to compel arbitration,LMRA 1947 §301, 29 USC §185 rather than in an unfair labor practice context.
Justice Douglas authored a dissenting opinion and said the following: (Douglas, J., dissenting).
See also
US labor law
UK labour law
European labour law
Parkwood-Leisure Ltd v Alemo-Herron [2010] EWCA Civ 24
Whent v T Cartledge Ltd [1997] IRLR 153, Hicks J held that there was no reason why an employer could not bind itself to a collective agreement which was constantly updated.
Werhof v Freeway Traffic Systems GmbH & Co KG (2006) C-499/04 [2006] ECR I-2397
Notes
External links
Category:United States labor case law
Category:Legal history of Michigan
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1974 in United States case law
Category:UNITE HERE
Category:Howard Johnson's
"""

From "Howes v. Fields" ==> """
Howes v. Fields, 565 U.S. 499 (2012),Howes v. Fields, 565 U.S. 499 (2012) was a decision by the U.S. Supreme Court that an interrogation of a prisoner was not a custodial interrogation per se, and certainly it was not "clearly established federal law" that it was custodial, as would be required by the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act (AEDPA). Instead, the Court said, whether the interrogation was custodial depended on the specific circumstances, and moreover, in the particular circumstances of this case, it was not custodial (that is, he was not "in custody" in a way that was covered by the Miranda v. Arizona decision). This decision overturned the rule of the Sixth Circuit, and denied the prisoner's habeas corpus petition.
 Background 
Randall Fields was serving a sentence in Lenawee County Jail in Michigan when he was escorted to a conference room and questioned by two sheriff's deputies.Fields v. Howes, Case Number 2:06-CV-13373 (E.D. Mich. 2009) The deputies questioned him about a sexual assault that was unrelated to the sentence he was serving. The interrogation began between 7 and 9 PM, lasted until midnight, and at no point was Fields given a Miranda warning. He was told, however, that he was free to leave the conference room and go back to his cell. He was not handcuffed or chained, and he did not ask to go back to his cell or ask for a lawyer, but at one point he did tell the deputies he didn't want to talk to them any more.Field v. Howes, 617 F.3d 813 (6th Cir. 2010) Returning to his cell would involve waiting about 20 minutes so a guard could arrive to escort him. Fields made statements during the interrogation that would to his being prosecuted and convicted for third-degree criminal sexual conduct.
 Procedural History 
 Trial and state court appeals 
In a 2002 case titled People v. Fields, a jury found Fields guilty of two counts of third-degree criminal sexual conduct, and he was sentenced to ten to fifteen years. Fields had made a motion to suppress the statements he'd made, on the grounds that he should have been given a Miranda warning, but the trial court denied the motion, saying the interrogation had not been custodial.People v. Fields, No. 246041 (Mich. App. May 6, 2004)
Fields appealed to the Michigan Court of Appeals, arguing the motion to suppress should have been granted, that evidence of other sexual acts should have been excluded, and that the judge impermissibly exceeding sentencing guidelines. In 2004, the Court of Appeals upheld the other evidence and the sentence as a matter of state law, and as to the lack of a Miranda warning, it said, "Although defendant was not read his Miranda rights, he was told that he was free to leave the conference room and return to his cell. Defendant never asked to leave." Therefore, he was not "in custody" for the purposes of Miranda.
Fields requested an appeal to the Michigan Supreme Court, but it declined to hear his case.People v. Fields, 689 N.W.2d 233 (Mich. 2004)
 Habeas corpus petition 
Fields later filed a habeas corpus petition in federal court, making the same arguments as his state court appeal. In a 2009 ruling, the District Court declined to consider his arguments about sentencing or the other evidence (these were state law issues, which could not be considered for a federal habeas corpus petition), but it granted his petition on the grounds of not being given a Miranda warning. The Court compared Fields' interrogation to the 1968 case Mathis v. United States, where a prisoner had been interrogated by an IRS agent; a subsequent conviction was thrown out because there had been no Miranda warning.
The prison warden, Carol Howes, appealed the decision to the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals on behalf of the state of Michigan. Although the Sixth Circuit did not yet have Miranda-related caselaw about prisoners being interrogated for unrelated crimes, the state cited examples from other circuits where Miranda warnings had not been required. The Court, however, did not find any of these examples relevant, as none involved a prisoner being interrogated alone in a separate room. The Court relied on a recent Sixth Circuit decision, Simpson v. Jackson,Simpson v. Jackson, 615 F.3d 421 (6th Cir. 2010) which was factually similar, and was controlling precedent for this case:The Court also noted a recent Supreme Court case, Maryland v. Shatzer, which said in part:Correspondingly, the Court of Appeals stated, "[a] prisoner is in custody when he is removed from his 'normal life' by being taken from his cell to an isolated area, such as a closet or conference room, for the purpose of interrogation."
 Decision of the Supreme Court 
The state of Michigan appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which reversed the Sixth Circuit. The court unanimously held that Fields' habeas corpus petition could not succeed because the application of Miranda to his situation was not "clearly established federal law", and it held by a 6–3 vote that his interrogation had not been custodial.
 Majority opinion 
Writing for the majority, Justice Alito addressed two issues: 1) that the AEDPA required that habeas corpus petitions address issues of "clearly established federal law", and the Sixth Circuit's interpretation of Miranda and Mathis did not qualify, and 2) that even if this were a direct appeal instead of a habeas corpus petition, Fields' interrogation could not be considered "custodial."
 "Clearly established federal law" 
Habeas corpus petitions are a very old judicial process, dating back to the 12th century in England. More recently, the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA), codified in 28 U.S.C. § 2254, had imposed particular limits on how federal courts in the U.S. handled habeas corpus petitions from prisoners in state prisons. A writ of habeas corpus can be granted if a state court decision "resulted in a decision that was contrary to, or involved an unreasonable application of, clearly established Federal law, as determined by the Supreme Court of the United States[.]"28 U.S.C. § 2254(d)(1) Considering the application of Miranda to Fields' situation, the Court said:Rather, the Court had consistently relied on case-by-case examination of the circumstances of an interrogation to determine whether it was custodial. The cases that the Sixth Circuit had cited, such as Mathis and Shatzer, had involved their own factual inquiries, and could not be relied on for establishing any categorical rule. The Sixth Circuit was therefore wrong to apply its categorical rule, and was wrong to grant the writ of habeas corpus. This part of the decision was unanimously joined by all nine justices.
 Custodial interrogation 
After detailing why the Sixth Circuit's categorical rule was "unsound," the majority said that Fields was not, in fact, in custody for Miranda purposes, primarily because Fields was told he could leave when he wanted:{{Blockquote|text=To be sure, respondent did not invite the interview or consent to it in advance, and he was not advised that he was free to decline to speak with the deputies. The following facts also lend some support to respondent's argument that Miranda'''s custody requirement was met: The interview lasted for between five and seven hours in the evening and continued well past the hour when respondent generally went to bed; the deputies who questioned respondent were armed; and one of the deputies, according to respondent, "[u]sed a very sharp tone,"  and, on one occasion, profanity.
These circumstances, however, were offset by others. Most important, respondent was told at the outset of the interrogation, and was reminded again thereafter, that he could leave and go back to his cell whenever he wanted.|source=Howes v. Fields, 565 U.S. at 515 (Justice Alito, writing for the majority)}}
 Ginsburg's dissent in part 
Justice Ginsburg, joined by Justices Breyer and Sotomayor, agreed with the majority that the applicability of Miranda was unclear, and the Sixth Circuit had been wrong to use a categorical rule, and so the habeas corpus petition had to be denied. However, she dissented from the majority's analysis of the circumstances of Fields' interrogation:
 See also 
 Miranda v. Arizona Maryland v. Shatzer Illinois v. Perkins''
 Habeas corpus in the United States
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Prisoners' and ex-prisoners' rights
Category:Legal history of Michigan
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:Miranda warning case law
Category:Law enforcement
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:2012 in United States case law
"""

From "Hoyt v. Florida" ==> """
Hoyt v. Florida, 368 U.S. 57 (1961), was an appeal by Gwendolyn Hoyt, who had killed her husband and received a jail sentence for second degree murder. Although she had suffered mental and physical abuse in her marriage and showed neurotic, if not psychotic, behavior, a six-man jury deliberated for just 25 minutes before finding her guilty. They sentenced her to 30 years of hard labor. Hoyt claimed that her all-male jury led to discrimination and unfair circumstances during her trial. The decision was subsequently overruled by Taylor v. Louisiana in 1975.
Background
Florida state law did not require women to serve on juries, unless they volunteered to do so. Most women in the state of Florida did not register, so they were exempted from jury services. The arguments put forward by the plaintiff suggested that there had been jury discrimination, and, moreover, that the Florida statute actively seeks to keep women from serving. This would be known as " the continuing validity". The continuing validity was jury slang for supporting the right to keep males as the primary, and only source, of jurors on these trials. This was argued in that women were excluded solely due to their sex. Men were automatically registered for duty, even if they had submitted an argument against serving. Women, however, had to actively register if they wished to serve. These women were merely recognized for their job of being "the center of home and family" and not in the courtroom.
Decision
In a unanimous opinion written by Justice John Marshall Harlan II, the Supreme Court of the United States held the Florida jury selection statute was not discriminatory. Harlan based his conclusion upon the theory of "reasonable classification," which permits states to choose whom to include and exclude in jury selections. In oral arguments, it was noted that at the time, 17 other states also exempted women from jury duty unless they so chose to register and that at least, in this case, the jury was not selected unconstitutionally.  The "practice of excluding women from the jury pool... it reasoned" was done to protect women "from the filth, obscenity, and obnoxious atmosphere... of the courtroom."Dean John Champion, Richard D. Hartley, and Gary A. Rabe, "Criminal Courts," p. 219 (2nd ed., Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson 2008),  citing Hoyt v. Florida, 367 U.S. 57 (1961). Harlan held the right to an impartially-selected jury assured by the Fourteenth Amendment does not entitle one accused of crime to a jury tailored to the circumstances of the particular case; it requires only for the jury to be indiscriminately drawn from among those in the community eligible for jury service, irrespective of any arbitrary and systematic exclusions. Furthermore, Harlan held the Florida statute was not unconstitutional on its face since it was not constitutionally impermissible for a state to conclude that a woman should be relieved from jury service unless she herself determines that such service is consistent with her own special responsibilities. Harlan noted that the statute was based on a reasonable classification and so was constitutional. Because women were "still regarded as the center of home and family life," Harlan found that the states could relieve them from the civic responsibility of jury duty unless they themselves determined that such service was consistent with their own "special responsibilities." He also held that the case was distinct from other cases involving racial discrimination in jury selection and that male-female disproportions on jury lists carried no constitutional significance.
In popular culture
The movie On the Basis of Sex covers the Hoyt v. Florida case when Ruth Bader Ginsburg is teaching "Sex Discrimination and the Law". Ginsburg concludes her lesson by telling her students that this case showed "Discrimination on the basis of sex is legal."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 368
 Women in United States juries
Further reading
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:1961 in United States case law
Category:Batson challenge case law
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
Category:History of women in Florida
"""

From "Huddleston v. United States" ==> """
Huddleston v. United States, 485 U.S. 681 (1988), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that before admitting evidence of extrinsic acts under Rule 404(b) of the Federal Rules of Evidence, federal courts should  assess the evidence's sufficiency under Federal Rule of Evidence 104(b). Under 104(b), "[w]hen the relevancy of evidence depends upon the fulfillment of a condition of fact, the court shall admit it upon, or subject to, the introduction of evidence sufficient to support a finding of the fulfillment of the condition."
Facts
Huddleston was being tried for selling stolen goods and possessing stolen goods, related to two portions of a shipment of Memorex videocassettes that had been stolen from the Overnight Express yard in South Holland, Illinois.Huddleston, 485 U.S. at 682.  Huddleston later sold the missing videocassettes to the owner of Magic Rent-to-Own in Ypsilanti, Michigan. At the trial, he did not dispute that the cassettes had been stolen. Instead, he contested a crucial element of the charged crimes — whether he knew that the cassettes had been stolen.Huddleston, 485 U.S. at 683. 
To prove that he knew the cassettes were stolen, the government sought to introduce two pieces of relevant "similar acts" evidence. First, the government called Paul Toney, a record store owner, to testify that Huddleston had offered to sell him some 12" black-and-white television sets for $28 each. Toney testified that Huddleston told him he could obtain several thousand of these televisions. Toney eventually accompanied Huddleston to the Magic Rent-to-Own store on two occasions, and bought a total of 38 televisions.
Second, the government called Robert Nelson, an undercover FBI agent posing as an appliance dealer, to testify that Huddleston had offered to sell him a large quantity of Amana appliances. Nelson agreed to pay $8,000 for the appliances. At the time appointed to make the delivery, Nelson arrested Huddleston, and found that an acquittance of Huddleston's had brought part of a shipment of appliances that had been stolen.
Huddleston testified at the trial that he had obtained the videocassettes legitimately. The prosecution explained in closing arguments that Huddleston was being tried only for the videocassettes, and that the evidence about the televisions and the appliances was intended to help the jury determine whether Huddleston knew that the videotapes had been stolen. The jury convicted Huddleston on the possession charge but not on the sale charge.
Huddleston appealed his conviction to the Sixth Circuit. That court initially reversed the conviction because the government had not proven by clear and convincing evidence that Huddleston had known that either the televisions or the appliances had been stolen, and thus that those incidents were not admissible against Huddleston in his trial on the videocassette charges. After the Sixth Circuit decided in a different case that courts should prove similar acts evidence by a preponderance of the evidence, it upheld Huddleston's conviction because it concluded that the evidence regarding the televisions had been proven by a preponderance of the evidence.Huddleston, 485 U.S. at 684. 
Decision of the Court
The Supreme Court agreed to hear the case "to resolve a conflict among the Courts of Appeals as to whether the trial court must make a preliminary finding before 'similar act' and other Rule 404(b) evidence is submitted to the jury."Huddleston, 485 U.S. at 685.  Chief Justice Rehnquist wrote for the unanimous court. Rule 404 of the Federal Rules of Evidence states:Federal Rule of Evidence 404(b). 
"Extrinsic acts evidence may be critical to the establishment of the truth as to a disputed issue, especially when that issue involves the actor's state of mind and the only means of ascertaining that mental state is by drawing inferences from conduct." The Court held that extrinsic acts which are only relevant on the condition that a separate fact is proven true—such as Huddleston's previous sale of televisions—are "dealt with under Federal Rule of Evidence Rule 104(b)."Huddleston, 485 U.S. at 686-87.  Rule 104(b) states that "[w]hen the relevancy of evidence depends upon the fulfillment of a condition of fact, the court shall admit it upon, or subject to, the introduction of evidence sufficient to support a finding of the fulfillment of the condition."Federal Rule of Evidence Rule 104(b). The Court reasoned that the text of 404(b) "contain[ed] no intimation . . . that any preliminary showing is necessary before such evidence may be introduced for a proper purpose" and rejected the petitioners argument that the issue should be governed under the stricter Rule 104(a) preponderance standard.Huddleston, 485 U.S. at 687-88. 
Thus, the Court held the evidence was properly admitted.Huddleston, 485 U.S. at 692.
Impact
Huddleston has been criticized for making it too easy for prosecutors to prove prior, unconvicted offenses for use under FRE 404(b). In response, the American Bar Association has proposed to amend FRE 404 to require that prior offenses be proven by a clear and convincing standard.120 F.R.D. 299, at 330 (1988) Prior to the Court's decision, Edward Imwinkelried had proposed that prosecutors should be burdened to show that admitting the prior offense would be more probative than prejudicial.Imwinkelried, The Need to Amend the Federal Rule of Evidence 404(b): The Threat to the Future of the Federal Rules of Evidence, 30 Vill. L. Rev. 607-611 (1985)
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 485
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
 Case brief 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Federal Rules of Evidence case law
Category:1988 in United States case law
"""

From "Hudson v. McMillian" ==> """
Hudson v. McMillian, 503 U.S. 1 (1992), is a United States Supreme Court decision where the Court on a 7—2 vote held that the use of excessive physical force against a prisoner may constitute cruel and unusual punishment even though the inmate does not suffer serious injury.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor delivered the opinion of the Court, joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justices White, Kennedy, and Souter. Justices Blackmun and Stevens separately concurred in the judgment. In the case, petitioner Hudson, a Louisiana prison inmate, testified that he suffered minor bruises, facial swelling, loosened teeth, and a cracked dental plate as a result from a beating by respondent prison guards, McMillian and Woods, while he was handcuffed and shackled following an argument with McMillian, and that respondent Mezo, a supervisor on duty, allegedly watched the beating and told the officers "not to have too much fun." Hudson's injuries were "minor" and required no medical attention.
Dissent
Justices Scalia and Thomas dissented, with Justice Thomas writing that the beating did not cause sufficient harm to meet the constitutional standard; however, he left open the option of a criminal charge or a tort claim, stating: 
In my view, a use of force that causes only insignificant harm to a prisoner may be immoral, it may be tortious, it may be criminal, and it may even be remediable under other provisions of the Federal Constitution, but it is not "cruel and unusual punishment." In concluding to the contrary, the Court today goes far beyond our precedents.
Conceding some of the petitioners' arguments, Justice Thomas cited a classic line from a Seventh Circuit decision, Williams v. Boles by Frank Easterbrook:
Many things—beating with a rubber truncheon, water torture, electric shock, incessant noise, reruns of Space: 1999—may cause agony as they occur, yet leave no enduring injury. The state is not free to inflict such pains without cause just so long as it is careful to leave no marks.
According to historian David Garrow, Thomas's dissent in Hudson was a "classic call for federal judicial restraint, reminiscent of views that were held by Felix Frankfurter and John M. Harlan II a generation earlier, but editorial criticism rained down on him."Garrow, David.  "Saving Thomas", The New Republic (2004-10-25).  Thomas would later respond to the accusation "that I supported the beating of prisoners in that case. Well, one must either be illiterate or fraught with malice to reach that conclusion ... no honest reading can reach such a conclusion."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 503
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause case law
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
"""

From "Hudson v. Michigan" ==> """
Hudson v. Michigan, 547 U.S. 586 (2006), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a violation of the Fourth Amendment requirement that police officers knock, announce their presence, and wait a reasonable amount of time before entering a private residence (the knock-and-announce requirement) does not require suppression of the evidence obtained in the ensuing search.. 
 Background 
On the afternoon of August 27, 1998, Officer Jamal Good and six other Detroit police officers arrived at the residence of Booker T. Hudson to execute a warrant authorizing a search of Hudson's home for drugs and firearms. Several officers shouted "police, search warrant," but then as was Officer Good's policy in drug cases, waited only "three to five seconds" before entering Hudson's home through the unlocked front door.Transcript of Oral Argument (Jan. 9, 2006), Hudson v. Michigan. Officer Good testified that he had adopted this policy even though it violates the Constitution, out of concern for his safety, having had been shot at numerous times while executing narcotics search warrants.
Immediately upon entering, the officers found Hudson sitting on a chair in the living room while numerous other individuals were running about the house. In the ensuing search, the police found five rocks of crack cocaine weighing less than  inside Hudson's pants pockets. In addition, a plastic bag containing 23 individual baggies of crack and a loaded revolver were found on the chair upon which Hudson was sitting and a plastic bag containing 24 individual baggies of cocaine was found on the living room coffee table.
 Trial and appeals 
At Hudson's trial for cocaine possession with intent to deliver and possession of a firearm during the commission of a felony, Hudson argued that—since the premature entry violated the knock-and-announce requirement and, therefore, according to the Supreme Court's decision in Wilson v. Arkansas (1995). his Fourth Amendment right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures—the exclusionary rule required that the evidence obtained in the ensuing search must be suppressed. At the evidentiary hearing on the suppression motion, the prosecutor conceded that the police had violated the knock-and-announce requirement, and the trial judge granted petitioner's motion to suppress.Under Supreme Court precedent set forth in , the knock-and-announce requirement can be constitutionally waived if the police have "a reasonable suspicion" that following the rule would be "dangerous," or "futile," or allow for the destruction of evidence; even if the exceptions outlined in Richards were not met, there is still the question of just how long a "reasonable" time is for officers to wait before entering. See .
In an interlocutory appeal by the prosecution, the Michigan Court of Appeals reversed, relying on Michigan Supreme Court cases holding that suppression is inappropriate when entry is made pursuant to warrant but without proper "knock-and-announce."App. to Pet. for Cert. 4 (citing People v. Vasquez, 461 Mich. 235, 602 N.W.2d 376 (1999) (per curiam); People v. Stevens, 460 Mich. 626, 597 N.W.2d 53 (1999)). The Michigan Supreme Court declined to hear Hudson's appeal.
Following a bench trial, Hudson was convicted of possession of less than twenty-five grams of cocaine and sentenced to probation for eighteen months.
Hudson appealed to the Court of Appeals on the sole ground that the evidence seized during the execution of a search warrant should have been suppressed because the police violated the knock and announce statute. The court rejected his argument and affirmed his conviction. The Michigan Supreme Court again declined to review Hudson's case.
On June 27, 2005, the Supreme Court of the United States granted certiorari to hear the case.  The Court heard oral arguments on January 9, 2006; and ordered an oral re-argument after the replacement of Justice O'Connor by Justice Alito and apparent difficulty in deciding the case by the remaining eight members who originally heard the case. In both arguments, Timothy Baughman argued for the state and David Moran argued for Hudson.  The question presented to the Court was whether violation of the knock and announce rule requires a court to suppress all evidence found in the search.  The Court issued its opinion on June 15, 2006.
 Decision 
 Majority 
Justice Antonin Scalia, writing for the majority (5–4) with respect to Parts I, II and III of his opinion, held that evidence seized in violation of the knock-and-announce rule could be used against a defendant in a later criminal trial in comport with the Fourth Amendment and that judges cannot suppress such evidence for a knock-and-announce violation alone.  He was joined by Chief Justice John Roberts, Justice Samuel Alito, Justice Clarence Thomas, and Justice Kennedy, who concurred in part and with the judgment.The Supreme Court, 2005 Term — Leading Cases, 120 Harv. L. Rev. 173 (2006).
Unlike previous cases addressing the knock-and-announce requirement, the Court did not need to address the question of whether the knock-and-announce rule was violated, as the State of Michigan had conceded the violation at trial. The question before the Court was regarding the remedy that should be afforded Hudson for the violation.
The majority notes that the Court first adopted an exclusionary rule for evidence seized without a warrant in Weeks v. United States, 232 U.S. 383 (1914), which was applied to the states in Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U.S. 643 (1961), but points out that the exclusionary rule was limited by later decisions.  After discussing those decisions, Scalia wrote:
[E]xclusion may not be premised on the mere fact that a constitutional violation was a 'but-for' cause of obtaining evidence. Our cases show that but-for causality is only a necessary, not a sufficient, condition for suppression. In this case, of course, the constitutional violation of an illegal manner of entry was not a but-for cause of obtaining the evidence.
Scalia distinguished evidence seized in warrantless searches from evidence seized in searches that violated the knock-and-announce rule:
[ex]clusion of the evidence obtained by a warrantless search vindicates [the] entitlement [of citizens to shield their persons, houses, papers, and effects, from the government's scrutiny]. The interests protected by the knock-and-announce requirement are quite different—and do not include the shielding of potential evidence from the government's eyes.
The interests protected by the knock-and-announce rule, according to Scalia, are to protect police officers from surprised residents retaliating in presumed self-defense, to protect private property from damage, and to protect the "privacy and dignity" of residents.  Scalia wrote that the knock-and-announce rule "has never protected ... one's interest in preventing the government from seeing or taking evidence described in a warrant."
The majority opinion goes on to note that the costs of exclusion for knock and announce violations outweigh the benefits of admitting the evidence. Scalia stated that the costs are small, but that "suppression of all evidence[] amount[s] in many cases is a get-out-of-jail-free card." The Court stated that exclusion of evidence has little or no deterrence effect, especially considering that deterrents (a civil action against the police department and internal discipline for officers) already existed.  Scalia ended the portion of his opinion that constitutes the majority opinion with praise for the "increasing professionalism" of the police force over the last half-century, which he says makes some concerns expressed in past cases by the Court obsolete.
 Kennedy's concurrence 
Justice Kennedy concurred in part with Scalia's opinion and concurred in the judgment that a violation of the knock-and-announce rule does not require a court to exclude seized evidence.  Kennedy's concurrence emphasizes that the Court has not disregarded the knock-and-announce rule through its decision and that the exclusionary rule continues to operate in other areas of criminal law, per the Court's precedent. Kennedy agreed with the majority that civil remedies and internal police discipline are adequate deterrents for knock-and-announce violations, but he went on to note that if a pattern of police behavior emerges that demonstrated disregard for the knock-and-announce rule, he would reevaluate his position.
 Dissent 
Justice Breyer, joined by Justice Ginsburg, Justice Stevens, and Justice Souter, dissented. Breyer began his dissent with a rebuke of the majority opinion:
In Wilson v. Arkansas, 514 U. S. 927 (1995), a unanimous Court held that the Fourth Amendment normally requires law enforcement officers to knock and announce their presence before entering a dwelling. Today's opinion holds that evidence seized from a home following a violation of this requirement need not be suppressed. As a result, the Court destroys the strongest legal incentive to comply with the Constitution's knock-and-announce requirement. And the Court does so without significant support in precedent. At least I can find no such support in the many Fourth Amendment cases the Court has decided in the near century since it first set forth the exclusionary principle in Weeks v. United States.
Breyer went on to examine the underlying case law, tracing the knock-and-announce rule to the 13th century, the writing of the Fourth Amendment, and the establishment of the exclusionary rule.
Breyer wrote that the strongest argument for application of the exclusionary rule to knock-and-announce violations is that it serves as a strong deterrent to unlawful government behavior.  At the very least, according to Breyer, eliminating the exclusionary rule from consideration for knock-and-announce violations would cause some government agents to find it less risky to violate the rule. Pointing out that civil remedies are not an adequate deterrent, Breyer wrote:
[t]he cases reporting knock-and-announce violations are legion ... [y]et the majority ... has failed to cite a single reported case in which a plaintiff has collected more than nominal damages solely as a result of a knock-and-announce violation. ... [C]ivil immunities prevent tort law from being an effective substitute for the exclusionary rule at this time.
Breyer noted that in precedent, the Court has declined to apply the exclusionary rule only "(1)where there is a specific reason to believe that application of the rule would 'not result in appreciable deterrence,' or (2)where admissibility in proceedings other than criminal trials was at issue" (citations omitted). He stated that neither of those exclusions applied to knock-and-announce violations.
Breyer ended his dissent with a summary of his disagreement with the majority:
There may be instances in the law where text or history or tradition leaves room for a judicial decision that rests upon little more than an unvarnished judicial instinct. But this is not one of them. Rather, our Fourth Amendment traditions place high value upon protecting privacy in the home. They emphasize the need to assure that its constitutional protections are effective, lest the Amendment "sound the word of promise to the ear but break it to the hope.
...
[T]he Court should assure itself that any departure from that principle is firmly grounded in logic, in history, in precedent, and in empirical fact. It has not done so.
 Criticism 
Justice Antonin Scalia was accused of twisting the arguments made by Samuel Walker in Taming the System: The Control of Discretion in American Criminal Justice. Scalia, in support of weakening the exclusionary rule, presented from Taming the System that there has been tremendous progress "in the education, training and supervision of police officers" since Mapp v. Ohio in 1961. However, Walker's main argument was that the Warren Court, including setting the exclusionary rule under Mapp and the Miranda warning, set new standards for lawful conduct and enabled curbs on abuse.
 References 
 Further reading 
 .
 External links 
 Brief for the United States as Amicus Curiae Supporting Respondent
 Northwestern University article on the case with background information
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Michigan
Category:Detroit Police Department
Category:Cocaine in the United States
Category:No-knock warrant
"""

From "Hudson v. Palmer" ==> """
Hudson v. Palmer, 468 U.S. 517 (1984), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that prison inmates have no privacy rights in their cells protected by the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution.. The Court also held that an intentional deprivation of property by a state employee "does not violate the Fourteenth Amendment if an adequate postdeprivation state remedy exists," extending Parratt v. Taylor. to intentional torts.468 U.S. at 519.
 Background 
On September 16, 1981, Ted Hudson and a fellow officer at the Bland Correctional Center in Bland, Virginia, entered the cell of Russell Palmer, an inmate at the center, to conduct a "shakedown" search. After the search, Palmer brought a civil rights suit against Hudson under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, claiming that Hudson had destroyed some of his personal property — "including legal materials and letters"468 U.S. at 541. — in violation of his Fourteenth Amendment due process rights, and that the search was undertaken "solely to harass him" in violation of his Fourth Amendment right to privacy.468 U.S. at 520-23.
The District Court held for Hudson on summary judgment, ruling under Parratt v. Taylor that "intentional destruction of a prisoner's property is not a violation of due process, when the prisoner has an adequate remedy under state law," and that a non-routine search of a prison cell intended to harass the prisoner would not have "constitutional significance" under the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments. The Fourth Circuit affirmed the District Court's due process holding but reversed its Fourth Amendment decision, concluding that Palmer "had a limited privacy right which may have been violated" if the search was undertaken because of "a desire to harass or humiliate him."697 F.2d at 1225.
 Decision 
Writing for a five-justice majority, Chief Justice Burger held that summary judgment was appropriate against Palmer on both his due process and Fourth Amendment claims. In so doing, Burger affirmed the Fourth Circuit's decision that Virginia's postdeprivation remedies eliminated the due process concerns arising from the destruction of Palmer's property, but reversed its holding that Palmer had a "limited privacy right" in his cell under the Fourth Amendment.
As to Palmer's Fourth Amendment claim, the Court applied the reasonable expectation of privacy test established by the landmark Katz v. United States decision in 1967, asking "whether a prisoner’s expectation of privacy in his prison cell is the kind of expectation that 'society is prepared to recognize as reasonable.'"468 U.S. at 525-26. Under that test, the Court held that prisoners have no right to privacy in their cells for two reasons: because the need for prison security requires "[u]nfettered access to these cells by prison officials...if drugs and contraband are to be ferreted out and sanitary surroundings are to be maintained," and because "society would insist that the prisoner’s expectation of privacy always yield to what must be considered the paramount interest in institutional security."468 U.S. at 527-28. Based on Bell v. Wolfish, where the Court had previously upheld a federal policy of conducting body-cavity searches of pretrial detainees after every visit with someone outside the facility, Burger reasoned that restricting prisoners' Fourth Amendment protections is not problematic because "it is clear that imprisonment carries with it the circumscription or loss of many significant rights."468 U.S. at 524.
The Court also held against Palmer on his due process claim under the Fourteenth Amendment. Palmer argued that Hudson had intentionally destroyed his property, and that this violated his due process rights. But the Court held that a "postdeprivation process must be constitutionally adequate" to address due process claims like Palmer's, ruling "that an unauthorized intentional deprivation of property by a state employee does not constitute a violation of the procedural requirements of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment if a meaningful postdeprivation remedy for the loss is available." This expanded the holding of Parratt v. Taylor, in which the Court held that state tort remedies available after the fact were sufficient due process when a prison official negligently lost an inmate's hobby kit. Applying the rule of Parratt to intentional destruction of property, Chief Justice Burger held that there had been no due process violation because Virginia had an adequate process in place for addressing Palmer's claim.
 Concurring opinion of Justice O'Connor 
Justice O'Connor joined the majority opinion and also wrote a brief separate concurrence. O'Connor argued that the Court was correct to hold the Fourth Amendment inapplicable in prison cells because "prison searches are the categorically reasonable products of necessarily ad hoc judgments of prison officials maintaining prison safety." She also responded directly to Justice Stevens' assertion in dissent that Fourth Amendment seizure protections were implicated by the case, arguing that Palmer had no seizure claim because "the exigencies of prison life authorize officials indefinitely to dispossess inmates of their possessions without specific reason."468 U.S. at 539. She argued further that the destruction of Palmer's property only raised due process claims, not Fourth Amendment issues, because it "had no bearing on whether the search and seizure were reasonable." O'Connor explained that Palmer's claim failed because he had neither taken advantage of the postdeprivation remedies for his due process concern offered by Virginia nor shown that those remedies were inadequate.468 U.S. at 540.
 Concurring/dissenting opinion of Justice Stevens 
Justice Stevens filed an opinion on behalf of four justices concurring in the Court's due process ruling but "bitterly dissent[ing]" from its Fourth Amendment holding. "[T]he dissenters found a clear fourth amendment violation in Hudson's malicious confiscation and destruction of Palmer's property." Stevens argued that Hudson's actions violated both the search and seizure protections of the Fourth Amendment because "inmates must retain some 'slight residuum of privacy'" in their cells and because the Seizure Clause "protects prisoners' possessory interests even assuming the absence of any legitimate expectation of privacy."
Although Stevens agreed that the need for prison security makes it legitimate for correctional officers to randomly search inmates' cells, he argued that safety concerns do not eliminate all civil rights of prisoners and that Palmer's Fourth Amendment rights had been violated in this case because the personal materials destroyed by Hudson had been found not to be dangerous. Stevens added that allowing concerns about prison security to extinguish inmates' Fourth Amendment rights "is to declare that the prisoners are entitled to no measure of human dignity or individuality," and that the Court's decision "declares prisoners to be little more than chattels."468 U.S. at 554-55.
Finally, the dissenters disagreed with Chief Justice Burger's assessment that society would not recognize privacy rights for prisoners as legitimate. Stevens argued that this belief about what level of privacy society would find reasonable was contradicted by the fact that lower courts were generally in agreement that prisoners retain some privacy rights, and that prison officials also shared a "near-universal view...that guards should neither seize nor destroy noncontraband property." The dissenters "pointed out with some irony [that] the Court's view of 'reasonableness' is 'not based on any empirical data; rather it merely reflects the perception of the four Justices who have joined the opinion that The Chief Justice has authored.'"
 Impact 
Hudson v. Palmer reversed a trend among the lower courts of finding that "all prison searches are not per se reasonable and that persons incarcerated in jails and prisons are entitled to some measure of Fourth Amendment protection." The case has been applied to find that cell searches in general do not violate inmates' Fourth Amendment rights, including searches "conducted for the purpose of extortion rather than prison security." Most state courts interpreting their state constitutions have followed Hudson and found that inmates have no constitutional privacy protections in their prison cells; Vermont is the only exception.
Although Hudson v. Palmer held that prisoners have no Fourth Amendment rights in their cells, it did not address whether prisoners have privacy rights in their persons. "Hudson merely concluded that the Fourth Amendment affords no protection for the prisoner's privacy interest in his cell or his possessory interest in his effects kept there, and thus arguably has no application to searches and seizures of the person of a prisoner." Hudson also did not specify whether its holding applied to pretrial detention facilities or was limited to prisons; lower courts have disagreed on that question. In 2012, the Supreme Court cited Hudson v. Palmer in Florence v. Board of Chosen Freeholders of County of Burlington, where it held that strip searches of pretrial detainees entering a general jail population do not violate the Fourth Amendment.. However, the Court in Florence found that the search was constitutional by "striking a balance between inmate privacy and the security needs of correctional institutions," not by holding that pretrial detainees have no Fourth Amendment privacy rights.
 See also 
 Bell v. Wolfish, 441 U.S. 520 (1979) — holding several prison practices constitutional, including visual body-cavity searches of pretrial detainees.
Parratt v. Taylor, 451 U.S. 527 (1981) — postdeprivation remedies provided by a state were sufficient to satisfy due process when prison officials negligently lost an inmate's property.
Daniels v. Williams, 474 U.S. 327 (1986) — negligence by a state official does not create a due process violation, overruling Parratt v. Taylor.
Samson v. California, 547 U.S. 843 (2006) — suspicionless searches of parolees did not violate the Fourth Amendment.
Florence v. Board of Chosen Freeholders of County of Burlington, 566 U.S. 318 (2012) — suspicionless strip searches of pretrial detainees entering a jail's general population are constitutional under the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments.
 References 
 Further reading 
 Justice Powell's papers on Hudson v. Palmer: https://scholarlycommons.law.wlu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?referer=&httpsredir=1&article=1307&context=casefiles
 Robert Hartmann, Hudson v. Palmer: Throwing Away the Keys to Prisoners' Privacy and Due Process Rights (1985).
Martin Gardner, Hudson v. Palmer--Bright Lines But Dark Directions for Prisoner Privacy Rights (1985).
Mark Brown, De-Federalizing Common Law Torts: Empathy for Parratt, Hudson and Daniels (1987).
Harvard Law Review Association, The Supreme Court, 1983 Term: 6. Rights of Prisoners and Pretrial Detainees (1984).
Edward Foley, Unauthorized Conduct of State Officials Under the Fourteenth Amendment: Hudson v. Palmer and the Resurrection of Dead Doctrines (1985).
Sheryl Love, Allowing New Technology to Erode Constitutional Protections: A Fourth Amendment Challenge to Non-Consensual DNA Testing of Prisoners (1993).
External links
 Fourth Circuit decision in Palmer v. Hudson: https://casetext.com/case/palmer-v-hudson
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States civil due process case law
"""

From "Hughes v. Alexandria Scrap Corp." ==> """
Hughes v. Alexandria Scrap Corp., 426 U.S. 794 (1976), was a case argued before the Supreme Court of the United States..  Maryland created a program that, 1) purchased junked cars, 2) paid a bounty for those with Maryland license plates and, 3) imposed more stringent documentation requirements on out-of-state processors, in an effort to reduce the number of abandoned cars in Maryland. 
The Issue before the Court is whether such a program violates the Dormant Commerce Clause—essentially, whether Maryland could Constitutionally discriminate or burden interstate commerce by imposing more stringent documentation requirements on out-of-state processors or favoring in-state car dealerships when they purchase junk cars.  
Unlike previous Dormant Commerce Clause cases, Maryland was acting like a market participant (as opposed to a state regulator).  In such instances, the Court determined that a state actor can favor its own citizens over the foreign citizens. 
This case created the "market participant" exception to the general restrictions on states imposed by the Dormant Commerce Clause.  
Determining when a state is acting like a "market participant" rather than as a regulator was not decided by this case, but found in South Central Timber Development v. Wunnicke..
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 426
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:Vehicle recycling
"""

From "Hughes v. Fetter" ==> """
Hughes v. Fetter, 341 U.S. 609 (1951), is a Supreme Court case involving the conflict of laws between states.
Facts
Harold Hughes, a resident of Wisconsin, was killed in an automobile accident while driving in Illinois. The other driver, Fetter, was also a Wisconsin resident, and Fetter's insurance company was also located in Wisconsin. The administrator of Hughes' estate filed a wrongful death claim in Wisconsin state court, alleging that the death was caused by negligence on Fetter's part.William L. Reynolds, William M. Richman, The Full Faith and Credit Clause: A Reference Guide to the United States  (2005), p. 44-45.
Although the administrator's action was filed in Wisconsin, and the defendants were a Wisconsin resident and a Wisconsin-based insurance company, the suit was based on the Illinois wrongful death statute. The trial court granted summary judgment on the merits to the defendants, holding that the public policy of Wisconsin, which had a "door-closing" statute with respect to wrongful death actions, which expressly limited the courts to compensating deaths occurring in Wisconsin. This was affirmed by the Wisconsin Supreme Court, and the administrator then filed a petition for certiorari in the U.S. Supreme Court, asserting that the Full Faith and Credit Clause of the United States Constitution required the Wisconsin courts to apply Illinois law.
Decision
The U.S. Supreme Court reversed, holding that because Wisconsin's statutory policy would exclude the Illinois cause of action, the public policy asserted violated the national policy of giving Full Faith and Credit to the laws of other states. The Court found that the Illinois wrongful death statute is a "public act", and that Full Faith and Credit shall be given in each state to the "public acts" of every other state. The Court noted that Wisconsin enforced wrongful death suits under its own law, and therefore evinced no strong public policy against such claims that would justify excluding them from its courts.
A dissenting opinion by Justice Frankfurter, joined by three other justices, argued that states should be able to close their courts to foreign causes of action where there is a reasonable basis to do so. Frankurter believed there was such a basis here, because the suit could have been brought in Illinois, and because there were substantial differences in the wrongful death laws of the two states.
The Court was unclear about what the objectionable discrimination really was, between the imposition of the law of another state, or the fact that the case involved an accident in another state. It has been noted that the Court also "allowed for an indeterminate exception to the Hughes rule" in circumstances "when the forum did have an antipathy to the foreign claim".
Impact
Hughes is considered the leading case on the constitutionality of door-closing statutes.
References
External links
Category:Conflict of laws case law
Category:1951 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
"""

From "Hughes v. Oklahoma" ==> """
Hughes v. Oklahoma, 441 U.S. 322 (1979), was a United States Supreme Court decision, which held that the United States Congress may enact legislation governing wildlife on federal lands.
Background
Oklahoma enacted statutes that prevented any person from selling minnows found within the natural waters of the state of Oklahoma outside of the state of Oklahoma. Oklahoma claimed that the purpose of the statute was for wildlife conservation. The underlying legal controversy arose when William Hughes was convicted of shipping minnows fished from Oklahoma waters out of the state.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court held that the statute violated the Dormant Commerce Clause because it discriminated the flow of interstate commerce without being the least discriminatory alternative. The Court stated that when conflicting state law exists, the supremacy clause ensures that federal legislation will prevail. The Court thereby overruled Geer v. Connecticut (1896), rejecting the earlier case's "19th century legal fiction of state ownership" of wildlife. In the Court's view, this "fiction" had "been eroded to the point of virtual extinction in cases involving regulation of wild animals." With the fall of Geer, the last precedential impediment to the federal government's wildlife management authority was removed.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 441
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States environmental case law
Category:United States land use case law
Category:1979 in the environment
Category:1979 in United States case law
"""

From "Humphrey's Executor v. United States" ==> """
Humphrey's Executor v. United States, 295 U.S. 602 (1935), was a Supreme Court of the United States case decided regarding whether the United States President has the power to remove executive officials of a quasi-legislative or quasi-judicial administrative body for reasons other than what is allowed by Congress. The Court held that the President did not have this power. However, Humphrey's has been distinguished by Seila Law LLC v. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. In Seila, Chief Justice John Roberts described Humphrey's as holding that Congress may occasionally create independent agencies with removal only for cause if such agencies share the characteristics of the FTC in 1935.
Background
US President Herbert Hoover appointed William Humphrey as a member of the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) in 1925, and Humphrey was reappointed for another six-year term in 1931. After Roosevelt took office in 1933, he became dissatisfied with Humphrey since Roosevelt viewed Humphrey as inadequately supportive of the New Deal.
Roosevelt twice requested Humphrey to resign from the FTC, but Humphrey did not yield. Finally, in 1933 Roosevelt fired Humphrey. Nevertheless, Humphrey continued to come to work at the FTC even after he was formally fired. However, the Federal Trade Commission Act permitted the President to dismiss an FTC member only for "inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office." Roosevelt's decision to dismiss Humphrey was based solely on political differences, rather than job performance or alleged acts of malfeasance..
Decision
 Opinion 
The case went to the Supreme Court, but Humphrey died in 1934 before the case could be decided. The case was then pursued by the executors of his estate and so it obtained the title "Humphrey's Executor."
The Court distinguished between executive officers and quasi-legislative or quasi-judicial officers. The Court held that the latter may be removed only with procedures consistent with statutory conditions enacted by Congress, but the former serve at the pleasure of the President and may be removed at his discretion. The Court ruled that the Federal Trade Commission was a quasi-legislative body because it adjudicated cases and promulgated rules. Thus, the President could not fire a member solely for political reasons. Therefore, Humphrey's firing was improper. 
thumb|180px|right|William Humphrey died before the Supreme Court could rule on whether his dismissal by the President from the Federal Trade Commission was valid.
During its analysis, the Court distinguished Myers v. United States and rejected its dicta that the President has unencumbered removal powers.
 Subsequent treatment 
US Attorney General Robert H. Jackson, who later joined the Supreme Court himself, said in his memoirs that Roosevelt was particularly annoyed by the Court's decision, as the President felt that it had been rendered in spite. 
Humphrey's was distinguished in Seila Law LLC v. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2020).Seila, 140 S. Ct. at 2199–200. Chief Justice Roberts narrowly construed Humphrey's to stand for the proposition that the President's removal power may be constrained by Congress if the officer in question was a member of an agency that shared the same characteristics as the Federal Trade Commission in 1935. However, scholars argue that no such agency currently exists because no such agency existed when Humphrey's was decided because the Court misconstrued the FTC's powers at the time.
 See also 
 The Appointments Clause of the U.S. Constitution
 Seila Law LLC v. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 591 U.S. ____ (2020)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 295
References
External links
Category:United States separation of powers case law
Category:1935 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:Constitutional challenges to the New Deal
"""

From "Hunt v. Cromartie" ==> """
Hunt v. Cromartie, 526 U.S. 541 (1999), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding North Carolina's 12th congressional district..  In an earlier case, Shaw v. Reno, , the Supreme Court ruled that the 12th district of North Carolina as drawn was unconstitutional because it was created for the purpose of placing African Americans in one district, thereby constituting illegal racial gerrymandering.  The Court ordered the state of North Carolina to redraw the boundaries of the district.
The redrawn 12th district boundaries were then thrown out in a summary judgment by a three judge panel in Eastern District of North Carolina. When appealed to the Supreme Court, Justice Thomas wrote for all nine justices saying that the District Court erred in granting summary judgement, while Justice Stevens concurred in an opinion indicating that he and three other justices would have upheld the 12th district as a legal partisan gerrymander. After the case was sent back down, the District Court after a three-day trial again found that the 12th district was an illegal racial gerrymander, resulting in another Supreme Court appeal and the ruling Easley v. Cromartie, . (Mike Easley replaced Jim Hunt as Governor of North Carolina, resulting in the change of name.) In Easley v. Cromartie, the Supreme Court ruled that the state was able to justify the new boundaries of the 12th district by showing that it was intended to create a safe seat for Democrats, and therefore the redrawn district was a constitutional example of political gerrymandering. Justice O'Connor acted as the swing vote, satisfied with the change in reasoning since Shaw v. Reno, despite not joining Justice Stevens' concurrence in the 1999 case.
See also
 Shaw v. Reno, 
 Easley v. Cromartie, 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 526
References
Further reading
External links
North Carolina Redistricting Cases: the 1990s. by the Redistricting Task Force for the National Conference of State Legislatures
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Congressional districts of North Carolina
Category:Legal history of North Carolina
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1999 in United States case law
Category:1999 in North Carolina
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Hunt v. Washington State Apple Advertising Commission" ==> """
Hunt v. Washington State Apple Advertising Commission, 432 U.S. 333 (1977), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States unanimously struck down a North Carolina law prohibiting the sale of apples in closed containers marked with any apple grade other than the United States Department of Agriculture grade. However, displaying the USDA grade was not required. Washington state, a major apple producer, used apple standards superior to those used by the USDA. The Court found that North Carolina's law violated the Commerce Clause because they discriminated against Washington state apple producers while working to the advantage of local North Carolina apple growers.
John R. Jordan, Jr., argued the cause for Hunt. With him on the brief were Rufus L. Edmisten, Attorney General of North Carolina, and Millard R. Rich, Jr., Deputy Attorney General. Slade Gorton, Attorney General of Washington, argued the cause for the Washington State Apple Advertising Commission. With him on the brief were Edward B. Mackie, Deputy Attorney General, and James Arneil, Special Assistant Attorney General. 
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 432
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:Apple production in Washington (state)
Category:Legal history of North Carolina
Category:Food law
Category:Food labelling
"""

From "Hunter v. City of Pittsburgh" ==> """
Hunter v. Pittsburgh, 207 U.S. 161 (1907), is a landmark case that confirmed the supreme sovereignty of a state over its municipalities.
 Background
In 1906, Pennsylvania passed a law permitting the joining of adjacent municipalities if, during an election regarding the issue, the majority of all votes passed approve the union. Subsequently, the City of Pittsburgh filed in state court to begin the process of an election regarding joining with the City of Allegheny, Pennsylvania. Allegheny pushed back but was turned down in court.
The election was allowed to continue, and a majority of all voters in the two cities combined voted for joining. The vast majority of voters in Allegheny voted in opposition, and most of the votes in favor came from Pittsburgh. However, because the majority of the total votes were in favor, the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania ruled the union constitutional under Pennsylvania law. Plaintiffs appealed under the United States Constitution's Contract Clause (Article 1, Section 10, Paragraph 1) and the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
 Decision
The United States Supreme Court unanimously ruled that the Pennsylvania law violated neither Article I nor the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution. Some important lines from the opinion concerning the supremacy of states over the municipalities include the following:
"We have nothing to do with the policy, wisdom, justice, or fairness of the act under consideration; those questions are for the consideration of those to whom the state has intrusted its legislative power, and their determination of them is not subject to review or criticism by this court. We have nothing to do with the interpretation of the Constitution of the state and the conformity of the enactment of the assembly to that Constitution; those questions are for those consideration of the courts of the state, and their decision of them is final. The 5th Amendment to the Constitution of the United States is not restrictive of state, but only of national, action.".
"This [claim] does not rest upon the theory that the charter of the city is a contract with the state, a proposition frequently denied by this and other courts."Hunter,  207 U.S. at 177.
"Municipal corporations are political subdivisions of the state, created as convenient agencies for exercising such of the governmental powers of the state as may be entrusted to them.... The number, nature, and duration of the powers conferred upon these corporations and the territory over which they shall be exercised rests in the absolute discretion of the state."Hunter, 207 U.S. at 178.
"The state, therefore, at its pleasure, may modify or withdraw all such powers, may take without compensation such property, hold it itself, or vest it in other agencies, expand or contract the territorial area, unite the whole or a part of it with another municipality, repeal the charter and destroy the corporation. All this may be done, conditionally or unconditionally, with or without the consent of the citizens, or even against their protest. In all these respects the state is supreme, and its legislative body, conforming its action to the state Constitution, may do as it will, unrestrained by any provision of the Constitution of the United States."Hunter,  207 U.S. at 178-79.
"Although the inhabitants and property owners may, by such changes, suffer inconvenience, and their property may be lessened in value by the burden of increased taxation, or for any other reason, they have no right, by contract or otherwise, in the unaltered or continued existence of the corporation or its powers, and there is nothing in the Federal Constitution which protects them from these injurious consequences. The power is in the state, and those who legislate for the state are alone responsible for any unjust or oppressive exercise of it."Hunter,  207 U.S. at 179.
 See also
Dillon's Rule
 References
External links
Other court cases citing this case
Brett W. Berri, "Annexation and Municipal Voting Rights," 35 Wash. U. J. Urb. & Contemp. L. 237 (1989)
summary of colloquium regarding "The Case for Local Constitutional Enforcement," arguing for an overruling of Hunter
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States standing case law
Category:United States Tenth Amendment case law
Category:1907 in United States case law
Category:History of local government in the United States
"""

From "Hunter v. Erickson" ==> """
Hunter v. Erickson, 393 U.S. 385 (1969), was a United States Supreme Court case.
The question in the case was "whether the City of Akron, Ohio, has denied [a black citizen] the equal protection of its laws by amending the city charter to prevent the city council from implementing any ordinance dealing with racial, religious, or ancestral discrimination in housing without the approval of the majority of the voters of Akron."
The Court held an amendment of a city charter to discriminate against minorities, and constitute a real, substantial, and invidious denial of the equal protection of the laws under the Fourteenth Amendment.
This amendment provided that an ordinance enacted by the city council would not be effective unless approved by a majority of the city voters at a regular or general election, and that any such ordinance in effect at the time of the charter amendment shall cease to be effective until approved by the voters, a fair housing ordinance having in fact been previously enacted by the city council; that ordinance  dealt with racial, religious, or ancestral discrimination in housing.
The amendment discriminated and violated the equal protection of the laws since, under the city's general system of enacting ordinances, an ordinance was effective a specified time after passage by the city council unless 10 percent of the voters petitioned for a referendum, and the amendment of the charter not only suspended the operation of the existing ordinance forbidding housing discrimination, but also made an explicit racial classification treating racial housing matters differently from other racial matters or other housing matters and made it more difficult to secure enactment of ordinances subject to the amendment, it being immaterial that the amendment drew no distinctions among racial and religious groups, since the amendment disadvantaged those who would benefit from laws barring racial, religious, or ancestral discriminations as against those who would bar other discriminations or who would otherwise regulate the real-estate market in their favor, and since the reality is that the law's impact falls on the minority and places special burdens on racial minorities within the governmental process.
Background
Ohio law
The Akron City Council in 1964 enacted a fair housing ordinance premised on a recognition of the social and economic losses to society which flow from substandard, ghetto housing and its tendency to breed discrimination and segregation contrary to the policy of the city to "assure equal opportunity to all persons to live in decent housing facilities regardless of race, color, religion, ancestry or national origin." Akron Ordinance No. 873-1964 § 1. A Commission on Equal Opportunity in Housing was established by the ordinance in the office of the Mayor to enforce the antidiscrimination sections of the ordinance through conciliation or persuasion if possible, but, if not, then through "such order as the facts warrant," based upon a hearing at which witnesses may be subpoenaed, and entitled to enforcement in the courts. Akron Ordinance No. 873-1964, as amended by Akron Ordinance No. 926-1964.
Charter amendment
Thereafter, a proposal for an amendment to the city charter, which had been placed on the ballot by petition, was passed.
It provided that any ordinance (including any in effect) which regulates the use, sale, advertisement, transfer, listing assignment, lease, sublease, or financing of real property on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, or ancestry must first be approved by a majority of the voters before becoming effective.
Ohio Rev. Code Ann. §§ 4112.02(H) and 4112.02(H)(1) (1967) makes it unlawful for "any person" to refuse to sell or otherwise deny or withhold commercial housing from any person because of the race or color of the prospective owner. "Commercial housing" is defined to exclude any personal residence offered for sale or rent by the owner or by his broker, salesman, agent, or employee. Ohio Rev. Code Ann. § 4112.01(K) (1967). The statute makes it unlawful to print, publish, or circulate any statement or advertisement relating to the sale of a personal residence that indicates any preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination based upon race. Ohio Rev. Code Ann. § 4112.02(H)(6) (1967).
Housing commission complaint
Seeking to invoke this machinery which had been established by the city for her benefit, Nellie Hunter addressed a complaint to the Commission asserting that a real estate agent had come to show her a list of houses for sale, but that on meeting Mrs. Hunter the agent "stated that she could not show me any of the houses on the list she had prepared for me because all of the owners had specified they did not wish their houses shown to negroes."
A buyer filed a complaint with the housing commission, asserting that she was denied equal housing opportunity in violation of the fair housing ordinance because she was black.
Commission's response
The commission refused to process the complaint because of the charter amendment.  Mrs. Hunter's affidavit met with the reply that the fair housing ordinance was unavailable to her because of the charter amendment; the proposal for the charter amendment had been placed on the ballot at a general election upon petition of more than 10% of Akron's voters, and the amendment had been duly passed by a majority.
This amendment provided:
Any ordinance enacted by the Council of The City of Akron which regulates the use, sale, advertisement, transfer, listing assignment, lease, sublease or financing of real property of any kind or of any interest therein on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry must first be approved by a majority of the electors voting on the question at a regular or general election before said ordinance shall be effective. Any such ordinance in effect at the time of the adoption of this section shall cease to be effective until approved by the electors as provided herein.
Akron City Charter § 137.
Court complaint
Appellant then brought an action in the Ohio courts on behalf of the municipality, herself, and all others similarly situated, to obtain a writ of mandamus requiring the Mayor to convene the Commission and to require the Commission and the Director of Law to enforce the fair housing ordinance and process her complaint thereunder with regard to her unsuccessful attempts to purchase a house through a real-estate agent.
First trial court decision
The trial court initially held that the enforcement provisions of the ordinance were invalid under state law.
However, the Supreme Court of Ohio reversed and remanded.  (State ex rel. Hunter v. Erickson 6 Ohio St 2d 130, 35 Ohio Ops 2d 151, 216 NE2d 371 (1966)).
Second trial court decision
On remand, the trial court held that the fair housing ordinance had been rendered ineffective by a subsequent amendment of the city charter which provided that any ordinance enacted by the city council dealing with racial, religious, or ancestral discrimination in housing was not to be effective unless approved by a majority of the city voters at a regular or general election, and that any such ordinance in effect at the time of the charter amendment ceased to be effective until approved by the voters.
The trial court denied appellant's housing discrimination complaint, holding that the fair housing ordinance was rendered ineffective by the charter amendment.
Ohio Supreme Court
The Supreme Court of Ohio affirmed the trial court's ruling that a city's fair housing ordinance was rendered ineffective by a charter amendment, holding that the charter amendment was not repugnant to the Equal Protection Clause of the United States Constitution. (12 Ohio St 2d 116, 47 Ohio Ops 2d 100, 233 NE2d 129).
Certiorari and arguments
The case was argued on November 13, 1968.
Opinion of the Court
On appeal, the Supreme Court of the United States reversed 8–1. Justice White wrote the opinion of the Court.  The case was decided on January 20, 1969.
White wrote that the city charter amendment discriminated against minorities and constituted a denial of equal protection of the laws under the Fourteenth Amendment, since, under the city's general system of enacting ordinances, an ordinance was effective a specified time after passage by the city council unless 10 percent of the voters petitioned for a referendum, and the amendment of the charter not only suspended the operation of the existing fair housing ordinance, but also made an explicit racial classification treating racial housing matters differently from other racial matters and other housing matters, and made it more difficult to secure enactment of ordinances subject to the amendment, placing special burdens on racial minorities within the governmental process.
The Supreme Court held that the charter discriminated against minorities, and constituted a real, substantial, and invidious denial of the equal protection of the laws. Although the Civil Rights Act of 1968, Pub. L. 90-284, 82 Stat. 73, and Ohio Rev. Code Ann. § 4112 et seq. were related to open housing, they were not intended to preempt local housing ordinances or provide rights and remedies that were effective substitutes for the ordinance. The case could not be considered moot since the ordinance provided an enforcement mechanism unmatched by either state or federal legislation. The city charter placed special burdens on racial minorities within the governmental process, which was not permissible. The mayor was subject to those constitutional limitations that had been duly adopted and remain unrepealed.
Held:
1. The case is not moot. Neither the 1968 Civil Rights Act (which specifically preserves local fair housing laws), nor the 1866 Civil Rights Act, was intended to pre-empt local housing ordinances; the Ohio Act of October 30, 1965 (which concerns "commercial" housing), does not apply to this case; and the Akron ordinance provides an enforcement mechanism unmatched by either state or federal legislation. pp. 388–389.
2. The charter amendment contains an explicitly racial classification treating racial housing matters differently from other racial and housing matters and places special burdens on racial and religious minorities within the governmental process by making it more difficult for them to secure legislation on their behalf. pp. 389–391.
3. Racial classifications "bear a heavier burden of justification" than other classifications, and here Akron has not justified its discrimination against minorities, which constitutes a denial of the equal protection of the laws. pp. 391–393.
Concurrence
Justice Harlan, joined by Justice Stewart, concurred, stating that he joined in the court's opinion, and that the charter amendment was not an attempt to allocate governmental power on the basis of any general or neutral principle, but had the clear purpose of making it more difficult for certain racial and religious minorities to achieve legislation that was in their interest.
Dissent
Justice Black dissented, expressing the view that there was no constitutional provision barring a state from repealing a law, and that the equal protection clause did not empower the court to decide that the fair housing ordinance could not be repealed by the city charter amendment.
 See also 
 Civil Rights Act of 1968, tit. VIII, §§ 815, 810(c), 82 Stat. 89, 86. 
 Civil Rights Act of 1866
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States racial desegregation case law
Category:1969 in United States case law
Category:History of Akron, Ohio
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Hunter v. Underwood" ==> """
Hunter v. Underwood, 471 U.S. 222 (1985), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court, in a unanimous decision, invalidated the criminal disenfranchisement provision of § 182 of the Alabama Constitution as a violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.Varat, J.D. et al. Constitutional Law Cases and Materials, Concise Thirteenth Edition.  Foundation Press, NY: 2009, p. 574
 Background 
Carmen Edwards, an African-American, and Victor Underwood, a white man, had been convicted for the misdemeanor of presenting a worthless check. They were blocked from voting. Their disenfranchisement was mandated by § 182 of the Alabama Constitution, which disenfranchised persons convicted of "any crime ... involving moral turpitude."Varat, p. 574 This part of Alabama's constitution was worked out at a constitutional convention in 1901, and afterwards adopted by a popular referendum. The new provisions in the constitution included a long list of both felonies and misdemeanors which should lead to disenfranchisement, together with the general provision in §182. In applying this generic paragraph, the Alabama Board of Registrars consulted precedents in the Alabama state court decisions, or asked the Alabama State Attorney for an opinion.
Edwards and Underwood contended that the registrar's decision to deny them suffrage violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, since the purpose and effect of this rule was directed against Afro-American suffrage.
Lower court decisions
Edwards and Underwood sued the Board of Registrars at a Federal District Court. The District Court found that indeed the outspoken purpose of the constitutional change was "the disenfranchisement of blacks". However, the court could not find it proven that this particular provision was based on racism, and decided against the plaintiffs.
Edwards and Underwood appealed to the 11th Circuit Court of Appeals, which reversed the decision in their favor. The Court of Appeals held that when the discriminatory purpose had been firmly established, as in this case, the burden was on the defendants to prove that, without this discriminatory purpose, the outcome would have been the same. In the court's opinion, the registrar representatives had failed to do this.
The Alabama Board of Registrars, in turn, appealed to the Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court upheld the decision of the Court of Appeal, and thus struck down the provision as a violation of the Equal Protection Clause.
The Court identified § 182 as a facially neutral law with racially disproportionate effects, thus requiring an inquiry to discover if the law was passed with a discriminatory purpose. The provision was adopted at a convention in 1901, and the Court found ample evidence that the law and other measures of the convention were passed with the outspoken intention of disenfranchising practically all African-Americans, from its very start. At the opening address, the chairman of the convention claimed that its purpose was, "within the limits imposed by the Federal Constitution, to establish white supremacy in this State".
This was supported by the minutiae of the proceedings, where delegates repeatedly claim that they did not wish to disenfranchise "whites", but "blacks".
The appellants claimed that this openly acknowledged purpose was accompanied by an unspoken purpose of disenfranchising "poor whites". They claimed their true object was for the ruling party, the Southern Democrats, to thwart the Populists and the Republicans, who threatened their political power, by disenfranchising groups of voters who were more inclined to vote for those parties. However, since they needed the "white votes" to bring through these measures directed against a tangible part of the "white electorate", the convention could not openly explain their true purpose. Instead, they exaggerated the purpose of disenfranchising Afro-Americans.
The appellants argued then that the disenfranchisement rules were not unconstitutional since the secret, yet ultimate, purpose was to secure the rule of the Southern Democrats by disenfranchising a sufficient number of their opponents' supporters, independent of their race. They claimed that rewriting the laws for such a purpose was not prohibited by the Fourteenth Amendment.
The Supreme Court did not comment on the constitutionality of the purpose that the appellants claimed that the constitutional reform had. Instead, the court noted that the enumerated misdemeanors in the constitution had been chosen with some care, so that they covered many lesser offenses for which mainly black people were convicted, such as petty larceny, while omitting what the court judged to be more serious offenses such as "second-degree manslaughter, assault on a police officer, mailing pornography, and aiding the escape of a misdemeanant". In the Court's opinion, this established discrimination against Afro-Americans as a major purpose of the constitutional reform (both in words and deeds). Therefore, whether or not there also was a secondary purpose, as outlined by the appellants, would be irrelevant.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 471
 Richardson v. Ramirez (1974) Original decision allowing disfranchisement of felons.
 References 
External links
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:United States elections case law
Category:Legal history of Alabama
Category:White supremacy in the United States
"""

From "Hurd v. Hodge" ==> """
Hurd v. Hodge, 334 U.S. 24 (1948), was a companion case to Shelley v. Kraemer,  in which the Court held that the Fourteenth Amendment prohibits a federal court from enforcing restrictive covenants that would prohibit a person from owning or occupying property based on race or color. Hurd v. Hodge also involved racially restrictive covenants on houses in the Bloomingdale neighborhood of Washington, D.C..
However, the Equal Protection Clause does not explicitly apply to a U.S. territory not in a U.S. state, and so the decision varied from the Fourteenth Amendment ruling in Shelley v. Kraemer. In Hurd, the Court found against the segregationists by holding that both the Civil Rights Act of 1866 and treating persons in the District of Columbia like those in the states would forbid restrictive covenants.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 334
Shelley v. Kraemer (1948), a companion case to Hurd v. Hodge
 References 
External links
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States land use case law
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:1948 in United States case law
Category:Housing rights activism
Category:African-American history between emancipation and the civil rights movement
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:1948 in Washington, D.C.
Category:Housing in Washington, D.C.
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
Category:May 1948 events in the United States
"""

From "Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Group of Boston" ==> """
Hurley v. Irish American Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Group of Boston, 515 U.S. 557 (1995), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court regarding free speech rights, specifically the rights of groups to determine what message their activities convey to the public. The Court ruled that private organizations, even if they were planning on and had permits for a public demonstration, were permitted to exclude groups if those groups presented a message contrary to the one the organizing group wanted to convey. Addressing the specific issues of the case, the Court found that private citizens organizing a public demonstration may not be compelled by the state to include groups who impart a message the organizers do not want to be presented by their demonstration, even if the intent of the state was to prevent discrimination.
Background
From 1901 until 1947, the city of Boston, Massachusetts, sponsored public celebrations of St. Patrick's Day and Evacuation Day, which marks the departure of British troops from the city in 1776, on or about March 17. Following 1947's events, Mayor James Michael Curley gave authority for organizing the celebratory parade to the South Boston Allied War Veterans Council, a group of unincorporated private citizens selected from a variety of Boston veterans' groups. The South Boston Allied War Veterans Council was the only group to apply for a parade permit until 1992.515 U.S. at 560-61.
In that year, the Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of Boston (GLIB) requested that it be allowed to march in the parade alongside the usual participating groups. GLIB argued that it was not a group primarily aimed at conveying a "gay, lesbian, and bisexual message". They said their members were Irish descendants who happen to be gay, lesbian, and bisexual, and who are proud of both their sexual orientation and their Irish ancestral nationality. On March 1, the Council denied GLIB permission to march in the parade.515 U.S. at 561. Massachusetts Governor William Weld supported GLIB's position. Boston Mayor Ray Flynn tried without success to broker a compromise. GLIB offered to limit its participation to 25 marchers and police their behavior, winning Flynn's support. The Council voted "overwhelmingly" to reject GLIB's proposal. GLIB sued the Council, the city, and Flynn, and asked the court to compel the Council to allow them to march, citing a Massachusetts law that forbade "discrimination or restriction on account of ... sexual orientation ... relative to the admission of any person to, or treatment in any place of public accommodation, resort or amusement."Mass. Gen. Laws § 272:98 (1992). On March 11, Judge Hiller B. Zobel issued an order restraining the Council from prohibiting GLIB from marching, and the Council did not appeal. GLIB marched in the parade, which the Boston Globe described as "a 5-mile gauntlet of hostility that sometimes threatened to erupt into wide-scale violence" where the GLIB marchers "faced an outpouring of vituperation that spanned generational lines." Several smoke bombs were tossed into their midst. In an editorial the paper concluded that "Despite Sunday's epithets and excesses, the parade went off relatively well", though its reporter decried the "revisionist history ... of wishful thinkers already trying to claim that aw, the crowd reaction to the gay marchers wasn't that bad".
The next year, the Council bolstered its position by declining the funds it normally received from the city in support of the parade and again denied GLIB's application to participate in the parade. The group again filed suit. Judge Zobel again found that GLIB's argument was valid: "The parade is in every rational sense a municipal celebration, a public festival". He reasoned that the parade had traveled roughly the same route for decades, that it frequently (if not always) accepted involvement and participation from the general public, and that it rarely, if ever, required formal submissions to entry into the parade, sometimes permitting groups to join the parade on the day of the event. GLIB stated that it should be permitted to march in the parade because the Council employed no uniform screening process of other groups that had previously been permitted to march with them. While the Council had prohibited certain groups such as the Ku Klux Klan from joining the parade, the trial court believed that these were not significant or germane to the facts presented. The trial court determined that the Council's rights under the First Amendment were not implicated because the parade was less a private event and more of an "open recreational event". Because the statute did not demand that GLIB be allowed in the parade, merely that the Council could not forbid groups based on sexual orientation, any infringement on the Council's right of expressive association was "incidental."515 U.S. at 561-63. Appeals Court Justice Frederick Brown affirmed Zobel's decision.
On appeal to the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts (SJC), Justice Herbert Wilkins affirmed the trial court's decision against the Council. The full SJC declined to hear the case on an emergency basis. The GLIB contingent of 25 marched that year and met a comparatively less hostile environment that included snowballs and smoke bombs and spitting. GLIB obtained a permanent injunction against the Council in December 1993. The Council appealed the permanent injunction and lost in Superior Court where Judge J. Harold Flannery wrote: "History does not record that St. Patrick limited his ministry to heterosexuals or that General Washington's soldiers were all straight. Inclusiveness should be the hallmark of the parade." The full SJC heard arguments on March 10, 1994. It ruled against the Council the next day. When the Court released its written opinion by Chief Justice Paul J. Liacos several weeks later, it reasoned that the law was not overly broad and that it did not unduly infringe upon the Council's First Amendment rights. It agreed with the trial court's finding that the parade, as it had been run, was subject to the "public accommodations" law and that it did not convey any obvious or specific message.515 U.S. at 563-65. The Council cancelled the 1994 parade. For the 1995 parade, the Council announced that it would have a political theme: to protest recent state court decisions. On January 17, 1995, U.S. District Court Judge Mark L. Wolf ruled that, given that the parade was an exercise of the organizers' free speech, the Council could restrict participation to those who endorsed that political stance. He ordered the city of Boston to issue the parade permit it was threatening to withhold. Because Boston Mayor Tom Menino ordered city employees not to participate in their official capacity, fire engines and mounted police did not march. Police estimated participation by marchers and the crowd at about half their levels in similarly good weather.
The Supreme Court granted certiorari on January 6, 1995, and heard oral arguments on April 25.
Supreme Court's decision
Justice Souter delivered the unanimous opinion of the court on June 19, 1995. He reasoned that, even though the Council did not have a narrow, set message that it was intending to convey, the parade nevertheless constituted a message that the Council had a right to protect.515 U.S. at 569. Noting that the Council had been fairly unrestrictive in its guidelines for determining which groups to allow to participate in the parade, he said this did not necessarily mean that the Council waived its right to present its message in a way it saw fit. He wrote: "One important manifestation of the principle of free speech is that one who chooses to speak may also decide what not to say".515 U.S. at 573. GLIB's attorney, John Ward of Gay & Lesbian Advocates and Defenders, had argued that a banner identifying GLIB by its full name carried no "extrinsic message" and therefore was not speech that could interfere with the parade sponsors' speech rights. Souter interpreted the banner as an attempt to "bear witness to the fact that some Irish are gay, lesbian, or bisexual" who "have as much claim to unqualified social acceptance as heterosexuals and indeed as members of parade units organized around other identifying characteristics". Of primary concern to the Court was the fact that anyone observing the parade could rationally believe that those involved in the parade were all part of an overriding message the Council was seeking to provide.515 U.S. at 575-76. Souter wrote that the Council could not statutorily be prohibited from excluding the messages of groups it did not agree with, nor could it be forced to endorse a message against its will.
The Court's decision affected the Spence test that had been established in Spence v. Washington (418 U.S. 405 (1974)) . In Spence the Court has ruled that actions may be protected speech if "an intent to convey a particularized message was present, and in the surrounding circumstances the likelihood was great that the message would be understood by those who viewed it." In Hurley, the Court dismissed the need for a particularized message, stating that a "narrow, succinctly articulable message is not a condition of constitutional protection, which if confined to expressions conveying a 'particularized message,' would never reach the unquestionably shielded painting of Jackson Pollock, music of Arnold Schoenberg, or Jabberwocky verse of Lewis Carroll." The Hurley decision created a circuit split in whether Spence or Hurley was to be used to judge the First Amendment protection of actions, which has yet to be resolved by the Supreme Court as of 2015.
The decision resolved a similar dispute in New York City, where a 1993 U.S. District Court ruling had allowed the city's parade sponsors, the Ancient Order of Hibernians, to exclude homosexual groups that wanted to be able to identify themselves as such.
Catholic officials welcomed the ruling as well. Legal scholar and gay rights supporter Arthur S. Leonard said that "lobbying and education" were better than litigation as a strategy for promoting gay inclusion, but welcomed the ruling because he thought it was "carefully crafted" to the issues raised by the parade "while at the same time upholding the authority of the state to ban sexual-orientation discrimination."
Aftermath
The South Boston Allied Veteran's Council did not permit gay groups to march in the parade until 2015, when it accepted applications from Boston Pride and OUTVETS, a gay veteran's organization. Following this decision, Boston Mayor Marty Walsh announced that he would march in the parade, the first time a mayor had participated in 20 years.
In 2017, LGBT groups were temporarily banned again, before being reallowed a few days later after negative media attention.
See also
 Freedom of association
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People v. Alabama (1958)
Roberts v. United States Jaycees (1984)
Boy Scouts of America v. Dale (2000)
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States LGBT rights case law
Category:United States freedom of association case law
Category:Irish-American history
Category:Irish-American culture in Boston
Category:1995 in United States case law
Category:1995 in LGBT history
Category:LGBT in Massachusetts
Category:Parades in the United States
Category:Saint Patrick's Day
"""

From "Hurn v. Oursler" ==> """
Hurn v. Oursler, 289 U.S. 238 (1933), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held A significant federal question raised by a suit can give jurisdiction to federal courts. If the federal question is rejected on the merits, the federal court still has jurisdiction to decide the local question on the merits.
The case being discussed was a copyright infringement suit.
In United States v. United States Gypsum Co., the Court's majority opinion referred to Hurn v. Oursler in passing. Justice Felix Frankfurter expanded this and recounted the case's background in his concurrence as a key point in his argument.
 References 
External links
Category:1933 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
"""

From "Hurtado v. California" ==> """
Hurtado v. California, 110 U.S. 516 (1884),. was a landmark case decided by the United States Supreme Court that allowed state governments, as distinguished from the federal government, to avoid using grand juries in criminal prosecutions.
 Background 
Joseph Hurtado discovered that his wife, Susie, was having an affair with their friend, José Antonio Estuardo. After measures that Hurtado took to put an end to the affair, such as temporarily sending his wife away to live with her parents and then assaulting Estuardo in a bar after his wife returned and the affair resumed, proved futile, Hurtado fatally shot Estuardo. Hurtado was arrested for the crime but was not indicted by a grand jury.
According to the California State Constitution at the time, "Offenses heretofore required to be prosecuted by indictment, shall be prosecuted by information, after examination and commitment by a magistrate, or by indictment, with or without such examination and commitment, as may be prescribed by law. A grand jury shall be drawn and summoned at least once a year in each county."
The Sacramento County judge examined the information and determined that Hurtado should be brought to trial. Hurtado was tried, convicted of murder, and sentenced to death. At issue was whether or not the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause extended the Fifth Amendment's Indictment Clause requiring indictment by grand jury to the states.
The following questions were presented:
Does a state criminal proceeding based on an information rather than a grand jury indictment violate the Fourteenth Amendment's due process clause? 
Is a grand jury indictment required by the Fifth Amendment applicable to state criminal trials via the Fourteenth Amendment?
 Decision 
The Supreme Court ruled 7-1 that Hurtado's due process right was not violated by denial of a grand jury hearing and that the Fourteenth Amendment was not intended to work retroactively to apply the Fifth Amendment to state criminal trials.
Writing for the majority, Justice Matthews stated that the states should be free to construct their own laws without infringement and that the Fourteenth Amendment was not intended to guarantee the right of a grand jury because it would then have been specifically referenced. His opinion also concluded that Hurtado's due process right was not violated, as an information is "merely a preliminary proceeding and can result in no final judgment." He further concluded that Hurtado still received a fair trial.
Dissenting opinion
However, Justice Harlan presented a lone dissent, a learned disquisition on the history and meaning of "due process of law" that included quotes of many of the great jurists. "Blackstone says: 'But to find a bill there must be at least twelve of the jury agree; for, so tender is the law of England of the lives of the subjects, that no man can be convicted at the suit of the king of any capital offense, unless by a unanimous voice of twenty-four of his equals and neighbors; that is, by twelve at least of the grand jury, in the first place, assenting to the accusation, and afterwards by the whole petit jury of twelve more finding him guilty upon his trial.'"4 Bl. Comm. 306.He failed to mention that in England, a person could be condemned to death without trial by a bill of attainder. Also, "'But these informations (of every kind) are confined by the constitutional law to mere misdemeanors only; for, wherever any capital offense is charged, the same law requires that the accusation be warranted by the oath of twelve men before the party shall be put to answer it.' Id. 309." He cited Edward Coke, who held that "in capital cases, informations are not allowed by that law [of the land], and was not due process of law." 
Aftermath
It has been on the basis of the decision that many states have abandoned the requirement for grand juries, usually replacing them with informations and a preliminary hearing before a judge or the discretion of the prosecutor. However, as Justice Harlan had written, "one of the peculiar benefits of the grand-jury system, as it exists in this country, is that it is composed, as a general rule, of private persons who do not hold office at the will of the government, or at the will of voters."
Critics contend that by abandoning the grand jury as originally conceived, the rights of the accused are less well-protected, resulting in more miscarriages of justice. The grand jury has been criticized, however, as ineffective in protecting the rights of the accused. In the words of Sol Wachtler, a former Chief Judge of the New York Court of Appeals, a grand jury would indict a ham sandwich if the prosecutor asked it to do so.
The decision was "reaffirmed in numerous cases" in the early 20th century. Even during the Supreme Court's drastic modification of its incorporation doctrine in the 1950s and '60s, there was no serious movement to overrule Hurtado, and it in fact was "the only guarantee that appeared unlikely to be incorporated."Israel 1982, p. 297 (emphasis added).
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 110
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1884 in United States case law
Category:Incorporation case law
Category:Grand Jury Clause case law
Category:1884 in California
Category:Legal history of California
Category:Criminal cases in the Waite Court
Category:History of Sacramento County, California
"""

From "Husted v. Randolph Institute" ==> """
Husted v. A. Philip Randolph Institute, No. 16-980, 584 U.S. ___ (2018), was a case before the Supreme Court of the United States regarding Ohio's voter registration laws.Docket At issue was whether federal law, 52 U.S.C. § 20507,. permits Ohio's list-maintenance process, which uses a registered voter's voter inactivity as a reason to send a confirmation notice to that voter under the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 and the Help America Vote Act of 2002. If the mail is not returned, the voter is stricken from the rolls, a practice called voter caging. The Court ruled in a 5–4 decision that Ohio's law did not violate federal laws.
Background
Ohio law provides a process to remove an inactive voter from its list of registered voters.  After a two-year break from certain voting activities specified by Ohio law  (i.e., filing a change of address, filing a registration to vote, casting an absentee ballot, casting a provisional ballot, or voting on election day), the State sends these inactive voters a confirmation notice via mail. If the voter does not respond to that notice, re-register, or vote over the next four years, the voter is removed from the list of registered voters. A similar approach is used in eighteen other states to trim voter registration lists, though Ohio's approach holds a strong reliance on the two-year non-voting break to trigger the process, faster than most other states. In 2016, an estimated 144,000 people were removed from Ohio's voter registration list in the three largest counties in the state, containing the cities Cleveland, Columbus, and Cincinnati.
The case originated from Larry Harmon, a resident of the state who had previously voted in the 2008 elections, but did not vote in either the 2012 main election or the 2010 and 2014 mid-term elections. Desiring to vote on an issue in 2015, Harmon found that his name had been struck from the voter lists, following Ohio's process, but he claims he never received the postal notice. The A. Philip Randolph Institute, a labor and civil rights group, originally filed this lawsuit for Mr. Harmon against Ohio’s Secretary of State, Jon A. Husted, alleging that this process violated the National Voter Registration Act of 1993, which bars states from removing someone from the voter registration list for not voting and sets out a process for states to remove voters who have moved away. The state prevailed in federal district court. The United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit reversed. It concluded that, although federal law allows Ohio to remove voters who did not either respond to the confirmation notice or vote in two elections, the state’s process uses the failure to vote as the basis for initiating removal, which is not authorized by federal law.
 Supreme Court 
On May 30, 2017, the Supreme Court agreed to hear the case later that year.  The Court was scheduled to hear oral arguments November 8, 2017, however the Court temporarily removed the case from its argument calendar due to one of the parties' attorneys being ill. The case was argued on January 10, 2018 by attorney Paul M. Smith, Ohio Solicitor General Eric E. Murphy, and Solicitor General of the United States Noel Francisco.
Opinion of the Court
The Court announced judgment in favor of the state on June 10, 2018, reversing the Sixth Circuit by a vote of 5–4. Writing for the majority, Justice Samuel Alito, joined by Justices John Roberts, Anthony Kennedy, Clarence Thomas, and Neil Gorsuch found that the process Ohio used follows the specifications of both the National Voter Registration Act and the Help America Vote Act. Under Section 8(d), 52 U.S.C. § 20507(d), a registration is subject to removal from the official list of eligible voters on grounds of a change of residence if:
 (a) The registrant fails to respond to a notice (a "Section 8(d)(2) Notice") that includes a postage prepaid and preaddressed return card sent by forwardable mail, on which the registrant may state his or her current address, and which contains specific instructions and information consistent with the language set forth in 52 U.S.C. § 20507(d)(2), and 
 (b) The registrant then fails to vote or appear to vote  or to correct the Registrar's record during the period ending on the day after the second federal general election subsequent to the Section 8(d)(2) notice being sent. 52 U.S.C. § 20507(d)(l)(B).
With respect to the aforementioned described section the United States Supreme Court stated in Husted v. A. Philip Randolph Inst., 138 S. Ct. 1833 (2018) that Section 8(d) "provides that a State may remove a registrant who "(i) has failed to respond to a notice" and "(ii) has not voted or appeared to vote ... during the period beginning on the date of the notice and ending on the day after the date of the second general election for Federal office that occurs after the date of the notice" (about four years). 52 U. S. C. §20507(d)(l)(B). Not only are States allowed to remove registrants who satisfy these requirements, but federal law makes this removal mandatory. Id. at 1841-42 (emphasis added), citing 52 U.S.C. § 20507(d)(3); 52 U.S.C. § 21083(a)(4)(A)."
Alito wrote that in interpreting Congress's intention of the Failure-to-Vote clause, amended by the Help America Vote act and a point of contention raised by the respondents, was not in claimed conflict with previous language from the National Voter Registration Act. Alito wrote that Ohio's law "does not strike any registrant solely by reason of the failure to vote" and "[i]nstead, as expressly permitted by federal law, it removes registrants only when they have failed to vote and have failed to respond to a change-of-residence notice".
Dissent
Justice Stephen Breyer wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Sonia Sotomayor, and Elena Kagan, argued against Alito's reading of Congress's intent with the two laws, and believed that Ohio's approach did violate this intent. Breyer wrote that this process presumes action on the absence of a response, since only few of those that are mailed voter cards reply back to them. Sotomayor opined in a separate dissent that Ohio's voter-list purging puts too much of an onus on registered voters, and weights against minority, low-income, disabled and veteran voters.
Subsequent developments and criticism 
The decision, issued in June, allows Ohio to continue pruning its voter list prior to the 2018 election cycle, as well as supporting similar approaches used in six other states. This approach made it harder for thousands of people to vote, especially minority and poor citizens as well as disabled voters and veterans, and it has been criticized by analysts because it has a greater effect on minorities or others that would normally vote as a Democrat, thus giving Republicans an edge in this upcoming election. Several other states have indicated that they would likely adopt similar language as Ohio's should the Court find in favor of the state.
Journalist Vann R. Newkirk II asserted in July 2018 that the Roberts Court with its Shelby County v. Holder decision along with the 2018 Supreme Court decisions in Husted v. Randolph Institute and Abbott v. Perez has "set the stage for a new era of white hegemony", because these cases "furthered Roberts's mandate to distance the federal judiciary from Thurgood Marshall's vision of those bodies as active watchdogs for the Fourteenth and arbiters for America's racial injustices." With the three cases together "the Court has established that not only are the legacies of Jim Crow no longer a valid justification for proactive restrictions on states, but the Court doesn't necessarily have a role in advancing the spirit of the franchise. Furthermore, with Alito's gerrymandering decision, the Court holds that past discrimination by states—even at its boldest and most naked—is not really a consideration in assessments of current policies. This part is crucial, because in an era where crafty state politicians have moved toward race-neutral language that clearly still seeks to disenfranchise people of color, a certain default suspicion by federal courts and the Department of Justice based on those state politicians' histories has been the main protective force for the minorities' voting rights. That suspicion is gone now, as are all vestiges of Marshall's intended vigilance."
 See also 
 Shelby County v. Holder (2013) A case dealing with Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, a core section of the Act
 Abbott v. Perez (2018) A case dealing with Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, a core section of the Act
 Tenth Amendment
 Voter suppression in the United States
 References 
External links
 Case page at SCOTUSblog
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:United States elections case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Hustler Magazine v. Falwell" ==> """
Hustler Magazine, Inc. v. Falwell, 485 U.S. 46 (1988), is a landmark decision by the Supreme Court of the United States in which the Court held that parodies of public figures, even those intending to cause emotional distress, are protected by the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the U.S. Constitution.
In the case, Hustler magazine ran a full-page parody ad against televangelist and political commentator Jerry Falwell Sr., depicting him as an incestuous drunk who had sex with his mother in an outhouse. The ad was marked as a parody that was "not to be taken seriously". In response, Falwell sued Hustler and the magazine's publisher Larry Flynt for intentional infliction of emotional distress, libel, and invasion of privacy, but Flynt defended the ad's publication as protected by the First Amendment.
In an 8–0 decision, the Court held that the emotional distress inflicted on Falwell by the ad was not a sufficient reason to deny the First Amendment protection to speech that is critical of public officials and public figures. Constitutional limits to defamation liability cannot be circumvented for claims arising from speech by asserting an alternative theory of tort liability such as intentional infliction of emotional distress.
Background
thumb|left|Hustler's parody, depicted above, includes the unauthorized use of a publicity photograph of Falwell and a near-exact duplicate of the typesetting used in a concurrent Campari advertising campaign.. See also Deana Pollard Sacks, Snyder v. Phelps, the Supreme Court’s Speech-Tort Jurisprudence, and Normative Considerations, 120 Yale Law Journal Online 193 (2010).
Known for its explicit pictures of nude women, crude humor, and political satire, Hustler, a monthly  magazine published by Larry Flynt, printed a parody ad in its November 1983 issue that targeted Jerry Falwell, a prominent Christian fundamentalist televangelist and conservative political commentator.
The parody was mimicking the popular advertising campaigns that Campari, an Italian liqueur, was running at the time that featured brief contrived interviews with various celebrities that always started with a question about their "first time", a double-entendre intended to give the impression that the celebrities were talking about their first sexual encounters before the reveal at the end that the discussion had actually concerned the celebrities' first time tasting Campari.
The Hustler parody, created by writer Terry Abrahamson and art director Mike Salisbury, included a headshot photo of Falwell and the transcript of a spoof interview, where, misunderstanding the interviewer's question about his "first time", "Falwell" casually shares details about his first sexual encounter, an incestuous rendezvous with his mother in the family outhouse while they were both "drunk off our God-fearing asses on Campari." In the spoof interview, "Falwell" goes on to say that he was so intoxicated that "Mom looked better than a Baptist whore with a $100 donation," and that he decided to have sex with her because she had "showed all the other guys in town such a good time." When the interviewer asked if Falwell ever tried "it" again, once again mistaking the interviewer's intention, "Falwell" responded, "Sure ... lots of times. But not in the outhouse. Between mom and the shit, the flies were too much to bear." Finally, the interviewer clarifies that he's asking if Falwell had tried Campari again, "Falwell" answered, "I always get sloshed before I go out to the pulpit. You don’t think I could lay down all that bullshit sober, do you?"
The ad carried a disclaimer in small print at the bottom of the page that said, "ad parody – not to be taken seriously", and the magazine's table of contents also listed the ad as: "Fiction; Ad and Personality Parody."
Falwell sued Flynt, Hustler magazine, and Flynt's distribution company in the United States District Court for the Western District of Virginia for libel, invasion of privacy, and intentional infliction of emotional distress. Before trial, the court granted Flynt's motion for summary judgment on the claim of invasion of privacy, and the remaining two charges proceeded to trial. A jury ruled against Falwell on the libel claim, stating that the parody could not "reasonably be understood as describing actual facts about [Falwell] or actual events in which [he] participated." On the claim of intentional infliction of emotional distress, the jury ruled in favor of Falwell and awarded him $150,000 in damages.
Flynt appealed to the Fourth Circuit. The Fourth Circuit affirmed, rejecting Flynt's argument that the actual-malice standard of New York Times Company v. Sullivan,  applied in cases of intentional infliction of emotional distress where the plaintiff was a public figure, as Falwell concededly was. The New York Times standard focused too heavily on the truth of the statement at issue; for the Fourth Circuit, it was enough that Virginia law required the defendant to act intentionally. After the Fourth Circuit declined to rehear the case en banc, the U.S. Supreme Court granted Flynt's request to hear the case.
Opinion of the court
"At the heart of the First Amendment is the recognition of the fundamental importance of the free flow of ideas and opinions on matters of public interest and concern. The freedom to speak one's mind is not only an aspect of individual liberty – and thus a good unto itself – but also is essential to the common quest for truth and the vitality of society as a whole. We have therefore been particularly vigilant to ensure that individual expressions of ideas remain free from governmentally imposed sanctions." The First Amendment envisions that the sort of robust political debate that takes place in a democracy will occasionally yield speech critical of public figures who are "intimately involved in the resolution of important public questions or, by reason of their fame, shape events in areas of concern to society at large". In New York Times, the court held that the First Amendment gives speakers immunity from sanction with respect to their speech concerning public figures unless their speech is both false and made with "actual malice", i.e., with knowledge of its falsehood or with reckless disregard for the truth of the statement. Although false statements lack inherent value, the "breathing space" that freedom of expression requires in order to flourish must tolerate occasional false statements, lest there be an intolerable chilling effect on speech that does have constitutional value.
To be sure, in other areas of the law, the specific intent to inflict emotional harm enjoys no protection. But with respect to speech concerning public figures, penalizing the intent to inflict emotional harm, without also requiring that the speech that inflicts that harm to be false, would subject political cartoonists and other satirists to large damage awards. "The appeal of the political cartoon or caricature is often based on exploitation of unfortunate physical traits or politically embarrassing events – an exploitation often calculated to injure the feelings of the subject of the portrayal". This was certainly true of the cartoons of Thomas Nast, who skewered Boss Tweed in the pages of Harper's Weekly. From a historical perspective, political discourse would have been considerably poorer without such cartoons.
Even if Nast's cartoons were not particularly offensive, Falwell argued that the Hustler parody advertisement in this case was so "outrageous" as to take it outside the scope of First Amendment protection. But "outrageous" is an inherently subjective term, susceptible to the personal taste of the jury empaneled to decide a case. Such a standard "runs afoul of our longstanding refusal to allow damages to be awarded because the speech in question may have an adverse emotional impact on the audience". So long as the speech at issue is not "obscene" and thus not subject to First Amendment protection, it should be subject to the actual-malice standard when it concerns public figures.
Clearly, Falwell was a public figure for purposes of First Amendment law. Because the district court found in favor of Flynt on the libel charge, there was no dispute as to whether the parody could be understood as describing facts about Falwell or events in which he participated. Accordingly, because the parody did not make false statements that were implied to be true, it could not be the subject of damages under the New York Times actual-malice standard. The court thus reversed the judgment of the Fourth Circuit.
Aftermath
 Dramatization 
The People vs. Larry Flynt, a 1996 film directed by Miloš Forman starring Woody Harrelson as Flynt and Edward Norton as Flynt's lawyer Alan Isaacman features the case prominently.  Burt Neuborne, a civil rights attorney, First Amendment advocate and law professor who contributed to Flynt's defense, reversed roles and played Jerry Falwell's lawyer in the film.
 Flynt–Falwell relationship 
After The People vs. Larry Flynt appeared, Falwell and Flynt began meeting in person to discuss philosophy. They visited colleges to publicly debate morality and the First Amendment, and exchanged Christmas cards and family photos. After Falwell's death in 2007 Flynt wrote, "the ultimate result was one I never expected ... We became friends".
See also
Caselaw
New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254 (1964) — "actual malice" standard for press reporting about public figure to be libel.
Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc., 418 U.S. 323 (1974) — opinion is not libel; "actual malice" not necessary for defamation of private person if negligence is present.
Westmoreland v. CBS (1985)
Milkovich v. Lorain Journal Co., 497 U.S. 1 (1990) — existing law sufficient to protect free speech without recognizing opinion privilege against libel claims.
Lists
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 485
Other
 The Entry
 Notes 
 Further reading 
 External links 
Category:1988 in United States case law
Category:United States defamation case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Larry Flynt Publications
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:Jerry Falwell
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Hutcherson v. Lehtin" ==> """
redirectGunn v. University Committee to End the War in Viet Nam#Aftermath
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1970 in United States case law
"""

From "Hutchinson v. Proxmire" ==> """
Hutchinson v. Proxmire, 443 U.S. 111 (1979), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that statements made by a Senator in newsletters and press releases were not protected by the Speech or Debate Clause.
Background
In 1975, Senator William Proxmire created the "Golden Fleece Award" for governmental agencies that sponsored programs and research which Proxmire considered a waste of tax dollars. Proxmire awarded a Golden Fleece to federal agencies sponsoring the research of behavioral scientist Ronald Hutchinson. Proxmire discussed Hutchinson's work, which he called "nonsense", in detail on the Senate floor, in conferences with his staff, and in a newsletter sent to over 100,000 of his constituents. The newsletter, which did not use Hutchinson's name, reported that "[t]he NSF, the Space Agency, and the Office of Naval Research won the 'Golden Fleece' for spending jointly $500,000 to determine why monkeys clench their jaws." Hutchinson sued Proxmire for libel, claiming that Proxmire's statements were defamatory and that he had been damaged by these libelous statements.
Hutchinson filed a lawsuit against Proxmire in the United States District Court for the Western District of Wisconsin claiming $8 million in damages for defamation, malicious conduct or conduct with grossly negligent disregard for the truth, invasion of rights to privacy, and intentional infliction of emotional anguish. The district court considered the following questions:
Whether a press release issued by the United States Senate Service Department containing similar content to a Senate floor speech made by Proxmire was privileged under the Speech or Debate Clause of the United States constitution.
Whether statements made by Proxmire were libelous or defamatory.
The respondents moved for summary judgment. The district court held that the press release was privileged under the Speech or Debate Clause, writing the "press release, in a constitutional sense, was no different than would have been a television or radio broadcast of his speech from the Senate floor." On the question of defamation, the district court considered whether Hutchinson was a public figure:
Given Dr. Hutchinson's long involvement with publicly funded research, his active solicitation of federal and state grants, the local press coverage of his research, and the public interest in the expenditure of public funds on the precise activities in which he voluntarily participated, the court concludes that he is a public figure for the purpose of this suit. As he acknowledged in his deposition, "Certainly, any expenditure of public funds is a matter of public interest."
Finding that Hutchinson was a public figure, the court moved on to the question of whether Proxmire had acted with actual malice. Finding that there was no "genuine issue of material fact" the court granted the motion for summary judgment in favor of Proxmire.
United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit affirmed, holding that Proxmire's statements in the press release and newsletters were protected by the Speech or Debate Clause. Though they found that comments made on television and during telephone calls were not protected by that Clause, the Court held that they were still protected by the First Amendment because the petitioner was a "public figure" and had not made a sufficient showing of "actual malice.".
Opinion of the Court
Having granted certiorari the Supreme Court considered three questions:
the scope of the Speech or Debate Clause
the First Amendment claims 
the appropriateness of summary judgment, under constitutional and state law
The Supreme Court decided that statements made by Congressmen in press releases and newsletters are not protected by the Speech or Debate Clause. In the course of their analysis, they determined that, under the precedents of the court, a member of Congress may be held liable for republishing defamatory statements that were originally made during floor speeches. They also found that Hutchinson was not a public figure and that the "actual malice" standard established by New York Times Co. v. Sullivan for defamation claims brought by public figure did not apply to Hutchinson's case. Although Hutchinson did have access to the news media, the facts of the case do not indicate "that he was a public figure prior to the controversy" that resulted from the Golden Fleece award. The Court wrote: 
His access, such as it was, came after the alleged libel, and was limited to responding to the announcement of the award. Those charged with alleged defamation cannot, by their own conduct, create their own defense by making the claimant a public figure. Nor is the concern about public expenditures sufficient to make petitioner a public figure, petitioner at no time having assumed any role of public prominence in the broad question of such concern
They reversed the lower court decision and remanded back to the appeals court for further proceedings.
Subsequent proceedings
Following the Supreme Court ruling, the case returned to the district court on remand. Proxmire sought dismissal. "Proxmire and Hutchinson [each] won some legal points, but neither scored a knockout."Warren Brown, "'Fleece' giver Proxmire shorn of $10,000 in suit," Washington Post, March 25, 1980, https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/1980/03/25/fleece-giver-proxmire-shorn-of-10000-in-suit/6a4cc845-2fed-43bb-be52-366e60791270, accessed July 2, 2019 As Proxmire put it, "The district court concluded that neither I nor my legislative assistant defamed Dr. Hutchinson. The court of appeals recently held that Dr. Hutchinson is entitled to reconsideration of this ruling. Dr. Hutchinson and I, however, have agreed that further litigation is unnecessary,""Senator Proxmire settles lawsuit with Dr. Ronald Hutchinson," Congressional Record, March 24, 1980, pp. 6271-72, https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/GPO-CRECB-1980-pt5/pdf/GPO-CRECB-1980-pt5.pdf, accessed July 2, 2019 instead agreeing to a settlement. Proxmire agreed to pay Hutchinson $10,000 out of his own pocket; the Senate covered Proxmire's $124,351 in legal bills."Proxmire Libel Suit," in CQ Almanac 1980, 36th ed., p. 564. Washington: Congressional Quarterly, 1981. http://library.cqpress.com/cqalmanac/cqal80-1174982, accessed July 2, 2019 While stopping short of an apology or recantation, Proxmire took to the Senate floor on March 24, 1980, stating in part, "Some of my statements concerning Dr. Hutchinson's research may be subject to an interpretation different from the one I intended and I am happy to clarify them.”
Specifically, Proxmire made these clarifications:
I stated that all of the public funding was given to Dr. Hutchinson of Kalamazoo State Hospital. While Dr. Hutchinson directed the research, the Federal funding went to the State of Michigan for this research. Dr. Hutchinson received his salary as an employee of the State.
I stated that Dr. Hutchinson's projects were extremely similar and perhaps duplicative. I know of no evidence that Dr. Hutchinson ever received extra money for work that duplicated earlier work that had already been funded.
In my press release, I stated that Dr. Hutchinson made a fortune from his monkeys. While the amount of Federal expenditure was large and provided support for Dr. Hutchinson's research for a number of years, the fact is that Dr. Hutchinson did not [make] a personal fortune.Ibid.
Proxmire continued to issue the Golden Fleece Award until his retirement from the Senate in 1989.
References
External links
 </ref>
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States defamation case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
Category:1979 in United States case law
"""

From "Hutto v. Finney" ==> """
Hutto v. Finney, 437 U.S. 678 (1978), is a landmark Supreme Court case against the Arkansas Department of Correction. The litigation lasted almost a decade, from 1969 through 1978. It was the first successful lawsuit filed by an inmate against a correctional institution. The case also clarified the Arkansas prison system's unacceptable punitive measures. Hutto v. Finney was a certiorari to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit..
 Background 
In their 1998 book Policy Making and the Modern State: How the Courts Reformed America, Malcolm M. Feeley and Edward L. Rubin traced the history of prison reform in Arkansas to 1965 and the case of Talley v. StephensThe superintendent at Cummins was Dan D. Stephens. 247 F. Supp. 683 (1965), a pro se petition for a writ of habeas corpus filed in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Arkansas on behalf of prisoners at Cummins prison, located along the Arkansas River, 75 miles southeast of Little Rock, in Lincoln County, Arkansas. The presiding judge was Judge J. Smith Henley, who was familiar with "the long series of scandals involving the Arkansas prison system". Feeley and Rubin described Cummins prison farm in the mid-1960s, "on the eve of events that were to transform it and initiate the judicial prison reform process" where "trusty guards", "reliable" armed prisoners−hardened felons themselves−on foot and on horseback, supervised long lines of prisoners who were working in the vast fields "six days a week, ten hours a day". Prisoners also worked as house servants in the plantation homes of Cummins officers. Concerned about a "federal court takeover" similar to the federal response after then-Arkansas Governor Orval Faubus deployed the Arkansas National Guard to Little Rock Central High School on September 4, 1957 to prevent desegregation, Arkansas' prison officials improved some of the conditions for prisoners.
On February 18, 1970, Judge J. Smith Henley wrote that, "For the ordinary convict a sentence to the Arkansas Penitentiary... amounts to a banishment from civilized society to a dark and evil world completely alien to the free world, a world that is administered by criminals under unwritten rules and customs completely foreign to free world culture."
According to a 1971 article published in The University of Chicago Law Review, in Holt v. Sarver (1969) (), Judge J. Smith Henley ruled that the "entire Arkansas penitentiary system prison, as then operated, constituted cruel and unusual punishment" and that some aspects of the system were unconstitutional and ordered administrators to implement changes and report on progress towards implementation.
According to an October 1978 article in the American Bar Association Journal, the ten-year long litigation against the Arkansas Department of Correction in Supreme Court Hutto v. Finney  437 U.S. 678 (1978) began in 1969. SCOTUS determined that the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution prohibited the practice of using punitive isolation for more than 30 days.
Defense attorneys for the prisoners, Philip E. Kaplan and Jack Holt Jr., began their work in December 1969 with the first litigation challenging conditions in the Arkansas prison system.
This case involved a challenge to the practice of "punitive isolation" in Arkansas prisons which was often done for indiscriminate periods of time in crowded windowless cells. Kaplan and Holt Jr. also defended the prisoners in Holt v. Sarver.
In his 2007 paper published in the University of Pennsylvania Journal of Constitutional Law, professor Seth F. Kreimer traced the history of court decisions prior to Hutto v. Finney, in relation to what constitutes "cruel and unusual punishment" in prison systems, in terms of violating the Eighth Amendment. Jackson v. Bishop 404 F.2d 571 (8th Cir. 1968), in which then-judge Harry Blackmun abolished corporal punishment in Arkansas' penitentiary system, "constituted a leading precedent in the application of the recently-incorporated Eighth Amendment to prison practices."
 Procedural history 
Hutto v. Finney (1978) was the first successful lawsuit filed by an inmate against a correctional institution. The case also clarified the Arkansas prison system's unacceptable punitive measures.
During the trial, the prisoners' living conditions were scrutinized.
By June 23, 1978, as part of the Finney v. Hutto series, there "had been three published district court opinions, five additional unpublished interim memoranda and orders of the district court, and three opinions in the appeals court regarding the Arkansas Department of Correction and the administration of the Arkansas prison system. All of the findings of unconstitutionality of the Arkansas prison system as cruel and unusual punishment by the district court had either been affirmed or never challenged".
Amicus briefs
The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) and others filed amicus briefs "urging affirmance" in support of the Respondent. Over a dozen attorneys general and assistant attorneys general, from across the country filed briefs for the Petitioner.
Counsel of Record
Garner L. Taylor Jr., Assistant Attorney General of Arkansas, was the Chief Lawyer for the Petitioners with then-Arkansas Attorney General, Bill Clinton, and Robert Alston Newcomb also on the brief.
The Chief Lawyer for the Respondents was Philip E. Kaplan, with Jack Holt Jr. and seven other attorneys.
Decision
The Supreme Court handed down its decision in Hutto v. Finney on June 23, 1978. They called for a limit on the amount of time prisoners spent in solitary confinement. The Court fined the Department of Correction $20,000 because of the reluctance of prison officials to remedy the unconstitutional prison conditions in Arkansas.
Culture
In 2011, the Old State House Museum hosted an award-winning exhibition, curated by Brian Robertson, Tony Perrin, and Bobby Roberts, entitled, Badges, Bandits & Bars: Arkansas Law and Justice exploring Arkansas' "history of crime and punishment from pre-territorial days to the mid-1980s". "Behind Bars" dealt with "Arizona's seemingly endless quest to reform its prison system".
See also
Trusty system
Gates v. Collier
Pervear v. Massachusetts
 Weems v. United States, 217 U.S. 349 (1910).
 Estelle v. Gamble, 429 U.S. 97 (1976).
Nutraloaf
Notes
References
Further reading
External links
Category:History of Arkansas
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause case law
Category:Penology
Category:Imprisonment and detention in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1978 in United States case law
"""

From "Hyatt v. Vincennes National Bank" ==> """
Hyatt v. Vincennes Nat. Bank, 113 U.S. 408 (1885), was a case involving the sale of property conveyed to Hyatt for a term of 50 years for all the mineral coal upon and under a described tract of land, in Knox County, Indiana, with the exclusive right to enter on the land to dig for the coal, and remove it, and to occupy with constructions and buildings as needed to obtain the coal.  Hyatt would then have the right to remove all buildings or fixtures placed on the land, when the agreement expired, and to pay a fixed royalty for the coal mined. 
Background
Under a judgment against Hyatt, the Sheriff of Knox County executed a judgment to a creditor by selling at the Knox County courthouse door, as prescribed by statute for the sale of real estate, the interest of Hyatt in the term of years and certain buildings and articles belonging to him, which were a part of the structures and machinery for operating a coal mine on the land, and which were firmly attached to the land. In a suit in equity brought by the purchaser against another judgment creditor and the sheriff, to enjoin interference with the property so purchased, held that under the Revised Statutes of Indiana of 1852, 2 Rev.Stat., part 2, c. 1, Act of June 18, 1852, vol. 2 of Davis' edition of 1876, art. 24, sec. 520, p. 232, and art. 22, secs. 463, 466 and 407 (as amended February 2, 1855), pp. 215, 217, the sale of the property as real estate was valid.Hyatt v. Vincennes Nat. Bank, .
Decision
Justice Blatchford delivered the opinion of the court, saying:
The statute in force at the time, in regard to the sale of personal property on execution, 2 Rev.Stat. Ind. 1852, pt. 2, c. 1; Act June 18, 1852, art. 22, §§ 468, 469, vol. 2 Davis' ed. 1876, p. 218, provided as follows:
"SEC. 468. Previous notice of the time and place of the sale of any personal property on execution shall be given for ten days successively, by posting up written notices thereof in at least three of the most public places in the township where the sale is to be made."
"SEC. 469. Personal property shall not be sold unless the same shall be present and subject to the view of those attending the sale, and it shall be sold at public auction in such lots and parcels as shall be calculated to bring the highest price."
The Revised Statutes of Indiana of 1852, in force at the time, in regard to the sale of real estate on execution, 2 Rev.Stat. pt. 2, c. 1; Act of June 18, 1852, vol. 2 Davis' ed. 1876, provided as follows, Art. 24, § 526, p. 232:
"SEC. 526. The following real estate shall be liable to all judgments and attachments, and to be sold on execution against the debtor owning the same, or for whose use the same is holden, viz., first, all lands of the judgment debtor, whether, in possession, reversion, or remainder; second, lands fraudulently conveyed with intent to delay or defraud creditors; third, all rights of redeeming mortgaged lands; also, all lands held by virtue of any land office certificate, fourth, lands and any estate or interest therein holden by anyone in trust for or to the use of another; fifth, all chattels real of the judgment debtor."
Art. 22, § 463, p. 215:
"SEC. 463. The estate or interest of the judgment debtor in any real estate shall not be sold on execution until the rents and profits thereof, for a term not exceeding seven years, shall have been first offered for sale at public auction, but, if the same shall not sell for a sum sufficient to satisfy the execution, then the estate or interest of the judgment debtor shall be sold by virtue of the execution."
Art. 22, § 466, p. 217:
"SEC. 466. Real estate, taken by virtue of any execution, shall be sold at public auction at the door of the courthouse of the county in which the same is situated, and if the estate shall consist of several lots, tracts, and parcels, each shall be offered separately, and no more of any real estate shall be offered for sale than shall be necessary to satisfy the execution, unless the same is not susceptible of division."
Art. 22, § 467, as amended February 2, 1855, p. 217:
"SEC. 467. The time and place of making sale of real estate, on execution, shall be publicly advertised by the sheriff, for at least twenty days successively, next before the day of sale, by posting up written or printed notices thereof, in three public places in the township in which the real estate is situated, and a like advertisement at the door of the courthouse of the county, and also by advertising the same, for three weeks successively, in a newspaper printed nearest to the real estate, if any such newspaper be printed within the jurisdiction of the sheriff."
In the rules prescribed by the act, Art. 48, § 797, p. 313, vol. 2 of Davis' ed. 1876, for its construction, it is enacted that such rules shall be observed "when consistent with the context." Among those rules are these—that "the word "land" and the phrases "real estate" and "real property" include lands, tenements, and hereditaments" and that "the phrase personal property' includes goods, chattels, evidences of debt, and things in action." But no definition or construction is given of the phrase "chattels real." 
The Revised Statutes of Indiana of 843, Act of February 11, 1843, pt. 2, c. 29, Art. 1, § 1, provided as follows:
"Section 1. When, by any law of this state, real estate is authorized or directed to be sold by virtue of any execution, the same shall be construed to mean and include, 1. all the lands, tenements, and hereditaments of the judgment debtor, whether, in possession, reversion, or remainder; 2. lands, tenements, and hereditaments fraudulently conveyed with intent to defeat, delay, or defraud creditors; 3. all rights of redeeming mortgaged lands, tenements, or hereditaments, and also all lands held by virtue of any land office certificate; 4. lands, tenements, and hereditaments, and any estate or interest therein, holden by anyone in trust for or to the use of another, on execution issued on any judgment against the person to whose use, or for whose benefit, the same are holden."
The provisions of these four clauses were substantially retained in the Revision of 1852, and the provision as to "chattels real of the judgment debtor" was added as a 5th clause. Although, by the Revised Statutes of 1843, part 2, chap. 29; Art. 1, § 3, p. 454, judgments were made a lien on real estate and chattels real of the judgment debtor, which provision is contained in the Revision of 1852, part 2, c. 1, Art. 24, § 527, vol. 2 of Davis' edition of 1876, chattels real were not specifically made liable to sale on execution as real estate until 1852, when the 5th clause was added.
That clause must be interpreted according to the accepted meaning of the words "chattels real." Blackstone defines chattels real, according to Sir Edward Coke, 1 Inst. 118, to be such as concern or savor of the realty, as terms for years of land, and says they are called real chattels as being interests issuing out of or annexed to real estates, of which they have one quality, viz., immobility, which denominates them real, but want the other, viz., a sufficient legal indeterminate duration, which want it is that constitutes them chattels. 2 Bl.Com. 386. Chancellor Kent says, 2 Kent 342:
"Chattels real are interests annexed to or concerning the realty, as a lease for years of land, and the duration of the term of the lease is immaterial, provided it be fixed and determinate, and there be a reversion or remainder in fee in some other person. "
The motion made in the circuit court to modify the decree was based on the idea, that while the term for years might be a chattel real, the machinery, buildings, fixtures, and improvements placed on the land should have been sold as personal property. As the statute requires that real estate "shall" be sold at the door of the courthouse, the visible property could not be sold there in view of the persons attending the sale of the real estate, unless it was first severed from the land, and to have so treated it would, doubtless, have rendered not only it but the term for years worthless, as vendible articles. No such result could have been contemplated by the lawmakers, and none such can be allowed, if another reasonable and consistent construction is to be found.
It is not necessary or proper to consider any question involved in any right of redemption. Nor is it intended to decide anything as to the status of any of the property, aside from the lawfulness of the manner of its sale, under the statute in regard to such sale.
The decree of the circuit court was affirmed.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Federal court cases involving Indiana
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Knox County, Indiana
Category:Coal mining in the United States
Category:Coal mining law
"""

From "Hyde v. United States" ==> """
Hyde v. United States, 225 U.S. 347 (1912), is a United States Supreme Court criminal case interpreting attempt.Criminal Law - Cases and Materials, 7th ed. 2012, Wolters Kluwer Law & Business; John Kaplan (law professor), Robert Weisberg, Guyora Binder, ,  The court held that for an act to be a criminal attempt, it must be so near the result that the danger of its success must be very large. The court wrote, "There must be a dangerous proximity to success."
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:1912 in United States case law
"""

From "Hylton v. United States" ==> """
Hylton v. United States, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 171 (1796),. is an early United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a yearly tax on carriages"An Act laying duties upon Carriages for the conveyance of Persons," Ch. XLV, 1 Stat. 373 (June 5, 1794). did not violate the Article I, Section 2, Clause 3 and Article I, Section 9, Clause 4 requirements for the apportioning of direct taxes. The Court concluded that the carriage tax was not a direct tax, which would require apportionment among the states. The Court noted that a tax on land was an example of a direct tax that was contemplated by the Constitution.
The case is also significant for being the first case by the Supreme Court to rely on judicial review, later formally established by Marbury v. Madison (1803), to decide whether a statute of Congress was unconstitutional.
Oral argument
Alexander Hamilton argued before the Court on behalf of the government and claimed that the tax was a valid use of the power of Congress. Justice James Iredell wrote two days after the event: "Mr. Hamilton spoke in our Court, attended by the most crowded audience I ever saw there, both Houses of Congress being almost deserted on the occasion. Though he was in very ill health, he spoke with astonishing ability, and in a most pleasing manner, and was listened to with the profoundest attention. His speech lasted about three hours."
Decision
Seriatim opinions
The Justices at the time, rather than issuing a single opinion of the Court, instead issued seriatim opinions, with each writing separately and in turn reading a separate analysis. Justice Chase wrote, "As I do not think the tax on carriages is a direct tax…. I am for affirming the judgment of the Circuit Court." Justice Paterson wrote, "All taxes on expenses or consumption are indirect taxes. A tax on carriages is of this kind, and of course is not a direct tax.... I am, therefore, of opinion, that the judgment rendered in the Circuit Court of Virginia ought to be affirmed." Justice Iredell wrote, "I am clearly of opinion this is not a direct tax in the sense of the Constitution, and therefore that the judgment ought to be affirmed." Justice Wilson wrote, "I shall now, however, only add, that my sentiments, in favor of the constitutionality of the tax in question, have not been changed."
Other comments
Regarding the definition of duties, Justice Samuel Chase wrote, "The term duty, is the most comprehensive next to the generic term tax; and practically in Great Britain, (whence we take our general ideas of taxes, duties, imposts, excises, customs, etc.) embraces taxes on stamps, tolls for passage, etc. etc. and is not confined to taxes on importation only."Hylton, 3 U.S. at 175 (Chase, J.).
On the issue of judicial review, he wrote, "As I do not think the tax on carriages is a direct tax, it is unnecessary, at this time, for me to determine, whether this court, constitutionally possesses the power to declare an act of Congress void, on the ground of its being made contrary to, and in violation of, the Constitution; but if the court have such power, I am free to declare, that I will never exercise it, but in a very clear case."
Subsequent history
The Court's interpretation of federal taxes on personal property as "indirect taxes" lasted until the 1895 case of Pollock v. Farmers' Loan & Trust Co., affirmed on rehearing, .  Writing for the majority in Pollock, Chief Justice Fuller explained, "We are of opinion that taxes on personal property, or on the income of personal property, are likewise direct taxes."Pollock, 158 U.S. at 637. The Congressional Research Service lists the Hylton decision as having been overruled by the Pollock decision.Senate Document # 108-17, 108th Congress, Second Session, "Supreme Court Decisions Overruled by Subsequent Decision," in The Constitution of the United States of America: Analysis and Interpretation: Analysis of Cases Decided by the Supreme Court of the United States to June 28, 2002, at page 2388, Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, U.S. Gov't Printing Office (2004).
In 1913, the Sixteenth Amendment was adopted, overruling Pollock relating to taxes on income from real estate and personal property."The Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution overruled Pollock...." Graf v. Commissioner, 44 T.C.M. (CCH) 66, TC Memo. 1982-317, CCH December 39,080(M) (1982); "The 'Pollock' case, which was in effect reversed by the sixteenth amendment...." Boris I. Bittker, "Constitutional Limits on the Taxing Power of the Federal Government," Tax Lawyer, Vol. 41, No. 1, p. 3, American Bar Ass'n (Fall 1987); "In 1913 the Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution was adopted, overruling Pollock....." William D. Andrews, Basic Federal Income Taxation, p. 2, Little, Brown and Company (3d ed. 1985); "Pollock was itself overturned by the Sixteenth Amendment as to apportionment of income...." Calvin H. Johnson, "Purging Out Pollock: The Constitutionality of Federal Wealth or Sales Tax", Dec. 27, 2002, Tax Analysts; "On February 25, 1913, in the closing days of the Taft administration, Secretary of State Philander C. Knox, [ . . . ] certified that the [sixteenth] amendment had been properly ratified [ . . . ] With that, the Pollock decision was overturned....." Sheldon D. Pollack, "Origins of the Modern Income Tax, 1894-1913," 66 Tax Lawyer 295, 323-324, Winter 2013 (Amer. Bar Ass'n) (footnotes omitted; italics in original). The Amendment did not address taxes on personal property itself. Writing for the majority in the 1916 case of Brushaber v. Union Pacific Railroad Co., Chief Justice White explained that the "Amendment contains nothing repudiating or challenging the ruling in the Pollock Case that the word 'direct' had a broader significance, since it embraced also taxes levied directly on personal property because of its ownership, and therefore the Amendment at least impliedly makes such wider significance a part of the Constitution....".
In 1916, while presiding over Stanton v. Baltic Mining Co., the Supreme Court said: “… the meaning of the 16th Amendment as interpreted in the Brushaber Case,... by the previous ruling it was settled that the provisions of the 16th Amendment conferred no new power of taxation.”.
Use as precedent
In 2012, Chief Justice John Roberts cited Hylton v. United States as a precedent for deeming the mandate for individuals to buy health insurance contained in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (as amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010) to be constitutional as a tax.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 3  
 National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius  
 Ware v. Hylton
References
Further reading
External links
Category:1796 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Ellsworth Court
Category:Taxing and Spending Clause case law
Category:Vehicle taxes
Category:Carriages
"""

From "Iancu v. Brunetti" ==> """
Iancu v. Brunetti, No. 18–302, 588 U.S. ___ (2019), is a Supreme Court of the United States case related to the registration of trademarks under the Lanham Act. It decided 6–3 that the provisions of the Lanham Act prohibiting registration of trademarks of "immoral" or "scandalous" matter is unconstitutional by permitting the United States Patent & Trademark Office to engage in viewpoint discrimination, which violates the Free Speech Clause of the First Amendment.
Legal background
Section 2(a) of the Lanham Act, passed in 1946, holds that a trademark may be refused registration by the United States Patent and Trademark Office if the subject consists of "immoral, deceptive, or scandalous matter." Section 2(a) had also held that trademarks may be refused if they were deemed "disparaging" to individuals or groups, but the Supreme Court unanimously ruled in Matal v. Tam (2017) that the restriction on "disparaging" trademarks was unconstitutional under the First Amendment.
Case background
Erik Brunetti started a clothing line with the skateboarder Natas Kaupas in 1990 and used the name Fuct (stylized as "FUCT"). Fuct stood as an initialism for "Friends U Can't Trust," but Brunetti felt its phonetic closeness to the expletive "fucked" was humorous. Around 2010, Brunetti saw a number of knockoffs of his clothing line being sold on eBay and other Internet sites that inappropriately used the "Fuct" label. In 2011, Brunetti sought to register the trademark on Fuct to stop the knockoffs but was denied registration by the Office Examiner. It stated the word was phonetically similar to the expletive "fucked," which was well-established as a "scandalous" word under Section 2(a) of the Lanham Act. The decision was upheld by the Trademark Trial and Appeal Board (TTAB) in 2014.
Brunetti then appealed the decision to the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit with support of the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU). The ACLU argued that the Supreme Court had already ruled there was a higher level of scrutiny when the mere display of a potentially offensive word can be regulated from the 1971 case Cohen v. California. In 2017, the Federal Circuit agreed with the TTAB that "Fuct" would fall under the definition of a "scandalous" word for not only its similarity to the vulgar word but also the use of such words in the target youthful market for the clothing line. However, the Federal Circuit also ruled that the restriction against "scandalous" words of Section 2(a) of the Lanham Act was unconstitutional as it violated Brunetti's rights to free speech, particularly in light of the government failing to take any steps to regulate such speech across the Internet, and it reversed the TTAB's holdings. The Federal Circuit referred to its prior decision and its Supreme Court affirmation in Matal v. Tam related to "disparaging" trademarks in that outside of the area of trademarks, such language remains unrestricted as private speech but not government speech.
Supreme Court
The Patent and Trademark Office, under its director Andrei Iancu, filed for writ of certiorari to the Supreme Court, which agreed to hear the case, with oral arguments heard on April 15, 2019. Observers believed that the majority of the Justices would favor Brunetti's case and strike out trademark restrictions on "immoral" or "scandalous" material in part because past inconsistency in the Office's application of the law by having past approved trademarks on "FCUK" and "FUBAR".
The Justices raised the question of whether the implied word from "Fuct" would be considered scandalous to the clothing line's target audience of young adults, but also brought concerns that then the word would appear in advertising, which people outside of this demographic may consider inappropriate speech. The Court expressed caution that others may follow suit with trademarking near matches to other well-established vulgar words and that it should be up to Congress to define a more exacting line, which otherwise does not violate the First Amendment.
The Court issued its decision on June 24, 2019 that affirmed the decision of the Federal Circuit Court. The majority opinion was written by Justice Elena Kagan, joined by Justices Thomas, Ginsburg, Alito, Gorsuch, and Kavanaugh. Kagan wrote that as the Court had found in Matal v. Tam, the Office would need to engage in and has engaged in "viewpoint discrimination" to determine if trademark requests were on the vague definitions of "immoral" or "scandalous". With the Office as a government entity, that would be a violation of First Amendment rights and it was thus decided that the portion of the Lanham Act was unconstitutional.
Justice Samuel Alito wrote a concurring opinion, pointing out that the Court had to make this decision because of the vagueness of the "immoral" and "scandalous" terms in the law, but Congress is empowered to create law that would make a more narrow determination that removed the viewpoint discrimination concern for the Office.
Separate opinions, each dissenting in part with the majority, were written by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justices Stephen Breyer and Sonia Sotomayor. The three generally felt that interpreting the "immoral" aspect of the Lanham Act was difficult and thus agreed with the majority in striking that portion of the law. However all three felt the "scandalous" interpretation was not as vague as majority opinion suggested and that the Office would not be engaging in viewpoint discrimination through that action. The three, along with Alito in his concurring opinion, expressed concern that this decision will lead to a flood of new trademarks that would be considered crude and the creation of public spaces that would be repugnant to some people.
References
External links
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States trademark case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States obscenity case law
"""

From "IBP, Inc. v. Alvarez" ==> """
IBP, Inc. v. Alvarez, 546 U.S. 21 (2005), is a US labor law case of the a United States Supreme Court, interpreting the Federal Labor Standards Act (FLSA) of 1938, as amended by the Portal-to-Portal Act of 1947. 
Facts
Workers for the Iowa Beef Processors, Inc. (IBP, Inc.) (now Tyson Foods, Inc.) filed a class-action lawsuit for unpaid wage reparations. Workers were not being paid for time spent putting on and taking off protective gear, or walking to and from the changing area. IBP, Inc. argued that changing into protective gear did not constitute a “principal activity” of the job and thus was not compensable by law.
Judgment
The Supreme Court unanimously held that putting on protective gear and walking to and from changing areas are “integral and indispensable” to the job's “principal activities” and must be paid..
However, the court said that waiting time in a queue for protective gear was “two steps removed from principal activities” and is not compensable under FLSA regulations. Additionally, time spent waiting to put on protective gear before leaving at the end of the workday should be paid. Compensable work hours begin at the time the employer asks employees to arrive. If employees are forced to wait at the beginning of their shift because the employer does not yet have protective gear available, employees will be compensated for their waiting time.
Significance
This case overturned a previous ruling by the United States Court of Appeals, First Circuit, in Tum v Barber Foods, Inc in 2003.Tum v. Barber Foods, Inc., 331 F.3d 1 (1st Cir. 2003), affirmed on rehearing, 360 F.3d 274 (1st Cir. 2004). Forty-four employees filed a class-action suit against Barber Foods, Inc., identical to employees' complaints against IBP, Inc. Barber Foods successfully argued that time spent donning and doffing protective gear was minimal (2–4 minutes per day) and not included in productive work activity. Thus, Barber Foods was not required to compensate employees for time spent changing, waiting or walking between the changing room and the meatpacking floor.
 References 
 “IBP v Alavarez.”Duke Law. September 2010. <https://web.archive.org/web/20110306023016/http://www.law.duke.edu/publiclaw/supremecourtonline/certGrants/2005/ibpvalv>
 Mize, Katherine and Laurence Stuart. “Supreme Court Rules: Time Spent Preparing to Work Starts the Time Clock.” Labor and Employment Matters. November 2005. September 2010. < http://www.leggefarrow.com/docs/111505_Newsletter_Supreme_Court_Rules_Time_Spent_Preparing_to_Work_Starts_the_Time_Clock.pdf>
 Pautler, Paul, Terry Potter, Virginia Fry and Nicole Theophilus. “Don and Doff the Day’s Apparel: IBP, Inc. v Alvarez.” Martindale.com. 7 December 2005. September 2010. < http://www.martindale.com/labor-employment-law/article_Husch-Blackwell-Sanders-LLP_201596.htm>
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Tyson Foods
Category:United States labor case law
"""

From "Idaho v. Coeur d'Alene Tribe of Idaho" ==> """
Idaho v. Coeur d'Alene Tribe of Idaho, 521 U.S. 261 (1997), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the Coeur d'Alene Tribe could not maintain an action against the state of Idaho to press its claim to Lake Coeur d'Alene due to the state's Eleventh Amendment immunity from suit, notwithstanding the exception recognized in Ex parte Young. The case was an important precedent for aboriginal title in the United States and sovereign immunity in the United States.
After the district court's decision dismissing the suit, the federal government—in its guardian capacity—brought a substantially similar suit against Idaho; in 2001, in another 5–4 decision, the Court ruled for the federal government: Idaho v. United States (2001).United States v. Idaho, 533 U.S. 262 (2001).
 Notes 
 References 
Pamela D. Bucy, This Land is Our Land, or Coeur D'alene Tribe of Idaho v. State of Idaho, 19 Pub. Land & Resources 113 (1998).
David W. Gross, Examining Aboriginal Rights in Submerged Lands: Coeur D'Alene Tribe v. Idaho, 30 Idaho L. Rev. 139 (1993).
E. Richard Hart, The Continuing Saga of Indian Land Claims: The Coeur D'Alene Tribe's Claim to Lake Coeur D'Alene, 24 Am. Indian Culture & Res. J. 183 (2000).
Lydia Hawkins, An Old Doctrine Assaulted: Kennedy Attempts to Eviscerate Ex parte Young: Idaho v. Coeur d'Alene Tribe of Idaho, 117 S. Ct. 2028 (1997), 24 Ohio N.U. L. Rev. 369 (1998).
John P. LaVelle, Sanctioning a Tyranny: The Diminishment of Ex parte Young, Expansion of Hans Immunity, and Denial of Indian Rights in Coeur d'Alene Tribe, 31 Ariz. St. L.J. 786 (1999).
Randy L. Meyer, The Supreme Court's Analysis in Idaho v. Coeur D'Alene Tribe of Idaho – Is the Young Exception to the Eleventh Amendment Inapplicable to Indian Tribe Claims?, 30 U. Tol. L. Rev. 131 (1998).
James R. Rasband, Was Lake Coeur d'Alene Ever Really In Idaho?  Did Congress Reserve the Lake for the Coeur d'Alene Tribe Prior to Statehood?, 2001 U.S. Sup. Ct. Cas. 380.
Lauren E. Rosenblatt, Removing the Eleventh Amendment Barrier: Defending Indian Land Title against State Encroachment after Idaho v. Coeur d' Alene Tribe, 78 Tex. L. Rev. 719 (1999). 
Kathleen Smith, Land Rights: Quiet Title Action against the State: Idaho v. Coeur d'Alene Tribe of Idaho, No. 94-1474, 1997 Wl 338603 (U.S. June 23, 1997), 22 Am. Indian L. Rev. 249 (1997).
Michael R. Thorp  & Kristen Bamford Wynne, The Coeur d'Alene Case: Breathing New Life into Old Defenses, 17 Nat. Resources & Env't. 194 (2003).
Carlos Manuel Vazquez, Night and Day: Coeur d'Alene, Breard, and the Unraveling of the Prospective-Retrospective Distinction in Eleventh Amendment Doctrine, 87 Geo. L.J. 1 (1998).
Eric B. Wolff, Coeur d'Alene and Existential Categories for Sovereign Immunity Cases, 86 Cal. L. Rev. 879 (1998).
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Aboriginal title case law in the United States
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:Coeur d'Alene tribe
Category:Legal history of Idaho
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1997 in United States case law
Category:Native American history of Idaho
"""

From "Idaho v. United States" ==> """
Idaho v. United States, 533 U.S. 262 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the United States, not the state of Idaho, held title to lands submerged under Lake Coeur d'Alene and the St. Joe River, and that the land was held in trust for the Coeur d'Alene Tribe as part of its reservation, and in recognition (established in the 19th century) of the importance of traditional tribal uses of these areas for basic food and other needs.Idaho v. United States, 533 U.S. 262 (2001).
Background
History
The Coeur d'Alene Tribe is an Indian tribe in northern Idaho.  The Coeur d'Alene people once inhabited  in northern Idaho, Washington,Emmi Blades, Using the Legal System to Gain Control of Natural Resources on Tribal Lands: Lessons from the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes and the Coeur D'alene Tribe, 47  175, 180 (2010).,  27 (2006). and Montana,,  43 (2013). but today, the only land controlled by the tribal nation is the Coeur d'Alene Reservation in Benewah and Kootenai counties, Idaho.
In 1853, the territorial governor of Washington (which at the time included the panhandle of Idaho), Isaac Stevens, began to negotiate treaties with local tribes., 10  152 (1983).Christina Roberts, Idaho, in  284 (Daniel Scott Murphree ed. 2012).  By 1855, Stevens had treaties with most of the tribes in the area, but not including the Coeur d'Alene tribe.  At the same time, gold had been discovered near Fort Colvile and on the Yakima reservation.,  108-09 (1890).Michael F. Dove, Yakima-Rouge War, in  867 (Spencer C. Tucker ed. 2011).  By September 1853, Yakima Indians killed six prospectors in retaliation for attacks on the tribes by trespassing miners.Dove, at 867.  Stevens negotiated a fragile peace in 1856, but the U.S. Army was unable to keep prospectors out of Indian lands. By 1858 hostilities sparked again.Dove, at 868.
In May 1858, Colonel Steptoe led a group of about 130 dragoons north toward the Coeur d'Alene lands.  On May 16, 1858, he was met by a force of about 600 Indians who, after blocking Steptoe's path forward, began to fight the next day., at 178-83.  Steptoe withdrew after losses of men and upon running low in ammunition., at 178-83., at 44.
In 1867, President Andrew Johnson established a reservation for the Coeur d'Alene tribe at the request of the territorial governor,,  77 (2012).Angelique Eaglewoman, Tribal Hunting And Fishing Lifeways & Tribal-State Relations In Idaho 46  81, 84 (2009). but the tribe never accepted the reservation as Lake Coeur d'Alene and the main waterways, on which they depended for fishing, were not included.  The tribe depended on the rivers and the lake for fish, camas, reeds for baskets, and other needs.Blades, at 180.  In 1873, the Commissioner of Indian Affairs sent a commission to induce the Coeur d'Alenes to accept a reservation.  Following negotiations, a reservation of approximately  was established.Blades,  at 180.,  33 (1992). The reservation boundaries included the Hangman Valley, the Coeur d'Alene River, the St. Joe River, and all but a small portion of Lake Coeur d'Alene.Idaho, 210 F.3d at 1070.In re Coeur d'Alene Lake, 95 F. Supp. 2d at 1095.
The agreement was implemented with an executive order, which was intended to be temporary until Congress approved it. Cession of land was supposed to be compensated. Congress never approved the action, and in 1883 the United States conducted a survey of the reservation.  Congress in 1886 authorized the Secretary of the Interior to negotiate with the tribe, to gain their cession of all of their land outside the reservation.  In 1887 the tribe and the federal government came to an agreement under those terms, but Lake Coeur d'Alene and related waters were part of the reservation., 1  300 (1999).  In 1889, the tribe ceded the northern third of the reservation back to the federal government, including part of Lake Coeur d'Alene, for compensation.,  34.  Unusually, in contrast to practices at the time, the reservation boundary was drawn across the lake, rather than by the meandering high water line. The agreement stated that it was not binding until ratified by Congress.Idaho, 210 F.3d at 1071.In re Coeur d'Alene Lake, 95 F. Supp. 2d at 1096.
Prior to Senate ratification of both agreements, Idaho became a state.  Congress passed the Idaho Statehood Act that ratified the state constitution, which contained a section disclaiming the state's rights to unappropriated public lands and lands owned by tribes.  In 1891, Congress ratified the earlier agreements with the tribe.  In 1894, the tribe ceded a one-mile wide strip (the "Harrison cession") for use by the Washington and Idaho Railway to extend its tracks.Idaho, 533 U.S. at 268.,  at 378. In 1908 Congress gave Idaho an area now known as Heyburn State Park.Idaho, 210 F.3d at 1072.In re Coeur d'Alene Lake, 95 F. Supp. 2d at 1097.
This area of Idaho was known for mining and has long held the nickname of "Silver Valley." It has been the second-largest area of silver production in the country.Blades,  at 181.  From 1880-1980 the Coeur d'Alene basin was one of the most productive silver, lead, and zinc mining regions in the country.Blades,  at 182.  The waste from the mining, estimated at 72 million tons,Roberts, at 291., at 27. contaminated land and downstream waters, including the Coeur d'Alene River and Lake Coeur d'Alene.  As of 2012, the Silver Valley was the second largest Superfund cleanup site in the nation, as designated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
Prior court action
For years the Coeur d'Alene tried to work with the state on clean-up and management of Lake Coeur d'Alene, but was unable to reach agreement on gaining a larger role. In 1991, the tribe notified the state of its intent to sue for title of the lake and submerged lands beneath.Blades,  at 184.Sarah Krakoff, Undoing Indian Law One Case at a Time: Judicial Minimalism and Tribal Sovereignty 50  1177, 1246 (2001).,  35.  The case was brought in the U.S. District Court which initially held that a suit by the tribe against the state was barred by the Eleventh Amendment.Coeur d'Alene Tribe of Idaho v. Idaho, 798 F. Supp. 1443 (D. Idaho 1992).  The tribe appealed the decision to the Ninth Circuit Court.  The Ninth Circuit affirmed in part and reversed in part,Coeur d'Alene Tribe of Idaho v. Idaho, 42 F.3d 1244 (9th Cir. 1994). and the state appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
thumb|left|alt=view of lake|Lake Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
In the Supreme Court, Justice Anthony Kennedy delivered the majority opinion which held that the Eleventh Amendment barred direct lawsuits by tribes against a state..Krakoff,  at 1246.  The decision was 5-4, with Chief Justice William Rehnquist and Justices O'Connor, Scalia, and Thomas joining Kennedy.  Justice David Souter dissented, joined by Justices Stevens, Ginsburg, and Breyer.Krakoff,  at 1247.
The Coeur d'Alene tribe requested that the United States sue to quiet title to the submerged lands on the reservation.Blades,  at 184-185.  The tribe moved to intervene on the side of the United States in this suit, and the court granted the request.  The court found that the earlier executive agreements had clearly intended to reserve the lake and submerged land for the use of the tribe, and ruled for the United States.Idaho, 210 F.3d at 1072.In re Coeur d'Alene Lake, 95 F. Supp. 2d at 1116.
The state appealed the ruling to the Ninth Circuit Court.  The Ninth Circuit affirmed the decision of the trial court, pointing out additional information that supported the lower court's ruling that was not in the District Court's memorandum opinion.Idaho, 210 F.3d at 1081.
The state again appealed and the Supreme Court granted certiorari.
Supreme Court
thumb|alt=photograph of Justice David Souter|Justice David Souter, author of the majority opinion
Arguments
Steven W. Strack argued the cause for the state of Idaho.  David C. Frederick argued the cause for the United States, and Raymond C. Givens argued the cause for the Coeur d'Alene tribe.
Opinion of the court
Justice Souter delivered the opinion of the court.  This decision was the opposite of the earlier decision in Idaho v. Coeur d'Alene Tribe of Idaho, with Justice O'Connor now voting with the dissenters in that case.  Basically repeating his earlier dissent, Souter noted that the presumption was that the state had ownership of all submerged lands, unless it was clear that the United States had reserved those lands for itself.Blades,  at 183. Souter observed that the 1873 executive order implicitly included the submerged lands and also noted that the 1888 report to Congress indicated that all of the submerged lands were retained in trust for the tribe, and that Congress knew this when they passed the Idaho statehood act.Blades,  at 186.  He also noted the trial court's finding that the federal government had consistently treated with the tribe over the submerged lands, including compensating the tribe for the railroad right of way.  In this case it was clear that the United States had retained the rights of title to the submerged land, overcoming the presumption of state ownership.  The decision of the Court of Appeals was affirmed, that the United States held title to the land.Idaho, 533 U.S. at 281-288.,  at 28.
thumb|left|alt=photograph of Chief Justice William Rehnquist|Chief Justice William Rehnquist, author of the dissent
Dissent
Chief Justice Rehnquist dissented from the majority opinion.  He stated that once the Idaho statehood act was passed, the title to the submerged lands transferred to the state.  Any subsequent look at actions of the Congress, even in ratifying agreements that antedated statehood were of no consequence, and should not have been considered by the majority.  The only action that would have retained tribal and federal ownership of the submerged lands would have been an action prior to Idaho becoming a state.  He would have reversed and remanded the case.Idaho, 533 U.S. at 275-281.,  at 29.
Subsequent developments
A year after the decision, the tribe applied to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for authority to enforce water standards under the Clean Water Act.Blades,  at 189.  Negotiations with the state, the tribe and the EPA began but broke down when both the state and the EPA could not match the $5,000,000 budget provided by the tribe., at 29.  In 2005, the EPA granted this authority, allowing the tribe to regulate non-members as necessary for the health and welfare of the tribe.  The three parties came together again, and after arbitration, agreed on a management plan as part of a settlement in 2009.Blades,  at 199.
The tribe has proceeded to file lawsuits requiring cleanup against mining companies for contamination of waters and land. State and federal politicians have moved to limit the damages that could be collected against the companies.,  217 (1999).
References
Footnotes
Notes
External links
Category:Aboriginal title case law in the United States
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:Coeur d'Alene tribe
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2001 in Idaho
Category:Legal history of Idaho
Category:Native American history of Idaho
"""

From "Illinois Brick Co. v. Illinois" ==> """
Illinois Brick Co. v. Illinois, 431 U.S. 720 (1977), is a United States Supreme Court case that involved issues concerning statutory standing in antitrust law.
The decision established the rule that indirect purchasers of goods or services along a supply chain cannot seek damages for antitrust violations committed by the original manufacturer or service provider, but it permitted such claims by direct purchasers. Several courts recognize exceptions to the rule.
The decision has become known as the "Illinois Brick doctrine" and is applied to determine whether a plaintiff has standing to bring claims under various federal antitrust statutes.
Background
In the early 1970s, the United States government filed both civil and criminal charges against eleven concrete block manufacturers in Chicago, stating that they were engaging in price fixing. The defendants pleaded nolo contendere and entered into a settlement with the government. 
Spurred by this, the government of Illinois filed a new suit at the eleven concrete block manufacturers, asserting they were engaged in conspiratorial price-fixing for concrete blocks to be used for government construction, violating the Sherman Antitrust Act, and seeking treble damage. The defendants sought to have the case dismissed as the government were not direct purchasers of the blocks. In general, these companies sold blocks directly to masonry contractors for them to complete jobs given to them by general contractors during the construction of new buildings; the defendants stated that the government, in paying for the construction of these buildings, were not the ones purchasing the blocks themselves. The district court agreed, citing both the Supreme Court ruling of Hanover Shoe, Inc. v. United Shoe Machinery Corp.. that emphasized that direct purchasers of goods have the right to sue manufacturers for antitrust, and the Seventh Circuit's decision in Commonwealth Edison v. Allis-Chalmers Mfg. Co. that determined that the ultimate consumers of goods along a supply chain were "too remote and [in]consequential to provide legal standing to sue against the alleged antitrust violator".
The state appealed to the Seventh Circuit, which overturned the district court's ruling, arguing that the Sherman Act allows for any person that was harmed by antitrust behaviors to bring suit for triple damages. The block manufacturers petitioned to the Supreme Court for writ of certiorari, which was granted. Oral arguments were heard on March 23, 1977 with the decision given on June 9, 1977.
Judgment
In a 6—3 decision, the Supreme Court held that indirect victims of a price fixing conspiracy had no standing to sue for antitrust violations for raised prices. The majority opinion was written by Justice Byron White, joined by Justices Warren Burger, Potter Stewart, Lewis Powell, William Rehnquist, and John Paul Stevens. It held that if an indirect purchaser of overpriced goods could sue, then it would open the door to “multiple recovery”. An overcharge might be collected if more than one entity in the chain of distribution of the product could recover for the same violation. White was concerned with the Court making a significant overrule to their previous decision in Hanover Shoe.
Justice William Brennan wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justices Thurgood Marshall and Harry Blackmun. Brennan wrote that the majority's approach to stay consistent with Hanover Shoe undercut the strength of the language that Congress had written into the Sherman Act. Justice Blackmun also wrote a dissenting opinion, arguing the case's close timing with Hanover likely impacted the result; if Hanover had not been decided, the courts would have likely ruled in favor of the state government..
Exceptions
Two exceptions to the direct purchaser rule are potentially recognized in various jurisdictions: the control exception and the preexisting cost-plus contract exception.
The control exception, noted in footnote 16 of the Illinois Brick opinion, states that in some situations an indirect purchaser might maintain an antitrust action where the direct purchases is owned or controlled by its customer.  This exception is narrowly construed and limited to situations where the relationship involves a functional or economic unity between the direct and indirect purchaser such that there has been effectively one sale.See  
The preexisting cost-plus contract exception states that an indirect purchaser may have standing where the costs initially borne by the direct purchaser are passed on to the indirect purchaser pursuant to a preexisting cost-plus contract between the parties.  In such situation, the overcharging is not absorbed by the direct purchaser but is instead passed on to the indirect purchaser.See 
Significance
Many state antitrust laws reject the Illinois Brick doctrine. Thus, in California v. ARC America Corp.,. the Supreme Court rejected arguments that Illinois Brick preempted broader state antitrust laws such as that of California, which rejected the doctrine.
A 2007 Antitrust Modernization Commission Report proposed that Congress should abandon the Illinois Brick doctrine.The Antitrust Modernization Commission was created pursuant to the Antitrust Modernization Commission Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-273, §§ 11051-60, 116 Stat. 1856. The Commission submitted its Report and Recommendations to Congress and the President on April 2, 2007. The Report and other documents relating to its work are found at its website—http://govinfo.library.unt.edu/amc/index.html. The proposal, if adopted, would weaken the federal right of action for direct purchasers by reviving as a defense the fact that the direct purchaser had passed on the overcharge instead of absorbing it, while creating a federal right of action for indirect purchasers. Federal rights of action under the proposal would not be exclusive, but state law claims would be subject to expanded federal jurisdiction to allow consolidation of all claims from a price fix in a single court for both discovery and trial. All recoveries in the consolidated actions would be limited to the initial overcharge, trebled.
The applicability of Illinois Brick towards digital marketplaces was the subject of the Supreme Court case, Apple Inc. v. Pepper heard in the 2018-2019 which relates to whether consumers of third-party mobile applications through a marketplace can bring antitrust actions against the owner of the marketplace. The Court determined that consumers that purchased apps through Apple's iOS app store were direct purchasers and had standing to sue Apple for antitrust actions, despite Apple's insistence that consumers were buying apps from developers.
See also
 US antitrust law
References
Further reading
 American Bar Association, Indirect Purchaser Litigation Handbook, —Bar association book on legal issues raised by doctrine and how practitioners may address them
External links
  Class interpleader: the Antitrust Modernization Commission's recommendation to overrule Illinois Brick — September 2008 Article from Antitrust Bulletin Symposium: The Antitrust Modernization Commission. Article asserts that proposal is flawed.
 Entrepreneur.com, Illinois Walls: how barring indirect purchaser suits facilitates collusion—Article asserts that Illinois Brick rule facilitates collusion by allowing an upstream cartel to shield itself from private damage claims by sharing cartel profits with its direct purchasers.
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States standing case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Brick manufacturers
Category:Legal doctrines and principles
"""

From "Illinois Central Railroad Co. v. Illinois" ==> """
The Supreme Court decision in Illinois Central Railroad v. Illinois, 146 U.S. 387 (1892), reaffirmed that each state in its sovereign capacity holds title to all submerged lands within its borders and holds these lands in public trust..  This is a foundational case for the public trust doctrine.  The Supreme Court held a four to three split decision that the State of Illinois did not possess the authority to grant fee title to submerged lands where doing so would preclude exercise of the public right to commercial navigation and fishing in navigable waters.
Background
In the mid-19th century, Chicago was growing rapidly and was becoming increasingly interested in creating an outer harbor at the junction of Lake Michigan and the Chicago River because local currents often resulted in either the formation of sandbars or areas of erosion, increasing congestion and complicating navigation.  Then, in 1851, the Illinois Central Railroad Company made an offer to the City of Chicago that in exchange for allowing tracks to be laid along the lake front, the railroad company would pay for and build a breakwater to protect the harbor.Chase, C.S. 2010. The Illinois Central Public Trust Doctrine and Federal Common Law: An Unconventional View (16 Hastings W.-Nw. J. Envy’l L. & Pol’y 113 (2010)  Illinois then officially granted  of shoreline along Lake Michigan to create a north–south railroad under the state charter titled "An Act to Incorporate the Illinois Central Rail Road Company".United States of America (1852). Documents Relating to the Organization of the Illinois Central Rail-Road Company 2nd ed. New York: GEO. Scott Roe.  This charter gave Illinois Central the authority to "enter upon and take possession of, and use all and singular any lands, streams and materials of every kind."Kearney, Joseph D and Thomas W. Merrill (2004). "The Origins of the American Public Trust Doctrine: What Really Happened in Illinois Central". Chicago Law Review 71: 799-931.  To further confirm their rights to this area, the railroad lobbied the state, and in 1869, the State of Illinois passed the Lake Front Act, granting Illinois Central "appropriation, occupancy, use and control" of a large portion of the harbor.  The legislature's goal in passing the act was to bring a new train depot, an outer harbor and better parks to the residents of Chicago.  The portion of land stretched from present-day West Randolph Street south to Twelfth Street, and from South Michigan Avenue east into Lake Michigan.  However, due to political controversy and poor public opinion of the railroad company, the legislature repealed the Lake Front Act in 1873.  
Both before and after the repeal, Illinois Central continued to construct tracks, piers and other facilities along the lake front.  This construction also included filling in several hundred feet into Lake Michigan to provide land for these new facilities.
On March 1, 1883, the Illinois Attorney General filed suit against Illinois Central in order to stop construction on the land known as Lake Park.
Procedural history
In 1883, Illinois filed suit in state court against the Illinois Central Railroad Company, asking the court to determine who possessed title to submerged lands under Lake Michigan adjacent to the Chicago shoreline. Illinois also sought a court order to remove structures the railroad company had constructed over the lakebed, as well as an injunction against Illinois Central continuing this construction. Upon motion, the case was removed to the federal Circuit Court for the Northern District of Illinois. Justice Harlan, then a circuit-court judge, ruled that the state held title to the submerged lands, and therefore had the right to revoke the license granted to Illinois Central in the Act, which Illinois Central had contested.  This decision also established that the City of Chicago held title to the land of Lake Park (present day Millennium Park). Illinois Central appealed to the Supreme Court. Chief Justice Melville Fuller and Associate Justice Samuel Blatchford recused themselves: Fuller had previously represented Illinois Central as a private attorney, while Blatchford held stock in the company.
Parties
The petitioners were Illinois Central Railroad Company, a corporation created by act of the Illinois State legislature and the city of Chicago, which was added as a party at trial because of its interest in the case. The respondent was the state of Illinois.
Issues
Whether the state of Illinois possessed the authority to grant title to its lands submerged by navigable waters.
Whether Illinois Central Railroad Company acquired riparian rights to the lake bed immediately adjacent to the lakefront property to which it possessed title.
Arguments
Illinois Central’s arguments
Illinois Central Railroad asserted three arguments in support of their claim on a portion of the lakebed under Lake Michigan. First, Illinois Central argued it had been granted by the state and by city ordinance a  wide corridor into the lake to construct a raised railway track, pier and warehouses. Second, Illinois Central argued that they had acquired riparian rights by virtue of their ownership of lands surrounding the lake. Third, the railroad company argued they had received title to a bounded parcel of submerged lakebed from the State of Illinois in 1869.
State of Illinois’s argument
In seeking to enjoin the railroad, the state claimed "title to the bed of Lake Michigan, and exclusive right to develop and improve the harbor of Chicago by the construction of docks, wharves, piers, and other improvements…."
Decision
Majority Opinion of the Court
thumb|alt=The Fuller Court in 1892.|The Fuller Court in 1892.
Writing for the majority, Justice Field affirmed the lower court's holding that the state held title to the lakebed. Field found that Illinois lacked the authority to grant title to submerged lands held in the public trust with two exceptions – for grants not impairing the public interest and grants that actually improved the public trust.  But neither exception was found to apply in this case and therefore the railroad did not possess title.
Justice Field expressed the doctrine of public trust as follows: 
"It is the settled law of this country that the ownership of and dominion and sovereignty over lands covered by tide waters, within the limits of the several states, belong to the respective states within which they are found, with the consequent right to use or dispose of any portion thereof, when that can be done without substantial impairment of the interest of the public in the waters, and subject always to the paramount right of congress to control their navigation so far as may be necessary for the regulation of commerce with foreign nations and among the states"
Justice Field determined that the public trust doctrine applies to the Great Lakes, despite the fact that they are not subject to the ebb and flow of the tides. Initially, the United States adopted English Common law which limited the definition of navigable waters to those that were subject to the ebb and flow of the tides. In the United States the tidal requirement was removed because many rivers can be navigated for great distances by large commercial vessels. Great Lakes, while not subject to the tides, are the conduit of a great deal of transnational and interstate commerce, and it was this value the common law sought to protect in the public trust doctrine. The public trust doctrine limits private property rights to lands submerged by navigable waters. The Great Lakes are owned in common to be preserved for the common good, and no private encroachment is allowed.
Justice Field argued that the 1869 grant Illinois made to Illinois Central Railroad was merely a grant of the right to lay track, not a transfer of title to a portion of the lakebed. The grant was expressly limited to this purpose and it particularly limited the transfer of a right of way across the lake so as not to interrupt the navigation of streams.
Justice Field agreed with Illinois Central that title to land bordering navigable waters carries with it the right to access these waters and to develop a pier for personal or public use. However, this right extends only to the "navigable point" of the water. Since no evidence had been presented indicating that the railroad's pier and docks extended that far, Justice Field remanded this particular issue back to the lower court.
The 1869 act establishing the Illinois Central Railroad Company, granted the company title to a section of the submerged lakebed of Lake Michigan. The state legislature later repealed this piece of legislation. Justice Field posed the question whether the legislature was authorized to transfer title to the submerged lake bed in the first place. It is up to courts to determine on a case-by-case basis whether a state legislature's transfer of rights to submerged lands  sufficiently protects the public interest.
In this case, Illinois Central was granted unrestricted rights to an enormous,  section of submerged land, which occupied the entire aquatic area bordering the Chicago harbor. Justice Field found the state can never permanently transfer authority over these submerged lands, but only grant revocable permissions to them. Therefore, the Illinois state legislature's original grant had no effect on the state of Illinois's ultimate authority over the submerged land.
Justice Shiras' Dissenting Opinion
Justice Shiras agreed that ownership of state lands extends to those lands submerged under its navigable waters; however, Shiras argued that the grant of the submerged lands by the state legislature functioned like any land transfer contract and effectively transferred title to Illinois Central. Shiras pointed out that the act granting the submerged lands expressly denied Illinois Central the rights to resell or transfer the lands or to impair the public right to navigation. Shiras makes it clear that this dissenting opinion does not contradict the point that states cannot transfer control of the public's rights to navigable waters, however, these rights are only violated once Illinois Central acts to obstruct them. To otherwise empower the legislature to revoke legislative acts granting property rights would offend "the right of the citizens to the free enjoyment of their property legally acquired."
Importance
Though Illinois Central is frequently cited as the source for American public trust law, it was several decades before, in Martin v. Waddell’s Lessee, that the Supreme Court ratified the public trust doctrine.  Still, Illinois Central has been referred to as "the Lodestar in American Public Trust Law".  As of 2010, the courts of 35 states had cited Illinois Central in their articulation of the public trust doctrine.
See also
Public trust doctrine
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 146
Notes
External links
Category:1890s in the environment
Category:1892 in United States case law
Category:United States property case law
Category:Illinois Central Railroad
Category:History of Chicago
Category:Legal history of Illinois
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Railway litigation in 1892
Category:Transportation in Chicago
"""

From "Illinois Tool Works Inc. v. Independent Ink, Inc." ==> """
Illinois Tool Works Inc. v. Independent Ink, Inc., 547 U.S. 28 (2006), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States involving the application of U.S. antitrust law to "tying" arrangements of patented products..  The Court ruled unanimouslyThe decision was unanimous as to the eight justices participating; Justice Samuel Alito joined the Court after it heard argument in this case, and so did not participate. that there is not a presumption of market power under the Sherman Antitrust Act when the sale of a patented product is conditioned on the sale of a second product in a tying arrangement.  A plaintiff alleging an antitrust violation must instead establish the defendant's market power in the patented product through evidence.
 Background 
Independent Ink was a distributor of printer ink and related products. Trident manufactured ink-related products used in printers used to print bar codes on cardboard. Trident's license, when licensing its printing apparatus to those printers' manufacturers, required them to use Trident ink. However, it did not require end users of the bar-code printers to refill the printers with Trident ink cartridges. Trident did not, though, warranty its printer for use with others' ink cartridges.
In the course of a patent-infringement suit, Independent Ink alleged that Trident's license constituted a tying arrangement in violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act. (Illinois Tool Works then bought Trident, so was added as a defendant.) Its lawsuit was thrown out of the United States District Court for the Central District of California on summary judgment, June 3, 2002.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit reversed summary judgment for the most part, and the Supreme Court granted certiorari..
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court vacated the Federal Circuit's decision.
 Footnotes 
 Further reading 
 External links 
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:Computer printing
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Illinois v. Allen" ==> """
Illinois v. Allen, , was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States regarding the removal of an unruly criminal defendant during his trial. In its decision, the court ruled that a trial judge may remove a stubbornly defiant defendant from the courtroom, following a warning from the judge that he will be removed if his disruptive behavior continues. Additionally, the court outlined other remedies available to judges faced with such conduct.
Background
On August 12, 1965, William Allen entered a bar in Illinois. After ordering a drink, he robbed a bartender of $200 (equivalent to $ in  dollars) while Allen held him at gunpoint. Allen would later be convicted by an Illinois jury of armed robbery and was sentenced to serve 10 to 30 years in state prison.
During the trial, he was removed from the courtroom due to his repeated use of profane language directed at the trial judge. During the trial, the judge had warned Allen that continued interruptions would result in his removal from the courtroom. Allen's appointed counsel represented him while he was not allowed in the courtroom, which was primarily during the presentation of the state's case. Later, having assured the judge that he would reform his conduct, Allen was allowed to return to the courtroom while his attorneys presented the defense's case.
Following the affirmation of the Supreme Court of Illinois, Allen filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus in federal court, saying that his rights afforded to him by the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments to confront adverse witnesses had been denied. The District Court declined to issue the writ. Later, the Court of Appeals reversed, saying that the right to be present at one's own trial is so absolute that no defendant, regardless of his conduct, can be held to have forfeited it so long as he insisted on it, as Allen had done.
Opinion of the Court
The court held that a defendant may lose his right to be present at his own trial if, following warnings from the judge that he will be removed if his disruptive behavior persists, he nonetheless insists on conducting himself in a manner inconsistent with the continuance of the trial. The defendant may, however, reclaim his right to be present as soon as he pledges to conduct himself in a manner befitting a criminal courtroom.
Additionally, the court affirms that judges may use their own discretion when confronted with a stubbornly defiant defendant, saying that there are "at least three" constitutionally permissible remedies for a judge in dealing with such a defendant. The judge may:
 Bind and gag the defendant, thus keeping him present in the courtroom.
 Cite the defendant for criminal or civil contempt.
 Remove him from the courtroom until he pledges to reform his conduct.
The opinion affirmed the discretion exercised by the trial judge in the original case, and reversed the lower circuit court's opinion.
 Notable invocations 
During the Waukesha Christmas parade attack trial, Judge Jennifer Dorow repeatedly cited the Supreme Court's decision in Allen as her authority to remove the defendant from her courtroom, after she had warned him that this could happen. During this trial, the defendant was often disruptive, and at times belligerent, toward the judge and prosecution.
References
External Links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Confrontation Clause case law
Category:1970 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Illinois v. Caballes" ==> """
Illinois v. Caballes, 543 U.S. 405 (2005), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States in which the Court held that the use of a drug-sniffing police dog during a routine traffic stop does not violate the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, even if the initial infraction is unrelated to drug offenses.
In the case, Illinois native Roy Caballes was stopped by a State Police officer for speeding on an interstate highway. As the officer was writing the ticket, another office arrived on the scene, who walked a drug-sniffing police dog around Caballes's car. The dog alerted to the presence of narcotics at the trunk of the car, which the police opened and found marijuana. Caballes was charged with narcotics trafficking, but tried to suppress the evidence found by the police dog, arguing that the use of the dog violated the Fourth Amendment's prohibition of unreasonable search and seizure because the officers did not have a warrant to search his car.
Justice John Paul Stevens wrote for the six-justice majority that it was not an overstep of police power to use a police dog during a routine traffic stop, because a well trained police dog will only alert to the presence of illegal substances that no citizen has the right to possess.. Chief Justice William Rehnquist took no part in the consideration of this case, and did not author an opinion. The ruling relied on a previous decision, United States v. Place (1983), in which the Court upheld the constitutionality of police dog searches, and affirmed that police do not have to have reasonable suspicion to bring a canine near a person's belongings in a public place. In response to Caballes, the Court clarified in Rodriguez v. United States (2015) that an officer may not unreasonably prolong the duration of a traffic stop to conduct a dog sniff.Rodriguez v. United States, 
Background
On November 12, 1998, Illinois state trooper Daniel Gillette stopped Roy Caballes for speeding on Interstate 80, a freeway that passed through LaSalle County. Gillette reported this stop to his precinct, asking the dispatcher to confirm Caballes's license plate and prior criminal record. Another trooper, Craig Graham of the State Drug Interdiction Team, overheard these transmissions and informed the dispatcher he would meet up with Gillette to conduct a canine sniff on Caballes's car, though Gillette did not ask for Graham's assistance. The dispatcher informed Gillette that Caballes had two prior convictions for distributing marijuana. Gillette noticed inconsistencies in Caballes's story, but had no reason to continue the investigation. As Gillette wrote a warning ticket for speeding, Graham arrived on the scene. Graham walked his drug-sniffing dog around Caballes's car, where the dog alerted at the trunk to the presence of illegal narcotics. Upon searching the trunk, officers found marijuana with a street value of $256,000.Illinois v. Caballes, 802 N.E.2d at 202, 203 (Ill. 2004). The whole episode lasted less than 10 minutes.
After unsuccessfully moving to suppress the marijuana evidence before trial, Caballes was convicted of narcotics trafficking and sentenced to 12 years in prison and a $256,136 fine. The trial judge denied Caballes' motion to suppress, reasoning that the officers had not unnecessarily prolonged the traffic stop, and the indication by the dog, of narcotics in the vehicle, gave them probable cause to search the trunk of Caballes' car. The Appellate Court of Illinois affirmed, but the Illinois Supreme Court reversed, holding that because the dog sniff was performed without reference to specific and articulable facts, it unjustifiably enlarged the scope of the stop into a drug investigation.People v. Caballes, 207 Ill. 2d 504, 802 N.E.2d 202, 280 Ill. Dec. 277 (2003). The Supreme Court granted certiorari to the case in order to answer the question of whether the Fourth Amendment requires reasonable suspicion to justify using a drug-sniffing dog during a routine and otherwise legitimate traffic stop.
Opinion of the Court
The Fourth Amendment guards against "unreasonable searches and seizures." Under the Court's Fourth Amendment jurisprudence, a traffic stop is a "seizure," and requires reasonable suspicion that the driver of the vehicle has violated a traffic law. In this case, it was undisputed that Caballes was speeding. Thus, the traffic stop by itself was lawful from the start.
However, a seizure that is justified at its inception may become unreasonable if it is unreasonably prolonged in duration. Thus, if the sole reason for the stop is to issue a warning to the motorist, the stop becomes unreasonable if it is prolonged beyond the time reasonably necessary to issue the warning. And if a drug-sniffing dog is used during this unreasonable extension, the use of the dog violates the Fourth Amendment. The Illinois Supreme Court reasoned that using the dog changed the character of the encounter from a routine traffic stop to a drug investigation, and that transformation had to be supported by reasonable suspicion. The Supreme Court instead reasoned that the dog sniff does not change the character of an encounter unless the dog sniff invaded any of the citizen's other reasonable expectations of privacy. The Court concluded it did not.
Official conduct that does not invade a reasonable expectation of privacy is not a "search" under the Fourth Amendment. The possession of contraband is not anything in which a person can have a legitimate expectation of privacy, since it is by definition illegal to possess contraband. In United States v. Place (1983), the Court had held that a dog sniff is sui generis because it discloses only the presence or absence of narcotics.. By contrast, the information disclosed by the heat sensing device in Kyllo v. United States (2001) disclosed the "intimate details in a home, such as at what hour each night the lady of the house takes her daily sauna and bath.". People have a reasonable expectation that such information will be kept private, whereas they have no such expectation in the fact they possessed contraband. Thus, the use of a drug-sniffing dog does not intrude upon any reasonable expectation of privacy, and it was not unreasonable for the Illinois police to use the dog during the time it took them to issue a warning to Caballes.
Caballes argued that it was wrong to assume that the alerts of drug-sniffing dogs reveal only information regarding the presence or absence of narcotics.  But the Court rejected this argument because there was no information before the state courts to support it, and because he did not point to anything else in which a person has a reasonable expectation of privacy that a drug detection dog's alert might reveal.
Dissenting opinions
Justice Souter's dissent
Justice Souter believed that the time had come to revisit the essential premise underpinning both the Court's opinion in United States v. Place and the majority's opinion in Caballes—that the sniff of a dog is infallible, and can reveal either the presence or absence of narcotics and nothing else. "The infallible dog, however, is a creature of legal fiction....  Their supposed infallibility is belied by judicial opinions describing well-trained animals sniffing and alerting with less than perfect accuracy, whether owing to errors by their handlers, the limitations of the dogs themselves, or even the pervasive contamination of currency by cocaine." Souter pointed to a study relied on by the State of Illinois in its reply brief, indicating that "dogs in artificial testing situations return false positives anywhere from 12.5% to 60% of the time, depending on the length of the search." If a dog is not infallible, then there is no logical basis for the sui generis rule underlying Place and Caballes, and every reason to investigate "the actual function that dog sniffs perform." Because the dogs are in the hands of government agents determined to discover evidence of crime, the dog sniff is the "first step in a process that may disclose intimate details without revealing contraband," and hence is a "search" within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment. In the context of a traffic stop, an additional search unrelated to the initial purpose of the stop requires reasonable suspicion. Since in this case the police did not have such suspicion, Justice Souter would have affirmed the decision of the Illinois Supreme Court.
Justice Ginsburg's dissent
Justice Ginsburg, joined by Justice Souter, focused on the long-standing connection in the Court's Fourth Amendment jurisprudence between a traffic stop and the stop-and-frisk authorized in Terry v. Ohio (1968). The scope of a Terry stop is not circumscribed merely by duration; the manner in which the stop is carried out must also be carefully controlled. Ginsburg would have applied this principle to the traffic stop in this case, and required reasonable suspicion for the police to transform the routine traffic stop into a more extensive search for drugs. The fact that a dog sniff is sui generis only matters if the sole determinant of what is "reasonable" is the length of time a traffic stop lasts. If the Court had recognized that traffic stops must be limited in what police are searching for as well as how long they take to conduct the search, the sui generis nature of dog sniffs would not have been dispositive of the case. "Under today's decision, every traffic stop could become an occasion to call in the dogs, to the distress and embarrassment of the law-abiding population....  Today's decision clears the way for suspicionless, dog-accompanied drug sweeps of parked cars along sidewalks and in parking lots....  Motorists [would not] have constitutional grounds for complaint should police with dogs, stationed at long traffic lights, circle cars waiting for the red signal to turn green."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 543
 United States v. Place, 
 Florida v. Harris, 
 Florida v. Jardines, 
 Rodriguez v. United States, 
References
Further reading
External links
  Transcript of the oral argument
  Opening brief of the State of Illinois as Petitioner
  Brief of Caballes as Respondent
  Reply brief of the State of Illinois as Petitioner
  Amicus brief of the ACLU
  Amicus brief of the Solicitor General
  Case note in the Harvard Law Review, 119 Harv. L. Rev. 179 (2005)
 "Bark if you love Justice Souter!" — Dahlia Lithwick in Slate
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:Search and seizure case law
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:Detection dogs
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Cannabis in Illinois
Category:Law enforcement in Illinois
Category:LaSalle County, Illinois
"""

From "Illinois v. Gates" ==> """
Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213 (1983), is a Fourth Amendment case.. Gates overruled Aguilar v. Texas. and Spinelli v. United States,. thereby replacing the Aguilar–Spinelli test for probable cause with the "totality of the circumstances" test.
Facts and procedural history
In May 1978, the Bloomingdale, Illinois Police Department received an anonymous letter. The letter stated:
Detective Mader decided to follow up on the tip, obtaining further information that an "L. Gates" had purchased an airline ticket leaving from Chicago's O'Hare Airport and arriving in West Palm Beach, Florida. Working with the DEA, Mader was able to ascertain that Gates had boarded the plane and arrived in West Palm Beach. The DEA surveillance team determined that Gates had met a woman at a Holiday Inn room registered to Susan Gates and that the couple had gotten into a car together driving toward the Chicago area. They estimated the pair due back in Bloomingdale within 22 to 24 hours.
Mader signed an affidavit laying down the events as they had unfolded, in addition to the anonymous letter. A judge of the Circuit Court of DuPage County issued a warrant. Upon the Gates' arrival home, the Bloomingdale Police searched the car, recovering over 350 lb. of marijuana. A search of the Gates' residence led to the discovery of additional marijuana and weapons.
The Illinois Circuit Court decided that the search was unlawful based on the test established in the Supreme Court ruling in Spinelli v. United States. In essence, the affidavit did not provide enough evidence to establish probable cause, which led to the exclusion of evidence obtained on the basis of that warrant. This ruling was upheld by both the Illinois Appellate Courts and the Supreme Court of Illinois.
The case was brought to the United States Supreme Court when the state and several amici curiae, friends of the court, asked them to review the decision. The main question that was presented was, "May a judge issue a search warrant on basis of partially corroborated anonymous informant's tip?"
Holding
The Supreme Court overturned the ruling of the Illinois courts. Justice William Rehnquist delivered the decision in favor of the State of Illinois. Justice Rehnquist stated:
This rejected the Aguilar–Spinelli test and put in place a totality-of-the-circumstances standard. This was put into place because the court recognized that there was more evidence that the Gateses were involved in drug trafficking than just the letter standing alone. The court agreed that if the letter had just stood alone it would not be probable cause to get a warrant. The court also recognized that under the Aguilar–Spinelli two-pronged test, it would be very hard for the "reliability" prong to ever be satisfied from an anonymous tip so it therefore should be abandoned.
This case is a landmark case in the evolution of probable cause and search warrants. In this case, the Supreme Court abandons the Aguilar–Spinelli test.
 Dissent
In dissent, Justice Brennan, joined by Justice Marshall, stated that "Only one of the cases cited by the Court in support of its 'totality of the circumstances' approach, Jaben v. United States, 381 U.S. 214 (1965), was decided subsequent to Aguilar. It is by no means inconsistent with Aguilar."Gates, 462 U.S. at 286 (Brennan, J., dissenting). The dissent argued that the two pronged test of the honesty of the informant and the basis of knowledge was more protective of a citizen's rights, leaving less chance of a warrant being issued based upon the claims of a dishonest or unreliable "informant." The dissenters believed that the Aguilar–Spinelli test was effective and should not have been replaced; that tests and laws that protect the rights of accused are too easily disregarded because the court and law enforcers are eager to prosecute suspects; and that the rights of the suspects also have to be protected. The dissenters stated,"By replacing Aguilar and Spinelli with a test that provides no assurance that magistrates, rather than the police, or informants, will make determinations of probable cause; imposes no structure on magistrates' probable-cause inquiries; and invites the possibility that intrusions may be justified on less than reliable information from an honest or credible person, today's decision threatens to obliterate one of the most fundamental distinctions between our form of government, where officers are under the law, and the police-state, where they are the law."  Justice Brennan and Justice Marshall also argued that the court did not show any persuasive reasoning for rejecting Aguilar and Spinelli, saying that the Court "reflects impatience with what it perceives to be overly technical rules governing searches and seizures under the Fourth Amendment." The dissenters supported their opinion by stating that, "Words such as practical, nontechnical, and common sense, as used in the Court's opinion, are but code words for an overly permissive attitude towards police practices in derogation of the rights secured by the Fourth Amendment." In other words, taking away suspects' rights is not a correct way to enforce drug laws, even though drug trafficking is reprehensible. The dissenters would have affirmed the Illinois court and excluded the evidence.
Concurring
Justice White concurred in the judgment. He wrote that in this case, the search and seizure was consistent with the Fourth Amendment. He stated that it was reasonable for the search of the Gateses' house. He stated that the exclusion of the evidence would have set the criminals free and it would not have served "any constitutional interest in securing compliance with the important requirements of the Fourth Amendment." Justice White does not believe that the exclusionary rule should be used in any case where law enforcement officials reasonably believe their actions are consistent with the Fourth Amendment.
Additional points
In Illinois v. Gates, probable cause was achieved for the warrant under the new "totality-of-the-circumstances" standard because the investigation by DEA and Detective Mader would have, on its own, been probable cause for a search warrant. The Gateses' actions were suspicious because Florida is a known source of illegal drugs. Lance Gates' stay at a motel for one night and immediate return to Chicago suggests that he was not going for a vacation and also implies that he might be involved in something illegal. The Court, after having heard oral argument, furthermore requested in November 1982 that the parties and amici submit briefs on the broader issue of whether the exclusionary rule should be modified.  When the opinion in Gates was rendered, however, the Court declined to rule on the issue, stating that the issue was "not pressed or passed upon below"meaning that it was not explicitly contested or argued in the state court, see Gates at 222. and that the exclusionary rule had become too difficult as an issue of great public importance to have been re-examined at the time.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 462
 Aguilar–Spinelli test
References
Epstein, Lee. "Illinois v. Gates." Constitutional Law for a Changing America.Third Ed. p. 490.1998.
External links
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:Bloomingdale, Illinois
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:Cannabis in Illinois
"""

From "Illinois v. Lidster" ==> """
Illinois v. Lidster, 540 U.S. 419 (2004), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that the Fourth Amendment permits the police to use a roadblock to investigate a traffic incident.
Facts
Just after midnight, on August 23, 1997, a 70-year-old man riding a bicycle was killed when a passing car struck him while he was riding on a highway in Lombard, Illinois. A week later, at the same time of day and at the same location, the police erected a roadblock.  They stopped each passing motorist and handed him or her a flyer asking for information about the hit-and-run incident.
Robert Lidster approached the checkpoint in his minivan. Before he reached the designated stopping point, Lidster swerved and nearly struck one of the officers. The officer smelled alcohol on Lidster's breath and directed Lidster to a side street where another officer administered field sobriety tests. Lidster was later tried and convicted of driving under the influence of alcohol.
Lidster challenged the lawfulness of his arrest, arguing that the checkpoint violated the Fourth Amendment. The trial court rejected the challenge, but the Illinois Appellate Court accepted it, as did the Illinois Supreme Court. Because a decision of the Virginia Supreme Court had reached the opposite conclusion, the US Supreme Court agreed to hear Lidster's case.
Majority opinion
In City of Indianapolis v. Edmond, , the US Supreme Court ruled that police checkpoints set up for the purpose of "general crime control" were unreasonable under the Fourth Amendment.  Although the Illinois Supreme Court ruled that Edmond required the trial court to suppress the evidence of Lidster's stop, the Court disagreed.
Unlike the checkpoint in Edmond, the "primary law enforcement purpose" of the stop in this case was to "ask vehicle occupants, as members of the public, for their help in providing information about a crime in all likelihood committed by others." Edmond was directed solely at roadblocks whose purpose was general crime control; however, not every activity undertaken by law enforcement falls under the rubric of general crime control. Ordinarily, a brief investigatory stop requires individualized suspicion. In the case of seeking information from the public, the Court reasoned, "the concept of individualized suspicion has little role to play.  Like certain other forms of police activity, say, crowd control or public safety, an information-seeking stop is not the kind of event that involves suspicion, or lack of suspicion, of the relevant individual."
The law allows the police to seek the voluntary cooperation of members of the public in investigating crime. The importance of doing so is "offset to some degree by the need to stop a motorist to obtain that help—a need less likely present where a pedestrian, not a motorist, is involved." Although such a stop is a "seizure" in Fourth Amendment terms, it is a reasonable one. The stop is hardly more onerous than ordinary traffic congestion, and the resulting cooperation with the investigation would prove just as fruitful as stopping pedestrians on the street. Accordingly, it would be "anomalous" to allow the police to stop pedestrians and ask for their help in solving crimes but forbid them to stop motorists for the same reason.
The Court stressed that this does not mean that the roadblock in this case was presumptively constitutional. Each roadblock must be evaluated on its own merits. In this case, the "relevant public concern was grave" in that the police were "investigating a crime that resulted in a human death." The roadblock advanced the police's "grave public concern," but it "interfered only minimally with liberty of the sort the Fourth Amendment seeks to protect." The stops were relatively short in duration. They "provided little reason for anxiety or alarm" on the part of the motorists, and there was no indication that the police acted in a discriminatory manner. Thus, the checkpoint stop was constitutional.
Concurring opinion
Justice Stevens pointed out that pedestrians are free to keep walking when they see a police officer handing out flyers or seeking information while "motorists who confront a roadblock are required to stop, and to remain stopped for as long as the officers choose to detain them." At the same time, the "likelihood that questioning a random sample of drivers will yield useful information about a hit-and-run incident that occurred a week earlier is speculative at best." However, neither of the lower courts had balanced the relative factors weighing in favor of and against finding the seizure reasonable, as the per se rule of Edmond dictated the outcome of this case.  Consequently, Stevens opined he would remand the case to the Illinois courts to perform the balancing in the first instance.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 540
List of United States Supreme Court cases
External links
  Amicus brief of the Criminal Justice Legal Foundation
  Opinion of the Illinois Supreme Court
  Amicus brief of ACLU
  Amicus brief of the Solicitor General
  Brief of Petitioner State of Illinois
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:Lombard, Illinois
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Illinois v. McArthur" ==> """
Illinois v. McArthur, 531 U.S. 326 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case decided in 2001. The case concerned the extent of the government’s power to limit an individual’s complete control of his or her home pending the arrival of a search warrant. A divided Court held that the search was not unconstitutional because there was a reasonable law-enforcement need to acquire a warrant, namely, to prevent the potential destruction of evidence within the home.. 
Background
Tera McArthur asked two police officers to accompany her to a trailer home where she lived with her husband Charles, so that she could take her belongings out of the home. Just after she came out of the trailer, she told the police that Charles McArthur had drugs inside. The police knocked and asked Charles if they could search, which he refused. He then came out of the trailer; an officer prevented him from going back inside while the other policeman rushed to get a warrant.531 U.S. at 329-330. The Illinois Appellate Court held that this action violated the Fourth Amendment, which prohibits unreasonable searches and seizures without a warrant.People v. McArthur, 304 Ill. App. 3d 395, 713 N.E.2d 93 (1999), leave to appeal denied, 185 Ill. 2d 651, 720 N.E.2d 1101 (1999). The Supreme Court granted certiorari to hear the case in 2000..
Opinion of the Court
The Court voted 8-1 to reverse the Illinois Appellate Court to hold the actions of the police officers at question constitutional. Justice Breyer wrote the majority opinion which upheld the search. Due to the specific circumstances of the case, the police needed to prevent the investigation scene from being contaminated. Breyer wrote that the Court found "no case in which [we have] held unlawful a temporary seizure that was supported by probable cause and was designed to prevent the loss of evidence while the police diligently obtained a warrant in a reasonable period of time."531 U.S. at 334. Moreover, McArthur's argument that his decision to remain on his porch and not allow the police entry did not amount to "a constructive eviction". Instead, Breyer noted that the Court found in a prior case that the doorway of a house is in a 'public place' and thus not subject to warrant rules. He noted in conclusion that the hard-to-contest fact of probable cause made it difficult to accept McArthur's claims.
Souter's concurrence
Justice Souter joined Breyer's opinion in all respects but wrote separately to condition his support on the belief that the search was appropriate only because of the immediate danger that the evidence could have been destroyed. Only in this unique instance could the warrant requirement be waived.531 U.S. at 339 (Souter, J., concurring).
Stevens' dissent
Justice Stevens wrote a brief dissenting opinion arguing that the case should have been dismissed because the Illinois legislature has largely reduced penalties for marijuana possession, which made it ridiculous for the officers to rush to get a warrant. He said that even if he reached the merits of the question, he would affirm and hold the search unconstitutional because the majority misapplied a balancing of “privacy-related and law enforcement-related concerns".531 U.S. at 340 (Stevens, J., dissenting). He wanted to give broader protection to the idea of the home as a place for protection, even if the home in this case was a trailer.531 U.S. at 341.
See also
 Mapp v. Ohio (1961)
 Terry v. Ohio (1968)
Notes
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
"""

From "Illinois v. Perkins" ==> """
Illinois v. Perkins, 496 US 292 (1990),Illinois v. Perkins, 496 US 292 (1990) was a decision by the United States Supreme Court that held that undercover police agents did not need to give Miranda warnings when talking to suspects in jail. Miranda warnings, named after the 1966 Supreme Court case Miranda v. Arizona, are generally required when police interrogate suspects in custody in order to protect the right not to self-incriminate and the right to counsel under the Fifth and Sixth Amendments. However, the Court ruled that potential coercion must be evaluated from the suspect's point of view, and if they are unaware that they are speaking to police, they are not under the coercive pressure of a normal interrogation.
 Background 
Lloyd Perkins became a suspect in a murder investigation being conducted by Illinois police when they received a tip from an inmate named Donald Charlton. In March 1986, Charlton and Perkins were inmates together at Graham Correctional Center near Hillsboro, Illinois, and Charlton reported to police that he'd heard Perkins talk about killing someone. The details that Charlton shared were enough to make the tip  credible, and it linked Perkins to the 1984 murder of Richard Stephenson in a suburb of East St. Louis, Illinois.People v. Perkins, 176 Ill. App.3d 443 (1988), 531 N.E.2d 141
By the time police got the tip, Perkins had been released, but they tracked him to a jail in Montgomery County, Illinois, where he was being held on an unrelated charge. On March 31, police placed Charlton and an undercover police agent (John Parisi) in the jail with Perkins, both posing as escapees from a work release program. They starting talking to Perkins about escaping from the jail, and then steered the conversation to whether Perkins had ever killed anyone. Perkins then talked about killing someone in East St. Louis, and when prompted for more information, he gave extensive incriminating details. Since he was working undercover, Parisi did not identify himself as a police officer or give Perkins a Miranda warning.
 History in lower courts 
 Trial court 
Perkins was charged with murder the same day that he spoke with Parisi and Charlton, had an arrest warrant issued against him the next day, and was indicted for murder by a grand jury in June 1986. In February 1987, in the circuit court in St. Claire County (the trial court), Perkins made a pretrial motion to suppress, arguing that his statements to Parisi were inadmissible as evidence because he had been subjected to a "custodial questioning" without a Miranda warning.People v. Perkins, 618 N.E.2d 1275, 248 Ill. App.3d 762, 188 Ill.Dec. 705 (1993) The motion was granted in April 1987, and the state appealed.
 Illinois appellate court 
In a 1988 decision written by Justice Moses Harrison, a three-judge panel (also including Justices Calvo and Welch) of the 5th District Illinois Appellate Court affirmed the trial court's decision. The state argued that Miranda's requirements should not apply, because "Parisi and Charlton merely engaged the defendant in friendly conversation," and Perkins made his statements "freely, voluntarily, and without compulsion." The Court, however, observed that Miranda applied even when a suspect was in custody on unrelated charges, and it applied to indirect questioning and subterfuge. It also noted decisions by state supreme courts in Nevada (i.e. Holyfield v. StateHolyfield v. State, 711 P. 2d 834 (1985)), Nebraska (i.e. State v. FullerState v. Fuller, 278 NW 2d 756 (1979)), and Rhode Island (i.e. State v. TravisState v. Travis, 360 A. 2d 548 (1976)) where the in-jail use of undercover agents and informants was subjected to Miranda requirements. The state appealed to the US Supreme Court, and certiorari was granted in 1989.493 U. S. 808 (1989)
 Decision by the Supreme Court 
In an 8-1 vote, the Supreme Court reversed the lower courts' decision.
 Majority Opinion 
The majority opinion, written by Justice Kennedy, focused on a suspect's subjective understanding of their situation, and how that point of view affected the coercive pressure they may feel:
Kennedy also noted that undercover investigation and voluntary confessions were an important part of police work. Without diminishing the important role of Miranda in assuring the fairness of the justice system, "Miranda was not meant to protect suspects from boasting about their criminal activities in front of persons whom they believe to be their cellmates."
 Justice Brennan's concurrence 
Justice Brennan concurred in the judgment, agreeing with how the majority applied the legal principles of Miranda v. Arizona to the case at hand. However, he believed that the undercover tactics used to get a confession from Perkins were nevertheless unconstitutional as a violation of the Due Process clause of the Fifth Amendment:
 Justice Marshall's dissent 
Justice Marshall dissented, as he disagreed with the majority's assessment that Perkins' situation lacked the coercive pressure of a normal police interrogation:
Marshall also worried that police departments would see this ruling as a way to circumvent the protections that Miranda gave to suspects.
 Further reading 
 https://www.ojp.gov/ncjrs/virtual-library/abstracts/constitutional-guide-use-cellmate-informants
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Miranda warning case law
Category:History of Illinois
Category:Law enforcement
Category:Prisoners' and ex-prisoners' rights
Category:Criminal procedure
Category:Evidence law
Category:Evidence case law
Category:1990 in United States case law
Category:History of law enforcement in the United States
Category:1990 in Illinois
Category:United States Sixth Amendment assistance of counsel case law
Category:United States criminal due process case law
"""

From "Illinois v. Rodriguez" ==> """
Illinois v. Rodriguez, 497 U.S. 177 (1990), is a U.S. Supreme Court case dealing with the issue of whether a warrantless search conducted pursuant to third party consent violates the Fourth Amendment when the third party does not actually possess common authority over the premises.
Opinion of the Court
In an opinion by Justice Scalia and decided 6–3, the Court held that a warrantless search of premises, when a third party consents to the search but does not possess actual common authority over those premises, is valid if the authorities "reasonably believed" at the time of the search that the third party possessed common authority over the premises.
In reaching its decision, the Court noted that "reasonableness," not consent, is the touchstone of Fourth Amendment jurisprudence; the Constitution only prohibits "unreasonable" searches and seizures.  Therefore, the constitutional validity of a police determination of consent to enter is not judged by whether the police were correct in their assessment, but by whether, based on the facts available at the moment, it was reasonable to conclude that the consenting party had authority over the premises.
See also
 United States v. Matlock (1974)
 Georgia v. Randolph (2006)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 497
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
Further reading
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1990 in United States case law
"""

From "Illinois v. Wardlow" ==> """
Illinois v. Wardlow, 528 U.S. 119 (2000), is a case decided before the United States Supreme Court involving U.S. criminal procedure regarding searches and seizures.
 Background 
On September 9, 1995, Officers Nolan and Harvey were working as uniformed officers in the special operations section of the Chicago Police Department. The officers were driving the last car of a four car caravan converging on an area known for heavy narcotics trafficking in order to investigate drug transactions. The officers were traveling together because they expected to find a crowd of people in the area, including lookouts and customers. 
As the caravan passed 4035 West Van Buren, Officer Nolan observed respondent Wardlow standing next to the building holding an opaque bag. Respondent looked in the direction of the officers and fled. Nolan and Harvey turned their car southbound, watched him as he ran through the gangway and an alley, and eventually cornered him on the street. Nolan then exited his car and stopped respondent. He immediately conducted a protective pat-down search for weapons because in his experience it was common for there to be weapons in the near vicinity of narcotics transactions. During the frisk, Officer Nolan squeezed the bag respondent was carrying and felt a heavy, hard object similar to the shape of a gun. The officer then opened the bag and discovered a .38-caliber handgun with five live rounds of ammunition. The officers arrested Wardlow.
The Illinois trial court denied respondent’s motion to suppress, finding the gun was recovered during a lawful stop and frisk. App. 14. Following a stipulated bench trial, Wardlow was convicted of unlawful use of a weapon by a felon. The Illinois Appellate Court reversed Wardlow’s conviction, concluding that the gun should have been suppressed because Officer Nolan did not have reasonable suspicion sufficient to justify an investigative stop pursuant to Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968). 287 Ill. App. 3d 367, 678 N. E. 2d 65 (1997).
 Holding 
In an opinion delivered by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, the Supreme Court held in a 5 to 4 decision that the police had reasonable suspicion to justify the stop. The police had reasonable suspicion to justify the stop because nervous, evasive behavior, like fleeing a high crime area upon noticing police officers, is a pertinent factor in determining reasonable suspicion to justify a stop
 Dissent 
Justice John Paul Stevens argued in dissent that the government did not articulate enough facts to establish reasonable suspicion and that there were not enough facts in the record to corroborate the government's claim.
 Impact 
The case has been described by civil libertarians as creating a new criminal offense of "running while black."
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 528
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
Terry v. Ohio, 
 References 
 Further reading 
 External links 
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2000 in Illinois
Category:2000 in United States case law
Wardlow
Category:Chicago Police Department
"""

From "Imbler v. Pachtman" ==> """
Imbler v. Pachtman, 424 U.S. 409 (1976), was a United States Supreme Court case in which district attorneys or prosecutors were found to have full immunity from civil suits resulting from their government duties..
Imbler, a defendant in a murder trial, had been convicted and sentenced when the district attorney, Pachtman, revealed new evidence that he said had recently surfaced and which exonerated Imbler.  Imbler used the new evidence to successfully free himself, then brought up a civil suit alleging that Pachtman had withheld evidence.  The suit, however, was dismissed on the grounds that Pachtman had prosecutorial immunity, a finding which the Supreme Court affirmed.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 424
References
External links
 Brummet, D. (1979) Chi.-Kent L. Rev. Section 1983, Immunity, and the Public Defender: The Misapplication of Imbler v. Pachtman.
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1976 in United States case law
"""

From "Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Abudu" ==> """
Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Abudu, 485 U.S. 94 (1988), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court shifted the balance toward adjudications made by the INS and away from those made by the federal courts of appeals when aliens who had been ordered deported seek to present new evidence in order to avoid deportation. The Court ruled that courts must review the Board of Immigration Appeals's decision to deny motions to reopen immigration proceedings—the name of the procedural device used to present new evidence to immigration officials—for abuse of discretion.
Facts
Assibi Abudu first came to the United States from his native Ghana in 1965 as a student. He went to medical school, and spent the summer of 1973 in his home country. When Assibi Abudu returned to the United States that fall, his student visa allowed him to remain until 1976. When the visa expired, however, Assibi Abudu did not return to Ghana. Instead, he remained in the United States and married an American citizen. In 1981, Assibi Abudu pleaded guilty to charges of attempting to obtain demerol by fraud. The immigration department then began deportation proceedings.
In these first deportation proceedings, Assibi Abudu tried to remain in the United States by adjusting his status on account of his marriage to an American citizen. But his conviction for a drug crime made him excludable from the United States, and so immigration officials denied his request for adjustment of status. Assibi Abudu expressly did not seek asylum during these proceedings. He selected England as his country of deportation in the event he should lose his deportation hearing, which he did in July 1982. The BIA affirmed in August 1984. Assibi Abudu asked the Ninth Circuit to review this decision.
In February 1985, Abudu sought to reopen his immigration proceedings so that he might present evidence in support of an application for asylum. He claimed he had a well-founded fear that if England would not accept him and he returned to Ghana, his life and freedom would be threatened by the regime in power there. After that regime seized power, it had carried out a system of persecution against its political enemies, including Assibi Abudu's brother and other close friends. A surprise visitor from Ghana in 1984, who was a high-ranking official in the government of Ghana, ostensibly tried to persuade Abudu to return to Ghana because physicians were in short supply there. Assibi Abudu suspected that the visitor was attempting to trick him into revealing his brother's whereabouts instead.
The BIA denied Assibi Abudu's motion to reopen the immigration proceedings because Assibi had not adequately explained why he did not present these concerns in earlier proceedings. The immigration judge had given Abudu extra time to present evidence in support of an application for asylum, but Assibi Abudu instead told the immigration judge he would not be presenting such an application. Moreover, all this evidence—except for the 1984 surprise visit—was available to Assibi Abudu during the first round of proceedings. Furthermore, even if he had, the BIA concluded it would not have made out a prima facie case for asylum or withholding of deportation. He did not present an affidavit from his brother, and his claims were too speculative to the BIA to make out the requisite showing. Assibi Abudu asked the Ninth Circuit to review the denial of his motion to reopen as well.
The Ninth Circuit consolidated the two pending petitions for review. It ultimately ordered the BIA to reevaluate Assibi Abudu's requests for asylum and withholding of deportation and grant him a full-blown hearing on the matters. In the Ninth Circuit's view, the "sole issue" was whether Assibi Abudu had made out a prima facie case for reopening. Because the BIA did not adequately credit the affidavits Abudu had submitted, the Ninth Circuit demanded that it give Assibi Abudu another chance to present more evidence. The INS asked the Supreme Court to review the Ninth Circuit's decision, and the Supreme Court agreed to do so.
Opinion of the Court
The BIA may deny a motion to reopen on at least three grounds.  First, it may determine that the applicant has not established a prima facie case to the underlying relief he seeks, such as asylum or withholding of removal. Second, the BIA may determine that the new evidence the applicant seeks to present was not previously unavailable, or in an asylum case, that the applicant has not adequately explained why he did not apply for asylum earlier. Third, in cases where the ultimate relief the applicant seeks depends on the exercise of some discretion committed to immigration officials, the BIA may determine that the applicant is not entitled to the discretionary relief sought. Thus, "in a given case the BIA may determine, either as a sufficient ground for denying relief or as a necessary step toward granting relief, whether the alien has produced previously unavailable, material evidence, and, in asylum cases, whether the alien has reasonably explained his or her failure to request asylum earlier."  The Court held that these determinations were subject to review in the federal courts of appeals for abuse of discretion and not any higher standard. "Although all adjudications by administrative agencies are to some degree judicial and to some degree political—and therefore an abuse-of-discretion standard will often apply to agency adjudicatons not governed by specific statutory commands—INS officials must exercise especially sensitive political functions that implicate questions of foreign relations, and therefore the reasons for giving deference to agency decisions on petitions for reopening or reconsideration in other administrative contexts apply with even greater force in the INS context." Moreover, in other totally judicial contexts, such as motions for new trials on the basis of newly discovered evidence, the movant bears an "especially heavy burden."  There is no reason not to require an alien seeking to reopen his deportation proceedings to carry an equally heavy burden.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 485
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
External links
 American Immigration Lawyers Association, who filed an amicus brief
 asylumlaw.org
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1988 in United States case law
Category:Deportation from the United States
"""

From "Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Aguirre-Aguirre" ==> """
Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Aguirre-Aguirre, 526 U.S. 415 (1999), examined a doctrinal question last presented to the U.S. Supreme Court in Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Cardoza-Fonseca.. In Aguirre-Aguirre, the Court determined that federal courts had to defer to the Board of Immigration Appeals's interpretation of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
Facts
In 1994, the Immigration and Naturalization Service began deportation proceedings against Juan Anibal Aguirre-Aguirre, who conceded deportability but requested asylum and withholding of deportation. At a hearing before an immigration judge, Aguirre testified he had been politically active in his native Guatemala with the Sindicato Estudiante (Student Union) and with the National Central Union political party. With these groups, Aguirre protested bus fares and the Guatemalan government's failure to investigate the murders and disappearances of other students. These protests included burning buses, breaking windows, and attacking police cars. Aguirre estimated he had set fire to around ten buses. When the passengers on these buses refused to leave, they were stoned, beaten with sticks, or tied up. Aguirre testified that he left Guatemala because of threats he received on account of his having participated in these activities. 
The immigration judge granted Aguirre's applications for asylum and withholding of deportation. The INS appealed to the Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA), which reversed the immigration judge, and ordered Aguirre deported. The BIA concluded that even if Aguirre had established the requisite level of persecution, see INS v. Stevic, , he had committed a "serious nonpolitical crime" and was thus ineligible for withholding of deportation under the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA). Under BIA precedent, the political aspect of the offense must outweigh its common-law character. As the activity Aguirre had participated in on behalf of the Estudeante Syndicado disproportionately affected civilians, the criminal aspect of his activities outweighed their political aspect. Aguirre asked the Ninth Circuit to review the BIA's decision.
From the Ninth Circuit's standpoint, the BIA's decision was deficient in three respects.  First, the BIA should have balanced the persecution Aguirre might have suffered if he should return to Guatemala against the offenses he had committed there. Second, it should have considered whether the offenses were grossly disproportionate to their objective. Third, it "should have considered the political necessity and success of Aguirre's methods." As the BIA did not consider these things, the Ninth Circuit found that the BIA's legal analysis was wanting and remanded the case. The INS asked the Supreme Court to review the decision.
Decision of the Supreme Court
The U.S. Attorney General must grant an applicant withholding of removal if he determines that the alien's life or freedom would be threatened in a country on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion.  (h)(1). Generally, withholding of deportation is required if it is more likely than not that the alien would be persecuted in his home country on account of one of the protected grounds. However, withholding does not apply if the Attorney General determines that "there are serious reasons for considering that the alien has committed a serious nonpolitical offense outside the United States prior to the arrival of the alien in the United States."  
The Ninth Circuit did not disagree that the "serious political offense" exception to mandatory withholding was the proper framework under which to analyze the case. The Ninth Circuit had "confronted questions implicating" the BIA's "construction of the statute which it administers", which meant it should have asked whether or not "the statute is silent or ambiguous with respect to the specific issue" before it. The Court clarified that this threshold inquiry, called the "Chevron deference", applies to questions regarding the BIA's interpretations of parts of the Immigration and Nationality Act, including the "serious political offense" exception. The BIA determined that the alien's criminal acts were not to be judged against the risk that he will be persecuted if he returned to his home country. This conclusion was consistent with the text of the statute, as it "is not obvious that an already-completed crime is somehow rendered less serious by considering the future circumstance that the alien may be subject to persecution if returned to his home country." 
The Ninth Circuit ruled that the "political nature of the offenses would be more difficult to accept if they involved acts of an atrocious nature," such as indiscriminate massacre of civilians. But the BIA did not dispute that this, in the abstract, "may be important in applying the serious nonpolitical crime exception." Thus, the Supreme Court decided that "the BIA's determination that (h)(2)(c) requires no additional balancing of the risk of persecution rests on a fair and permissible reading of the statute." Bender's Immigration Bulletin, V.4, No. 10 (May 15, 1999), pp 451-52
Other
Bender's Immigration Bulletin, V.4, No. 10 noted on May 15, 1999 that a "Motion to Reopen was pending at the BIA on the issue of interpretation and transcript errors, thus leaving open the possibility that on remand, the Ninth Circuit may in time be reviewing the results of a new hearing with a new set of facts".
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 526
References
External links
 Medill School of Journalism, Northwestern University
  Brief of the Solicitor General
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1999 in United States case law
Category:Deportation from the United States
"""

From "Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Cardoza-Fonseca" ==> """
Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421 (1987),. was a United States Supreme Court case that decided that the standard for withholding of removal, which was set in INS v. Stevic,. was too high a standard for applicants for asylum to satisfy.  In its place, consistent with the standard set by the United Nations, the Court in held that an applicant for asylum in the United States needs to demonstrate only a "well-founded fear" of persecution, which can be met even if the applicant does not show that he will more likely than not be persecuted if he is returned to his home country.
Facts
Cardoza-Fonseca entered the United States in 1979 as a visitor from Nicaragua. She overstayed her US visa, and the INS began proceedings to deport her. She admitted that she was in the US illegally but applied for two forms of relief in the deportation hearings: asylum and withholding of deportation.  Under US law, the INS had the discretion to grant asylum to an alien eligible for that relief, but must withhold deportation if the alien is eligible for that kind of relief.
To support her request for asylum, Cardoza said that her brother had been tortured by the Sandinistas because of his political activities in Nicaragua.  They believed that the Sandinistas knew that they had fled Nicaragua together and that even though Cardoza had not been politically active herself, she feared that she would be interrogated about her brother's whereabouts and activities if she returned to Nicaragua. She also mentioned that her own political opposition to the Sandinistas would be brought to the attention of the government. For that reason, Cardoza feared that she would be tortured if she returned to Nicaragua.
An immigration judge denied her requests for asylum and withholding of deportation and believed that the same legal standard applied to both claims.  The judge found that Cardoza had not established a clear probability of persecution and thus was not entitled to either asylum or withholding of deportation. The Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) agreed with those conclusions.
Cardoza appealed only the denial of her claim for asylum to the Ninth Circuit. The Ninth Circuit ruled that the BIA had incorrectly applied the same standard to Cardoza's claims for both asylum and withholding of deportation since the statutes giving the Attorney General authority to grant those forms of relief to aliens were phrased differently. It held that the standard for asylum was lower than that for withholding of deportation and that asylum required only a showing of a "well-founded fear" of persecution, instead of a "clear probability."
The INS successfully asked the Supreme Court to hear the case.
Majority opinion
A person is eligible for the discretionary relief of asylum if he is a refugee by being "unable or unwilling to return to, and is unwilling or unable to avail themselves of the protection of, [their home] country because of persecution or a well-founded fear of persecution on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion." In contrast, a person is eligible for the mandatory relief of withholding deportation by demonstrating a "clear probability of persecution" if he is returned to his country.  Because statutes governing the different forms of relief describe the showing the alien must make in different terms, the Court reasoned that they are different.
Furthermore, a "well-founded fear" is different and can be lower than, a "clear probability" of persecution.
Three aspects of the legislative history of Congress's definition of asylum bolstered the Court's conclusion. Firstly, before 1980 Congress added the words "well-founded" to the definition of "asylum" to conform the US definition to the United Nations Protocol regarding refugees.  Next, the 1980 Refugee Act pushed the goal of conforming US law with the UN Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees. Indeed, the Refugee Act's definition of a "refugee" was virtually identical to the protocol's, which required contracting nations to establish a category of immigrants for whom discretionary grants of asylum were available, which the 1980 act did precisely. Then, Congress expressly rejected a proposal by the Senate to make the standards for eligibility for asylum and withholding of deportation the same.
Then, the INS argued it would be anomalous to have a lower standard for asylum that afforded greater benefits to an alien than withholding deportation. (Asylum allows a person to become a lawful permanent resident of the United States, but withholding deportation is subject to quotas from certain countries and conditional on deportation to a hospitable third country not being available.) That argument overlooked the fact that asylum is "discretionary" on the part of the Attorney General, but withholding of deportation is "mandatory."
Finally, the INS asked the Court to make the standards the same because the BIA had interpreted them to be the same, and the Court's precedent in Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., , required it to defer to an agency's own interpretation of a pertinent statute. The question of whether Congress had intended the standards to be the same was one for the courts, even under Chevron. The Court was not deciding what a "well-founded fear" would mean but simply that it was a lower standard than a "clear probability" of persecution.
Justice Harry Blackmun commended the Courts of Appeals for its diligent work in recognizing the distinction between the two standards: "The efforts of these courts stand in stark contrast to—but, it is sad to say, alone cannot make up for—the years of seemingly purposeful blindness by the INS, which only now begins its task of developing the standard entrusted to its care."
Justice Antonin Scalia stressed that he concurred in the judgment of the Court merely because he believed that it had reached the right result. He chastised the Court for examining legislative history: "Judges interpret laws rather than reconstruct legislators' intentions. Where the language of those laws is clear, we are not free to replace it with an unenacted legislative intent." He also questioned whether the Court's discussion of Chevron deference was correct or appropriate.
Dissenting opinion
Writing for the three dissenting Justices, Justice  Lewis F. Powell, Jr. said he would reverse the decision of the Ninth Circuit because the BIA's interpretation of the definition of "refugee" was reasonable. He pointed out that the BIA's interpretation of both "well-founded fear" and "clear probability of persecution" were not mathematical in nature but were instead qualitative determinations. The heart of the standard articulated by the BIA was its "empirical conclusion, based on its experience in adjudicating asylum applications, that if the facts establish such a basis for an alien's fear, it rarely will make a difference whether the judge asks if persecution is 'likely' to occur or 'more likely than not' to occur. If the alien can establish such a basis, he normally will be eligible for relief under either standard."
Next, Justice Powell observed that both a "well-founded fear" and a "clear probability" had an objective component. The question in this case, whether those objective components are materially different, and if so, how, "is just the type of expert judgment—formed by the entity to whom Congress has committed the question—to which we should defer."  Persecution is an individualized activity, and the BIA had undertaken of evaluate the probability of persecution qualitatively. There was no reason to suppose that the BIA's formulation of the standard was inconsistent with Congress's definition of the statute, particularly in light of what Powell considered an ambiguous legislative history.
Also, Powell asserted the BIA had actually applied the lower standard the Court had identified to the evidence presented in this case. Cardoza's other family members, after all, were still in Nicaragua and presumably subject to the persecution that she and her brother claimed to fear. Cardoza admitted that she had not taken any action against the Nicaraguan government. In fact, she said that she was not politically active and had never been singled out for persecution by the government. The BIA accordingly held that Cardoza was not entitled to relief under any standard, including the "good reason" standard that was ultimately adopted by the Ninth Circuit and was described by Powell described as the "least burdensome" standard available to the BIA. Accordingly, Powell felt that the BIA had applied the correct legal standard to Cardoza's claim for asylum.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 480
References
Further reading
External links
  The Refugee Law Reader
  asylumlaw.org
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:Right of asylum case law
Category:Right of asylum in the United States
Category:Nicaragua–United States relations
Category:Human rights in Latin America
Category:Deportation from the United States
"""

From "Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Chadha" ==> """
Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Chadha, 462 U.S. 919 (1983), was a United States Supreme Court case ruling in 1983 that the one-house legislative veto violated the constitutional separation of powers..
Background
Section 244(a)(1) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, , authorized the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) to suspend deportation of an alien continually residing in the United States for at least seven years where the U.S. Attorney General, in his discretion, found that deportation would result in "extreme hardship". After making such a finding, the Attorney General would transmit a report to Congress pursuant to § 244(c)(1) and either house of Congress had the power to veto the Attorney General's determination pursuant to § 244(c)(2).
Facts
Respondent Jagdish Rai Chadha was born in the British colony of Kenya to Indian parents. Chadha was a Citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies and entered the United States on a British passport when studying in Ohio as a foreign exchange student. After Kenya's declaration of independence from Britain in 1963 he was not recognized as a legitimate citizen or resident of Kenya (as his parents were Indian) or India (as he was born in Kenya). Furthermore, his right of abode in the United Kingdom was stripped under the Immigration Act 1971 due to his lack of connection with the United Kingdom. After his non-immigrant student visa expired in 1972, none of the three countries would accept him onto their territory, rendering him de facto stateless.
The INS initiated deportation proceedings against Chadha. Chadha sought to suspend his deportation, and the INS accommodated his request according to § 244(a)(1), and transmitted a report of the suspension to Congress according to § 244(c)(2). The House of Representatives vetoed the suspension of Chadha's deportation, and the INS resumed deportation proceedings. Chadha raised constitutional objections to § 244(c)(2), but the immigration judge found no authority to rule on such claims and ordered Chadha deported. Chadha then appealed to the Board of Immigration Appeals, which also found it lacked any authority to consider constitutional objections to § 244(c)(2). Chadha appealed to the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit for review of the deportation order, and the INS supported his challenge to the constitutionality of § 244(c)(2). The Ninth Circuit found § 244(c)(2) unconstitutional and ordered the Attorney General to suspend deportation proceedings. The INS appealed the Ninth Circuit's decision to the Supreme Court in order to obtain a final judgment on the constitutionality of § 244(c)(2).
The House and Senate, as amici curiae, argued that the Ninth Circuit erred in holding that the resolution of the House of Representatives vetoing the Attorney General's determination was constitutionally invalid. It asked the United States Supreme Court to reverse the Ninth Circuit's decision.
Congress argued that: (1) Chadha lacked standing to challenge the constitutionality of § 244(c)(2) because that section is not severable from § 244(a)(1). Therefore, if Chadha were to succeed in invalidating § 244(c)(2), his means of remedy in § 244(a)(1) would also be destroyed, and there would be no relief possible; (2) the Court did not have jurisdiction over the issue because the Attorney General and INS enforced the challenged statute and thereby effectively waived their right to challenge it; (3) the action was not a genuine case or controversy, as both the original plaintiff and defendant challenged the statute without real opposition; (4) the action was a non-justiciable political question.
Holding
The Supreme Court affirmed the Court of Appeals' judgment. In an opinion by Chief Justice Burger, the court held that the resolution of the House of Representatives vetoing the Attorney General's determination was constitutionally invalid, unenforceable, and not binding. Congress may not promulgate a statute granting to itself a legislative veto over actions of the executive branch inconsistent with the bicameralism principle and Presentment Clause of the United States Constitution.
The court rebutted Congress's assertions as follows: (1) § 244(c)(2) of the Immigration and Nationality Act is severable from the rest of the act pursuant to the express severability clause § 406. The legislative history of § 244 supports the proposition that Congress, frustrated with the process of passing private laws to provide relief for deportable individuals, would likely not have been willing to retain the private law mechanism rather than ceding all power to the Attorney General. (2) The Attorney General and INS did not waive their right to challenge the constitutionality of the statute by enforcing the statute. (3) The action is a genuine case with adequate representation in favor of sustaining the act provided by the houses of Congress as amici curiae. (4) The case is a judicable question, not exempted by the political question doctrine; the constitutionality of a statute is a question for the courts.
The court then presented its affirmative reasoning: (5) When the Constitution provides express procedures, such procedures must be strictly observed. Two such provisions are bicameralism and presentment in the enactment of law. (6) The presentment process—especially the President's veto power—was intended by the Framers to provide a mechanism by which the executive branch could defend itself against legislative encroachment and could prevent ill-conceived policies. (7) Similarly, the bicameralism requirement was formulated in order to hinder congressional action and thereby prevent legislative encroachment. (8) The action of the House of Representatives is legislative in nature because (a) it modifies rights and duties of individuals outside the legislative branch; (b) the enactment would otherwise have required a private law, which is a legislative function; and (c) the nature of the action is inherently legislative. (9) When the Framers intended to authorize Congress to exercise power outside of the bicameral and presentment principles, it provided alternate procedures explicitly; other procedures cannot be admitted. (10) Because the action of the House of Representatives was legislative, but did not conform to the mode of action specifically stated by the Constitution for legislative action, it is therefore invalid, unenforceable, and not binding.
Concurrence
Justice Powell, in a concurring opinion, argued that to invalidate all legislative veto provisions is a serious matter, as Congress views the legislative veto as essential to controlling the executive branch, and should therefore be undertaken with caution. However, Congress's action in this case is nonetheless unconstitutional. Contrary to the views of the majority, Congress's action is not legislative in character but adjudicative, and it therefore violates the principle (called the anti-aggrandizement principle) that Congress may not expand its own power into the areas of competence of the other branches. The Constitution specifically attempted to prevent this form of aggrandizement in the Bill of Attainder Clause, Art. I, § 9, cl. 3, which prohibits Congress from undertaking legislative trials that lack the safeguards and accountability of judicial trials. For a house of Congress to force the deportation of Chadha would amount to such a legislative trial.
Dissents
Justice White, dissenting, argued that (1) the legislative veto power is absolutely necessary to modern government, as exemplified by the legislative veto powers granted in the War Powers Act of 1973. (2) The absence of constitutional provisions for alternate methods of action does not imply their prohibition by the Constitution, and the court has consistently read the Constitution to respond to contemporary needs with flexibility. (3) The legislative veto power does not involve the ability of Congress to enact new legislation without bicameral consensus or presentation to the president, but instead involves the ability of Congress to veto suggestions by the executive, a power that both houses of Congress already possess. (4) The court has allowed Congress to delegate authority to executive agencies; lawmaking does not always require bicameralism or presentation. (5) The bicameralism and presentation provisions of the Constitution serve to ensure that no departure from the status quo takes place without consensus from both houses of Congress and the President or by a super-majority vote of both houses of Congress. In this case, the deportation of Chadha is the status quo situation, and the veto by House of Representatives of an alternative suggestion of the executive branch is reasonable given the purposes of bicameralism and the Presentment Clause.
Justice Rehnquist, in a dissent joined by White, argued that it is unlikely that Congress would have promulgated § 244(a)(1) without the corresponding provisions of §§ 244(c)(1–2). Therefore, the provisions are not severable from one another, and holding one unconstitutional requires invalidating the other.
Aftermath
Chadha became a citizen of the United States and was living in Albany, California, as of October 2015.
Chadha increased the power of the executive branch. Legislative vetoes continued to be enacted after Chadha, although various presidents have issued executive signing statements disclaiming the unconstitutional legislative veto provisions. The consultation provisions of the War Powers Act, for example, while contested by every president since Richard M. Nixon, are usually grudgingly obeyed. Some laws, such as the National Emergencies Act were amended to replace the legislative veto with a joint resolution, requiring a Presidential signature and able to be vetoed, requiring a two-thirds majority of both houses of Congress to override. Joint resolutions have proven difficult to pass over a veto, and in cases where that process was chosen the power of the President has increased greatly.
Other processes, such as fast-track legislation or sunset clauses, have taken the place of the legislative veto in other laws with greater success in obtaining similar results to the original legislative vetoes. The Contract with America Advancement Act of 1996, 5 U.S.C. Sections 801-808, allowed Congress to disapprove federal agency regulations; the effect of Chadha is that any such legislative disapproval can be vetoed by the sitting President, and is not a true legislative veto. Instead, its practical use is limited to the initial days of a new President's term following a change in Administration. Such a veto had been exercised only once, in March 2001, until 2017, when the 115th Congress under President Donald Trump passed fifteen such vetoes, overturning various rules issued under the Obama administration.Senate Joint Resolution 6, Pub L. No. 107-5, 107th Cong. 1st Sess.
In 1984, then-Delaware senator and future President Joe Biden who served as the ranking minority member on the Senate Judiciary Committee, wrote a scholarly article in Syracuse Law Review appraising the impact of the Supreme Court decision on how the government works. The article was added to congressional records on July 26, 1985 on request of Wendell Ford.
See also
 Clinton v. New York (1998)
References
Further reading
 Berry, Michael J. The Modern Legislative Veto: Macropolitical Conflict and the Legacy of Chadha (U of Michigan Press, 2016).
 Wheeler, Darren A. INS v. Chadha: A Study in Judicial Implementation (PhD. Dissertation Miami University, 2003) online .
External links
 INS v. Chadha, 462 U.S. 919 (1983) (opinion full text).
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States separation of powers case law
Category:Bicameralism and Presentment case law
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:United States political question doctrine case law
Category:Veto
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Deportation from the United States
"""

From "Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Delgado" ==> """
Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Delgado, 466 U.S. 210 (1984), was a United States Supreme Court decision on the limits of worksite enforcement by immigration agents. Specifically, the Court ruled that factory raids by the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) were not illegal seizures under the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. 
 Summary 
INS v. Delgado concerned whether the restrictions placed on government officials by the Fourth Amendment applied to worksite enforcement operations by the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS). The case was originally filed by the International Ladies Garment Workers Union (ILGWU) in 1978 on behalf of members of the union who worked at two Los Angeles garment factories (Southern California Davis Pleating Co. and Mr. Pleat) raided by the INS in January and September 1977. The raids were based on search warrants that claimed probable cause to believe undocumented workers were employed in the factories, but did not name specific workers to be questioned or detained. During the operation, some INS agents guarded the exits while others moved through the factory questioning workers about their to citizenship status. Agents arrested workers they believed to be undocumented immigrants. Four of the employees questioned filed actions against the INS in 1978, arguing that the sweeps violated their Fourth Amendment right to be free from unreasonable search and seizure, and their right to equal protection under the Fifth Amendment. The U.S. district court rejected the plaintiff's claims, but the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed the lower court's ruling in 1982, finding that the faculty raids were unlawful violations of the Fourth Amendment. The INS appealed that ruling to the Supreme Court. 
The Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution states, "The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized." The case hinged narrowly on whether a seizure took place at all, and therefore whether the protections of the Fourth Amendment applied. The Court had previously ruled that non-citizen immigrants are protected by the Fourth Amendment. Also, the Court had ruled that not every interaction between police or government officials and a suspect qualifies as a search or seizure, and that officials can approach and speak with people so long as the interaction is brief. In the Delgado case, the Court held that the factory survey was not a seizure of the workforce, but instead an instance of “mere questing.” The presence of INS agents at the doors of the factory and the manner with which the workers were approached and questioned, the Court ruled, did not constitute a formal detention. Therefore the Fourth Amendment did not apply.
Background
Factory Sweeps
The Immigration and Naturalization Service has a history of conducting "factory sweeps" across the country in order to locate undocumented immigrant workers.  While critics have claimed that these sweeps are largely ineffective and serve most often as media events, the INS maintains that they are an important tool for protecting U.S. jobs. These sweeps occur when the INS receives information that a certain business may be employing undocumented immigrants and the workers at the business are determined to fit such a profile, though, as in the case of INS v. Delgado, no specific individuals need be identified. Typically, 15 or 25 INS agents enter a place of business, surrounding workers and guarding exits, and proceed to question workers with regards to their citizenship status, often carrying those suspected of being undocumented away in handcuffs. As can be expected, these raids can cause considerable stress for the workers; one woman subjected to this procedure is even quoted as saying she was afraid "because if I leave and they think I don't have no papers and they shoot me or something." Despite the fear-inducing nature of the sweeps, the Supreme Court maintained that those subjected to them have in no way been detained or seized, as they are technically free to go at any time and any "reasonable person" would realize this freedom.
Terry v. Ohio
In the case of Terry v. Ohio, the Supreme Court established a practical standpoint on “mere questioning”, effectively giving law enforcement officials the ability to speak with citizens, and even search them, in certain situations without necessarily being held accountable to the restrictions of the Fourth Amendment.. In this case, an officer approached three men he suspected of casing a building for a robbery or stick up. He confronted them, questioned them, and for the purposes of his own safety, patted them down. The officer found that they were carrying concealed weapons, which were later used as evidence that they were about to attempt a robbery. The case hinged on whether the weapons were admissible as evidence under the Fourth Amendment, which protects against unreasonable and warrantless searches and seizures, and prevents evidence collected in such a manner from being used in court. The opinion of the Court was that in lieu of the circumstances, in which the officer had reason to fear for his own safety, the pat-down was reasonable and did not constitute a search to which the Fourth Amendment is applicable. Specifically, the Court held that “Though the police must, whenever practicable, secure a warrant to make a search and seizure, that procedure cannot be followed where swift action based upon on-the-spot observations of the officer on the beat is required” and “The reasonableness of any particular search and seizure must be assessed in light of the particular circumstances against the standard of whether a man of reasonable caution is warranted in believing that the action taken was appropriate.” While these particular circumstances warranted a search based on the safety of the officer, the decision of the Court allowed for a greater freedom of officers to confront and question individuals in other situations. The Supreme Court has frequently referenced Terry v. Ohio and the principle of “mere questioning” in later cases, including INS v. Delgado. The most important formulation of the principle as it relates to Delgado is that “law enforcement officials can approach and speak to individuals without the constraints of the Fourth Amendment’s reasonableness standard, so long as the encounter is consensual.”
United States v. Mendenhall
Terry v. Ohio, and the ensuing principle of mere questioning, left open the important question of where the line is drawn between a consensual encounter and a temporary detention. In United States v. Mendenhall, the Court outlined a number of variables which may indicate a temporary detention or seizure, and a number of variables which may indicate a mere consensual stop. Those indicative of a seizure are “(1) threatening presence of several officers; (2) display of weapons by officer; (3) some physical touching of the individual; and (4) use of language or tone of voice indicating that compliance with the request might be compelled.” Those factors indicative of a consensual stop are “(1) questioning in public; (2) officers not wearing uniforms; (3) displaying no weapons; (4) approaching, not summoning, an individual and identifying oneself as a law enforcement official; and (5) requesting, not demanding, to ask questions or see identification.” INS v. Delgado demonstrates a complex mixture of these factors, making the determination difficult. For example, while the workers were free to move about the factory, INS agents were stationed at all exits, possibly indicating a level of detention.
Opinion of the Court
Justice William Rehnquist delivered the opinion of the court, which Chief Justice Warren E. Burger and Justices Byron White, Harry Blackmun, Sandra Day O’Connor, and John P. Stevens joined. John P. Stevens filed a concurring opinion in the result. William J. Brennan filed and Thurgood Marshall joined an opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part. 
Concurring Opinion
The Court held that “The factory surveys did not result in the seizure of the entire workforces, and the individual questioning of the respondent employees by INS agents concerning their citizenship did not amount to a detention or seizure under the Fourth Amendment.” The decision is broken down into a few key components. For one, interrogation by members of law enforcement for one’s identity or identification does not in itself constitute a Fourth Amendment seizure. Also, so long as a “reasonable person” would not have reason to believe that he could not leave the questioning, it does not constitute a detention under the Fourth Amendment. While the Court accepted that the ability of the workers to leave the questioning was “meaningfully restricted”, it was restricted by their obligations to their employer and not by the INS. Further, the entire workforce of the factory was not seized during the sweeps, though agents were placed by the doors. The agents’ presence at the exits was held to be nothing more than a measure to make sure that all workers were questioned, and “If mere questioning did not constitute a seizure when it occurred inside the factory, it was no more a seizure when it occurred at the exits.” Lastly, as there was no seizure of the workforce in its entirety, the respondents may only litigate what happened to them individually and, based on their testimonies, all of their interactions with agents were nothing more than “classic consensual encounters.” 
Dissenting Opinion
The dissenting opinion, written by Justice Brennan and joined by Justice Marshall, calls the decision of the Court a “sleight of hand.” Brennan cited a number of preceding cases, including Terry v. Ohio and United States v. Mendenhall, drawing up a general rule from Mendenhall as follows; that "the threatening presence of several officers, the display of a weapon by an officer, some physical touching of the person of the citizen, or the use of language or tone of voice indicating that compliance with the officer's request might be compelled” is a threshold indication of a seizure taking place. Brennan concluded that the factory sweep was very much a seizure. While there was no restraint of the individuals physically, the sudden and systematic intrusion of 15 to 25 agents upon the factory and the manner in which they dealt with the workers demonstrated a “show of force” and created an “intimidating atmosphere” with “widespread disturbance among workers”, fit to indicate that a reasonable person would not feel free to leave, and that a seizure was in fact taking place. 
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Immigration case law
"""

From "Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Doherty" ==> """
Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Doherty, 502 U.S. 314 (1992), was a United States Supreme Court case which confirmed that the Attorney General of the United States has broad discretion to reopen deportation (now called "removal") proceedings, as well as other adjudications heard before immigration courts.
Background
John Patrick Doherty was a citizen of Northern Ireland, Ireland, and the United Kingdom. In May 1980, Doherty and fellow members of the Irish Republican Army ambushed a car containing members of the British army, killing one of them. Doherty was tried for murder in Northern Ireland, but escaped from the maximum security prison where he was being held during the trial. He was convicted in absentia and sentenced to life in prison. After escaping from prison, however, Doherty entered the United States illegally in 1982. He was discovered in June 1983, and deportation proceedings were initiated. During these proceedings, Doherty applied for asylum and withholding of deportation. The United Kingdom asked the United States to extradite Doherty, but a federal judge ruled that he was not extraditable because his crimes were considered political offenses for which extradition was not required.
At the conclusion of the extradition proceedings, the deportation proceedings resumed. Doherty conceded deportability and designated Ireland as the country to which he should be deported. He then withdrew his applications for asylum and withholding of deportation. The INS challenged Doherty's selection of Ireland as his country of deportation, but the Board of Immigration Appeals rejected the selection as unsupported by clear evidence. The INS then appealed this determination to the Attorney General. Ultimately, Attorney General Edwin Meese reversed the BIA and ordered Doherty deported to the United Kingdom.
By this time, the Irish Extradition Act had been passed, under which criminals in Ireland would face trial in the United Kingdom. Doherty thus sought to reopen the deportation proceedings in order to present his claims for asylum and withholding of deportation. He asserted that under the Irish Extradition Act, the British would seek to extradite him to the United Kingdom from Ireland if he should return there, and consequently he feared persecution in the United Kingdom. The BIA granted Doherty's motion to reopen, and the INS again appealed to the Attorney General. Attorney General Richard Thornburgh found three grounds for denying the motion to reopen.
The Second Circuit affirmed Meese's order of deportation but reversed Thornburgh's order denying Doherty's motion to reopen. It believed that the Irish Extradition Act, coupled with Meese's denial of his designation of Ireland as his country of deportation (itself an unusual act) was new evidence that entitled Doherty to reopening. It also ruled that following INS v. Abudu, , the Attorney General lacked discretion to deny reopening once an alien had established a prima facie case for withholding of deportation. Finally, the Second Circuit ordered the BIA to reevaluate Doherty's claim for asylum in light of the "foreign policy concerns" inherent in deporting a member of the IRA to Ireland.
Opinion of the Court
When Attorney General Thornburgh denied Doherty's motion to reopen, he offered three separate grounds for doing so. First, Thornburgh concluded that Doherty did not present new evidence that warranted reopening. Second, he concluded that Doherty had waived his claims to asylum and withholding of deportation when he abandoned those claims during the original deportation proceedings. Third, he concluded that Doherty was ineligible for withholding of deportation and for asylum because he had committed "serious nonpolitical crimes" in Northern Ireland.
Motions to reopen are disfavored, particularly in deportation proceedings, because they can upset the finality of determinations made and simply work to the advantage of deportable aliens who wish nevertheless to remain in the United States. After Abudu, courts review denials of motions to reopen for abuse of discretion. A majority of the Court concluded that Thornburgh had not abused his discretion in denying Doherty's motion for any one of the three reasons he gave.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 502
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
External links
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:Deportation from the United States
"""

From "Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Elias-Zacarias" ==> """
Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Elias-Zacarias, 502 U.S. 478 (1992), is a case in which the United States Supreme Court ruled that a Guatemalan man seeking asylum in the United States of America as a result of forced conscription in a guerrilla army did not establish persecution on account of political opinion, a legal requirement for asylum.
Facts
In July 1987, Jairo Jonathan Elias-Zacarias was arrested for illegally entering the United States without inspection. In deportation proceedings, he testified that six months before he was arrested, in his native Guatemala, two armed, uniformed guerrillas covering their faces with handkerchiefs entered his home. The armed guerrillas demanded that he and his parents join the rebellion, but they all refused. Elias-Zacarias did not want to join the guerrillas because they were against the government, and he was afraid the government would retaliate against him if he joined the guerrillas. Elias-Zacarias left Guatemala in March, 1987, because he was afraid the guerrillas would return.
After an immigration judge denied his application for asylum, and the Board of Immigration Appeals denied an appeal, he submitted new evidence saying that after he had left Guatemala, the guerrillas had returned to his home twice more seeking to recruit him. The BIA rejected the new evidence, saying it would not change the fact that he was not legally eligible for asylum. He appealed this denial to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, which concluded that Elias-Zacarias had established a well founded fear of persecution–of being conscripted into the guerrilla army in Guatemala. The INS asked the Supreme Court to review the Ninth Circuit's decision.
Opinion of the Court
Under the Immigration and Nationality Act, (a)(42), any alien who is "unable or unwilling to return to his home country because of persecution or a well-founded fear of persecution on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion" is eligible for asylum in the United States. The Court emphasized that, when a refugee applies for asylum on account of political opinion, the refugee must actually be expressing a political opinion, and it is the political opinion of the refugee that is important, not that of his persecutors. Because neither of these applied to Elias-Zacarias, the Court had to ultimately deny his application for asylum.
There were many reasons apparent to the Court why a person might not want to join a guerrilla organization, and not all of them were related to a political opinion. He might be afraid of combat, he might want to remain with his family and friends, he might wish to "earn a better living in civilian life." None of these explanations was germane to any political opinion Elias-Zacarias might have been expressing.
And as for the political motives of the guerrillas, the Court found these to be beside the point.  The statute, after all, made a refugee eligible for asylum only if the persecution he experienced was "on account of political opinion."  The Court thought that the "ordinary meaning" of these words referred to the victim'''s political opinion, not the persecutor's. "If a Nazi regime persecutes Jews, it is not, within the ordinary meaning of language, engaging in persecution on account of political opinion; and if a fundamentalist Moslem regime persecutes democrats, it is not engaging in persecution on account of religion. Thus, the mere existence of a generalized 'political' motive underlying the guerrillas' forced recruitment is inadequate to establish... the proposition that Elias-Zacarias fears persecution on account of political opinion."
Further, even if the Court were to accept the proposition that not taking a political opinion was in itself a political opinion, Elias-Zacarias had to establish that he feared the guerrillas would persecute him because of that political opinion. The crucial deficiency on this score was that there was no evidence in the record of what the guerrillas' motives were.
Justice Stevens' dissent
Justice Stevens, writing for himself and two other dissenting Justices, criticized the majority's holding for being too harsh. After all, if he had prevailed, he would simply have been eligible'' for asylum; the ultimate decision to grant him that status still rested with the United States Attorney General. In his view, the majority's decision overlooked this critical fact.
The discretion that rests with the Attorney General was Stevens's point of departure for two other criticisms.  First, "a political opinion can be expressed negatively as well as affirmatively."  Choosing not to take sides in a political dispute is itself a political choice, one that the asylum laws should protect just as much as an affirmative political statement.  Because the Attorney General ultimately retains discretion to grant or deny an application for asylum, Stevens found it to be imprudent to take away from him or her the discretion to extend that protection to an equally deserving class of refugees.  Second, the guerrillas' threat to kill Elias-Zacarias for refusing to join their cause was indisputably "on account of" the political opinion to remain neutral with respect to their fight against the government.
Aftermath
It was assumed following the case that Elias-Zacarias would be deported from the United States.  However, Elias-Zacarias won the visa lottery and became a legal resident. In 2006, he became a U.S. citizen.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 502
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
  "Repairing the Legacy of INS v. Elias-Zacarias"
  www.asylumlaw.org
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:1992 in international relations
Category:Right of asylum case law
Category:Right of asylum in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Deportation from the United States
"""

From "Immigration and Naturalization Service v. St. Cyr" ==> """
Immigration and Naturalization Service v. St. Cyr, 533 U.S. 289 (2001), is a United States Supreme Court case involving habeas corpus and INA § 212(c) relief (repealed 1997) for deportable aliens.
 Facts 
Enrico St. Cyr, a Haitian citizen, had been a lawful permanent resident (LPR) of the United States for ten years when he pleaded guilty to a controlled substance violation in Connecticut. Under the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA), St. Cyr became "removable" after he was convicted of a controlled substance violation. ("The term 'removable' means—(A) in the case of an alien not admitted to the United States, that the alien is inadmissible under section 1182 of this title, or (B) in the case of an alien admitted to the United States, that the alien is deportable under section 1227 of this title."); see also Tima v. Attorney General of the U.S., 903 F.3d 272, 277 (3d Cir. 2018);  Before the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA)Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996, . and the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 (IIRIRA),Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996, , Div. C. INA § 212(c) was interpreted to give the U.S. Attorney General broad discretion to waive deportation of certain LPRs. The AEDPA and IIRIRA, however, limited relief to LPRs and non-LPRs. U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft argued that AEDPA and IIRIRA stripped him of the authority to grant St. Cyr any waiver. St. Cyr, who had pleaded guilty on March 8, 1996, which was prior to the enactment of AEDPA and IIRIRA, had removal proceedings brought against him on April 10, 1997, after the enactment of these Acts, conceded removability but argued that he was entitled to a writ of habeas corpus. The U.S. District for the District of Connecticut accepted St. Cyr's habeas corpus application and agreed that the new restrictions do not apply to removal proceedings brought against an LPR who pleaded guilty to a deportable crime before the enactment of AEDPA and IIRIRA. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed.
 Issues 
The Supreme Court answered two questions. The first one was procedural. Do the AEDPA and IIRIRA strip federal district courts of habeas corpus jurisdiction over deportable aliens as previously granted under ? The substantive question was whether the federal laws deny relief under INA § 212(c) to LPRs who would have been eligible for such relief at the time of their convictions?
 Decision 
In a 5-4 opinion, Justice John Paul Stevens wrote for the majority stating that Congress did not intend to strip the federal district courts of their authority to hear habeas petitions from deportable aliens, and that the AEDPA and IIRIRA did not deny relief under INA § 212(c) to LPRs who would have been eligible for such relief at the time of their convictions.. Stevens reasoned that the Supreme Court should interpret statutes as avoiding constitutional issues, such as abridging the right to habeas corpus. He also argued that there is a presumption that administrative proceedings can be appealed to Article III federal courts.
 Dissent 
Justice Antonin Scalia dissented, arguing that the plain language of the AEDPA and IIRIRA stripped the federal district courts of jurisdiction to entertain habeas corpus petitions. He also argued that the majority was forcing Congress to use "magic words" to overcome the presumption of habeas corpus relief.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 533
List of United States Supreme Court cases
 References 
External links
 I-191, Application for Relief Under Former Section 212(c) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA)
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:Suspension Clause case law
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:Deportation from the United States
Category:Haiti–United States relations
"""

From "Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Stevic" ==> """
Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Predrag Stevic, 467 U.S. 407 (1984), was a Supreme Court of the United States decision that held if an alien seeks to avoid deportation proceedings by claiming that he will be persecuted if he is returned to his native land, he must show a "clear probability" that he will be persecuted there.
Facts
In 1976, Predrag Stevic, a citizen of Yugoslavia, entered the United States to visit his sister in Chicago. He overstayed his visa, and the Immigration and Naturalization Service began deportation proceedings against him. At the hearing, Stevic conceded that he was deportable and agreed to leave by February 1977. In January 1977, however, he married a United States citizen, who applied for a visa on Stevic's behalf. When Stevic's wife died in a car accident shortly after the wedding, however, the visa was automatically revoked, and the INS ordered Stevic deported.  
Stevic then sought withholding of deportation and claimed that he would be persecuted in Yugoslavia for anticommunist activities in which he had engaged after his wedding. He also said that his father-in-law had been imprisoned there, also for anticommunist activities. He claimed he feared persecution if he returned to Yugoslavia.
The Board of Immigration Appeals ultimately denied his application without a hearing and explained that Stevic had not presented any further evidence he would be persecuted in Yugoslavia. The BIA also rejected Stevic's second attempt in 1980 to forestall deportation, despite a change in the law passed by Congress that arguably might have been more favorable to Stevic.  
Stevic appealed the 1980 decision to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.  It held that the law simply required an alien to show a "well-founded fear" of persecution, instead of a "clear probability," and remanded the case to the immigration department for a plenary hearing. The INS asked the Supreme Court to hear the case.
Opinion of the Court
The case centered on the change of the law imposed by Congress in 1980 and whether that change lowered the standard for claiming asylum from a "clear probability" of persecution to a "well-founded fear" of persecution. The Court stated that "in 1980 Congress intended to adopt a standard of withholding of deportation claims by reference to pre-existing sources of law." There were three such sources: United States law before 1968; the United Nations Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees, to which the United States acceded in 1968; and United States law between 1968 and 1980.
Before 1968, United States law required an alien to demonstrate a clear probability of persecution in order to be eligible for withholding of deportation, which was available to aliens only within the United States, not at the border. The United States Attorney General could not conditionally admit aliens for limited purposes until 1976. The United States acceded to the UN protocol on refugees in 1968, but both the President and the Senate believed that doing so would require no modification of statutory law. In 1973, however, the BIA confronted the issue of whether acceding to the UN protocol had modified the standard for withholding of deportation. It concluded the protocol did not change the standard. Nevertheless, the term "well-founded fear" crept into some court decisions. The Seventh Circuit concluded in 1977 that a well-founded fear of persecution was functionally equivalent to a clear probability of persecution, and the Second, Fifth, and Ninth Circuits reached the same conclusion as well.
In 1980, Congress finally conformed United States statutory law to the UN protocol, but the modifications did not clarify how great a possibility of persecution must exist before the alien can qualify for withholding of removal. The statute spoke of withholding if the alien's life "would" be threatened, not if it "might" or "could" be threatened. Other statutes dealing with the discretionary grant of asylum referred to the well-founded fear standard, but that was not the case for the statutes dealing with withholding of deportation.
The Court thus concluded that some higher standard was required for the alien to receive the mandatory relief of withholding of removal. The Court assumed also that the standard for discretionary relief was lower than that for mandatory relief and so held that "an application [for withholding of deportation] be supported by evidence establishing that it is more likely than not that the alien would be subject to persecution on one of the specified grounds."
The Court determined, "The Court of Appeals granted respondent relief based on its understanding of a standard which, even if properly understood, does not entitle an alien to withholding of deportation under 243(h). Our holding does, of course, require the Court of Appeals to reexamine this record to determine whether the evidence submitted by respondent entitles him to a plenary hearing under the proper standard. The judgment of the Court of Appeals is reversed, and the cause is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion."
Stevic was thus remanded to the Second Circuit to determine whether the alien would be entitled to withholding of deportation under the standard that the Supreme Court had articulated.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 467
External links
  asylumlaw.org
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:1984 in international relations
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Deportation from the United States
"""

From "Impression Prods., Inc. v. Lexmark Int'l, Inc." ==> """
Impression Products, Inc. v. Lexmark International, Inc., 581 U.S. ___ (2017), is a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States on the exhaustion doctrine in patent law in which the Court held that after the sale of a patented item, the patent holder cannot sue for patent infringement relating to further use of that item, even when in violation of a contract with a customer or imported from outside the United States.. The case concerned a patent infringement lawsuit brought by Lexmark against Impression Products, Inc., which bought used ink cartridges, refilled them, replaced a microchip on the cartridge to circumvent a digital rights management scheme, and then resold them. Lexmark argued that as they own several patents related to the ink cartridges, Impression Products was violating their patent rights. The U.S. Supreme Court, reversing a 2016 decision of the Federal Circuit, held that the exhaustion doctrine prevented Lexmark's patent infringement lawsuit, although Lexmark could enforce restrictions on use or resale of its contracts with direct purchasers under regular contract law (but not as a patent infringement lawsuit). Besides printer and ink manufacturers, the decision of the case could affect the markets of high tech consumer goods and prescription drugs.
Background
Factual setting
thumb|right|300px|Drawing of toner cartridge from one of Lexmark's patents
Lexmark International, Inc. makes and sells printers and toner cartridges for its printers. Lexmark owns a number of patents that cover its cartridges and their use. Lexmark sold the cartridges at issue in this case—some in the United States and some abroad.
 Domestic sales 
Lexmark's domestic sales were in two categories. A "Regular Cartridge" is sold at "list price" and confers an absolute title and property right on the buyer. A "Return Program Cartridge" is sold at a discount of about 20 percent, and is subject to post-sale restrictions: The buyer may not reuse the cartridge after the toner runs out and may not transfer it to anybody else. The first branch of the case turns on the legal status of these post-sale restrictions.
Lexmark manufactured the toner cartridges with microchips in them, which send signals to the printers indicating toner level. When the amount of toner in a cartridge falls below a certain level, the printer will not operate with that cartridge. Also, the printer will not operate with a Return Program Cartridge that has been refilled by a third party. Thus, Lexmark's technology prevented violation of the post-sale restriction against refilling the Return Program Cartridges. The Regular Cartridges do not have this anti-refill feature and can therefore be refilled and reused (but they cost 20 percent more).
"To circumvent this technological measure," however, "third parties have 'hacked' the Lexmark microchips. They created their own "unauthorized replacement" microchips that, when installed in a Return Program cartridge, fool the printer into allowing reuse of that cartridge. Various companies purchase used Return Program Cartridges from the customers who bought them from Lexmark. They replace the microchips with "unauthorized replacement" microchips, refill the cartridges with toner, and sell the "re-manufactured" cartridges to resellers such as Impression Products for marketing to consumers for use with Lexmark printers. Lexmark had previously argued in Lexmark International, Inc. v. Static Control Components, Inc. that replacing these microchips violated copyright law and the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA), but both federal and the Supreme Court have ruled against Lexmark, affirming that replacing the microchips is not in violation of copyright.
Imported cartridges
The second branch of the case involves cartridges that Lexmark sold outside the US. While some of the foreign-sold cartridges were Regular Cartridges and some were Return Program Cartridges, this branch of the case does not involve any distinction among the two types of imported cartridges.
Trial court decision
The district court granted Impression's motion to dismiss Lexmark's claim of infringement involving the single-use cartridges Lexmark had first sold in the United States.Lexmark Int'l, Inc. v. Ink Techs. Printer Supplies, LLC, No. 1:10-cv-564, 2014 WL 1276133 (S.D. Ohio Mar. 27, 2014). The district court concluded that the Supreme Court in Quanta Computer, Inc. v. LG Electronics, Inc..  found exhaustion where "the Supreme Court determined that the agreements [at issue] broadly authorized Intel [the seller] to sell the licensed products without restrictions or conditions."2014 WL 1276133, at *5. The district court said "that Quanta overruled Mallinckrodt sub silentio," and therefore "those post-sale use restrictions do not prevent patent rights from being exhausted given that the initial sales were authorized and unrestricted."2014 WL 1276133, at *5-6.
The district court held, however, that the exhaustion doctrine did not apply to the cartridges that Lexmark had sold abroad. It said that international exhaustion did not apply to patents because Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,. which established international exhaustion in at least some cases, applied only to copyrights. The court therefore denied Impression's motion to dismiss Lexmark's claim of infringement involving the cartridges Lexmark had sold abroad.9 F. Supp. 3d at 838.
Government amicus curiae position
In its amicus curiae brief, the US Government argued that Mallinckrodt had been wrongly decided in 1992 and in any case it had been overruled sub silentio in Quanta. It stated:
In the view of the United States, the first authorized sale of a patented article in the United States wholly exhausts the patentee's exclusive rights in that article, notwithstanding any post-sale restriction imposed by the patentee.
The government also argued that the decision of Jazz Photo Corp. v. United States International Trade Commission (2001) should be partially overruled in light of Kirtsaeng insofar as it held that foreign sales can never exhaust US patent rights. When the patentee neither makes nor authorizes a foreign sale, as occurred in Boesch v. Graff,. it is proper to say no exhaustion occurred. But when the patentee makes or authorizes a foreign sale, and fails expressly to reserve its US rights, then exhaustion should be found. In the present case, Lexmark made the foreign sales and failed to expressly reserve its US rights; therefore, the sale exhausted the patent rights.
thumb|300px|right|Judges of the Federal Circuit
Federal Circuit decision
thumb|Federal Circuit oral argument on March 6, 2015.
thumb|Federal Circuit re-argument en banc on October 15, 2015.
The parties each appealed.  After a three judge panel had heard oral argument the Federal Circuit sua sponte set the case for argument en banc in the first instance and invited the filing of amicus curiae briefs.
Majority opinion
Judge Taranto, writing for a 10-2 majority, reaffirmed both of the prior Federal Circuit rulings. In summary, the court held:
First, we adhere to the holding of Mallinckrodt, Inc. v. Medipart, Inc. that a patentee, when selling a patented article subject to a single-use/no-resale restriction that is lawful and clearly communicated to the purchaser, does not by that sale give the buyer, or downstream buyers, the resale/reuse authority that has been expressly denied. Such resale or reuse, when contrary to the known, lawful limits on the authority conferred at the time of the original sale, remains unauthorized and therefore remains infringing conduct under the terms of § 271. Under Supreme Court precedent, a patentee may preserve its § 271 rights through such restrictions when licensing others to make and sell patented articles; Mallinckrodt held that there is no sound legal basis for denying the same ability to the patentee that makes and sells the articles itself. We find Mallinckrodt's principle to remain sound after the Supreme Court's decision in Quanta Computer, Inc. v. LG Electronics, Inc. . . .
Second, we adhere to the holding of Jazz Photo Corp. v. International Trade Comm'n, that a U.S. patentee, merely by selling or authorizing the sale of a U.S.-patented article abroad, does not authorize the buyer to import the article and sell and use it in the United States, which are infringing acts in the absence of patentee-conferred authority. Jazz Photo's no-exhaustion ruling recognizes that foreign markets under foreign sovereign control are not equivalent to the U.S. markets under U.S. control in which a U.S. patentee's sale presumptively exhausts its rights in the article sold. A buyer may still rely on a foreign sale as a defense to infringement, but only by establishing an express or implied license—a defense separate from exhaustion, as Quanta holds—based on patentee communications or other circumstances of the sale. We conclude that Jazz Photo's no-exhaustion principle remains sound after the Supreme Court's decision in Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., in which the Court did not address patent law or whether a foreign sale should be viewed as conferring authority to engage in otherwise-infringing domestic acts. Kirtsaeng is a copyright case holding that 17 U.S.C. § 109(a) entitles owners of copyrighted articles to take certain acts "without the authority" of the copyright holder. There is no counterpart to that provision in the Patent Act, under which a foreign sale is properly treated as neither conclusively nor even presumptively exhausting the U.S. patentee's rights in the United States.816 F.3d at 726-27.
Domestic exhaustion
In this part of its opinion, the Federal Circuit reaffirmed its Mallincrodt decision and rejected contentions that Quanta had silently overruled it.
§ 271 abrogates common-law rule
The court began by distinguishing the Patent Act's and Copyright Act's respective approaches to infringement. in 17 U.S.C. § 109(a) the Copyright Act says, "Notwithstanding the provisions of section 106(3)," defining infringement by selling, a purchaser "is entitled, without the authority of the copyright owner, to sell or otherwise dispose of the possession" of a purchased copy of a work. In contrast, the Patent Act contains no exhaustion provision. Therefore, the Patent Act requires a "conferral of 'authority' by the patentee . . . in order for the actions listed in § 271(a) not to constitute infringement." This means there must be "permission from the patentee" to avoid infringement. The court does not accept exhaustion as a form of "constructive" permission. Hence, if the patentee places explicit limits or conditions on its permission, they qualify the scope of the permission. This has the effect of limiting the common law.
General Talking Pictures rule applies to "conditional" sale
The court turned to the General Talking Pictures decision, which holds "that Lexmark would not have exhausted its patent rights in those cartridges, upon the manufacturing licensee's sale (the first sale), if a buyer with knowledge of the restrictions resold or reused them in violation of the restrictions." Although the government in its amicus curiae brief and defendant Impression argue "that a different result is required—that Lexmark automatically lost its patent rights—simply because Lexmark sold the Return Program cartridges itself, subject to the same communicated restriction, rather than having left the manufacture and sale to others under license," the court does not accept that:
We conclude otherwise, as we did in Mallinckrodt and subsequent decisions. A sale made under a clearly communicated, otherwise-lawful restriction as to post-sale use or resale does not confer on the buyer and a subsequent purchaser the "authority" to engage in the use or resale that the restriction precludes. And there is no sound reason, and no Supreme Court precedent, requiring a distinction that gives less control to a practicing-entity patentee that makes and sells its own product than to a non-practicing-entity patentee that licenses others to make and sell the product.
Quanta distinguishable and inapplicable
The court turned to the Quanta decision and found it inapplicable to the present issues. "'Quanta did not involve a patentee's sale at all, let alone one subject to a restriction or, more particularly, a single-use/no-resale restriction." Rather, Quanta involved a patentee's (LGE's) license to a manufacturer (Intel) that sold to the accused infringer (Quanta). LGE had not limited Intel's license to manufacture the patented product, although it imposed contractual obligations on Intel. "No conditions limited Intel's authority to sell products substantially embodying the patents." The Federal Circuit emphasized: "There were no patentee sales, and there were no restrictions on the sales made by the licensee." Those facts were removed from the case at bar. Thus the Quanta "Court's discussion of that issue does not undermine Mallinckrodts ruling that a patentee can preserve its patent rights through restrictions on its sales." The Federal Circuit also emphasized as significant the failure of the Quanta Court to explicitly repudiate Mallinckrodt despite the fact that in its amicus brief "the government prominently featured an argument that Mallinckrodt was incorrect and should be repudiated."
Prior cases
The court then turned to the prior Supreme Court cases. Reviewing them, it found that although they used sweeping language that a patentee's sale of the patented product placed it beyond the reach of the patent, so that no post-sale restriction could be enforced under the patent laws, that language went beyond the actual facts of the cases. First, the sales were in most cases without any condition or restriction on what the buyer might do with the product. Second, in the cases where an explicit condition or restriction was imposed, the case involved a tie-in or a price-fix.
The Court conceded that in the General Electric case, the Supreme Court had said: "It is well settled, as already said, that where a patentee makes the patented article, and sells it, he can exercise no future control over what the purchaser may wish to do with the article after his purchase. It has passed beyond the scope of the patentee's rights." But that case involved an antitrust challenge to GE's distribution of lamps that did not meet that description. The case involved price restrictions on a licensed manufacturer. The Federal Circuit then explained that the word "settled" in the Supreme Court's statement had a special, narrow meaning:
"We read that language to deem 'settled' only what was settled in the cited precedents—a patentee's sales without restrictions exhaust patent rights in the item sold." Thus, the Supreme Court's sweeping exhaustion language applies precedentially only to cases in which either the sale was without condition or restriction or else the sale was made with a tie-in or price-fixing condition. "But the Court did not rule that all restrictions on a patentee's sale were ineffective to preserve the patentee's patent-law rights."
Similarly, in United States v. Univis Lens Co., the Supreme Court's sweeping language must now be limited to the factual context of the case:
Moreover, although some language in Univis,  like language in other decisions in the area, can be taken out of context and read as going beyond the specific restrictions involved, the most the Court ruled, even as to patent law all by itself, was that a vertical price-control restriction was ineffective to preserve patent rights after sales of articles embodying the patents. While Univis is controlling on what it decided on the issues before it, we do not think it appropriate to give broad effect to language in Univis, taken out of context, to support an otherwise-unjustified conclusion here on a question not faced there.
The Federal Circuit therefore drew this conclusion from the past series of Supreme Court cases on exhaustion:
For the foregoing reasons, we think that the best lesson to draw from the Supreme Court's precedents, as applied to the question before us, is that a patentee may preserve its patent rights by otherwise-proper restrictions when it makes and sells patented articles itself and not only when it contracts out manufacturing and sales.
Patent law trumps common law
The Federal Circuit returned to the common law and Lord Coke's commentary on it. Again, the court insisted that Congress had overridden the common law's prohibitions on post-sale restraints, in order to promote technological progress:
[W]hatever considerations might go into a jurisdiction's choice as to the background rule for personal property in general, lawmaking authorities may reasonably make different choices for particular kinds of property. Notably, as to intellectual property in its various forms, Congress, implementing the Constitution, has long deemed it important to incentivize creation and disclosure through grants to the creator of rights to exclude others for a time. . . . That overriding legislative prescription removes the patented-article sale from the scope of Lord Coke's 1628 description of his country's general judicially fashioned property law. . . . In short, notwithstanding Lord Coke's description of English general personal-property judge-made law, the patent-specific statutory analysis must govern here.
Likely effects on public
The court then turned to what it called "the likely real-world consequences of one answer or another to the exhaustion question presented here." The court noted that in Kirtsaeng the Supreme Court had envisioned serious adverse effects on competition unless Coke's 1628 property law rules were followed. The Federal Circuit said that did not apply to patents:
[W]e see no basis for predicting the extreme, lop-sided impacts the Court found plausible in Kirtsaeng in different circumstances. Mallinckrodt has been the governing case law since 1992 and has been reiterated in subsequent precedent. And yet we have been given no reliable demonstration of widespread problems not being solved in the marketplace. Given General Talking Pictures, the only question is about patentees' ability to do for their own sales what they already can do by contracting out their manufacturing and sales. Regarding the specific scenario we are addressing today—in which the patentee has sought to preserve its patent rights by conditioning its first sale on a single-use/no-resale restriction of which the accused infringer had adequate notice at the time of purchase—we have been given no proof of a significant problem with enforcing patent rights.
Furthermore, the Federal Circuit maintained, the conduct challenged here can have benefits. Under Lexmark's program, customers who agree to the restriction pay a lower price than those who do not. It could be that the companies that refill the cartridges use inferior products that could harm the Lexmark machines, which "could harm Lexmark's reputation." To assume that the restrictions are illegitimate would run counter to the trends "over the last four decades, that have displaced the strict condemnation of various vertical restrictions that characterized" earlier antitrust and patent-misuse law in the first part of the twentieth century. "Field-of-use, territorial, and other limitations on intellectual property licenses may serve procompetitive ends by allowing the licensor to exploit its property as efficiently and effectively as possible." Therefore, the court concluded it is appropriate to apply to post-sale restrictions the same tolerance that the General Talking Pictures doctrine accords limitations in manufacturing licenses.
International exhaustion
In this part of its opinion, the Federal Circuit reaffirmed its Jazz Photo opinion and rejected contentions that Kirtsaeng had undermined the basis for Jazz Photo. The Federal Circuit insisted that "Kirtsaeng says nothing about patent law."
The court emphasized the differences between patent law and copyright law. For example, patent law gives patentees an exclusive right to use of the invention but copyright law gives no general exclusionary right as to use (it gives exclusive public performance and display "use" rights, but not others). Also, it is much more costly and time-consuming to obtain a patent than a copyright. The court did not explain, however, the way that or other differences between copyrights and patents called for contrary results as to international exhaustion.
The court did say that the US patent statute gives patentees the reward available from "sales in American markets, not from sales in foreign markets." A sale in a foreign market therefore does not furnish a proper basis for finding exhaustion. "American markets differ substantially from markets in many other countries, and not just because of disparities in wealth that can lead to dramatically different prices" in this country and abroad (as was the case in Kirtsaeng). "Government policies differ dramatically, including policies on price regulation and, most particularly, policies on the availability and scope of patent protection." The court did not explain further, however, whether and how such dramatic differences in policy applied to the toner cartridges at issue in the present case.
The court then turned to the only Supreme Court case on foreign exhaustion, Boesch v. Graff. In that case, Graff was the assignee of a US patent. Boesch bought the product from a German supplier who had a prior-user right under German law to make and sell the product, because the supplier had begun activity before the application for the German counterpart patent was filed. The US assignee and the inventor had no connection with Boesch. When Graff imported the product into the US, Boesch sued for infringement. The US courts found Boesch liable. The rights that Boesch had under German law did not entitle him to import the product into the US. That is governed by US law. The US patentee had never "received any royalty or given any license to use the patented article in any part of the United States."
Accordingly, the court held, a foreign sale does not of its own force authorize importation into the US.
This does not mean, however, that a patentee by its conduct cannot waive its US rights, be estopped from asserting them, or be found to have granted an implied license.
The court expressed concern that overruling Jazz Photo would harm the US drug industry:
There seems to be no dispute that U.S.-patented medicines are often sold outside the United States at substantially lower prices than those charged here and, also, that the practice could be disrupted by the increased arbitrage opportunities that would come from deeming U.S. rights eliminated by a foreign sale made or authorized by the U.S. patentee.
Finally, the court rejected a proposal that exhaustion should be presumed unless the patentee express states that it reserves its US rights. Foreign governments might "prohibit sellers from stating reservations of rights that would make importation into and sale in the United States more difficult." Also: "Intermediary companies between the foreign purchase and the importation into the United States may be created that make it difficult for the U.S. patentee to carry an affirmative burden of proving adequate notice of reservations attached to a foreign-sold article."
Dissenting opinion
Judge Dyk, joined by Judge Hughes, dissented from both branches of the court's exhaustion analysis. Judge Dyk summarized his dissent in these terms:
I would overrule our decision in Mallinckrodt as inconsistent with governing Supreme Court authority and overrule Jazz Photo to the extent that it imposes a blanket ban on foreign exhaustion. I would recognize foreign exhaustion where the U.S. rights holder has not notified the buyer of its retention of the U.S. patent rights.
Domestic exhaustion
In this part of the dissent, Judge Dyk argued that the majority had misunderstood the Supreme Court's exhaustion jurisprudence in order to substitute its own ideas of the proper balance between patent rights and public rights. He began by saying:
First, I agree with the government that Mallinckrodt was wrong when decided, and in any event cannot be reconciled with the Supreme Court's recent decision in Quanta Computer, Inc. v. LG Electronics, Inc. We exceed our role as a subordinate court by declining to follow the explicit domestic exhaustion rule announced by the Supreme Court.
He argued that since 1850 the Supreme Court has held that a sale by the patentee or its licensee exhausts all patent rights. In such cases, "The question of whether the seller has 'authorized' the buyer to use or resell the item is simply irrelevant." Post-sale restrictions could not be enforced under federal patent law. The only Supreme Court case to depart from that principle was Henry v. A.B. Dick Co.,. and it was explicitly overruled five years later by Motion Picture Patents Co. v. Universal Film Mfg. Co.. The principle of the overruled Dick case that a patentee could impost a post-sale restriction by giving a buyer notice of it was "the same as the panel's holding in Mallinckrodt and the majority's holding in this case."
He insisted that the majority opinion misread the Motion Picture Patents decision by asserting "that it only 'held particular restrictions improper' . . . but 'did not rule that all restrictions on a patentee's sale were ineffective to preserve the patentee's patent-law rights.'" He explained:
That is not accurate. Motion Picture Patents did not leave behind the remnants of A.B. Dick—minus tie-ins and resale price maintenance. To the contrary, the Court in Motion Picture Patents found that "[t]he patent law furnishes no warrant for" the restrictions imposed by the patent owner.
Later cases, such as Quanta, confirmed this "broad patent exhaustion rule [in Motion Picture Patents] and left no room for a resurrection of A.B. Dick."
He next turned to the majority's referenced to "conditional sales" and "unconditional sales," and said that the majority misconstrued the terms. "Conditional sales," he said, as used in pre-Mallinckrodt case law referred only to the retention of title for a security interest in installment purchases. "In other words, a sale with restrictions could nonetheless be an 'unconditional' sale in which title passes, with the restrictions invalid under the patent laws because of exhaustion."
He then criticized the majority for making up special rules for patent cases that differed from the common law and general legal principles, citing Supreme Court admonitions not to do that--"The Supreme Court has repeatedly instructed us not to ignore traditional legal principles to fashion rules 'unique to patent disputes.'"
Finally, Judge Dyk took issue on multiple grounds with the majority's efforts to distinguish and limit the Supreme Court's rulings. "The majority's justifications for refusing to follow Supreme Court authority establishing the exhaustion rule misconceive our role as a subordinate court." Each justification in the majority decision was unsupportable, he said.
 "First, the majority characterizes the statement of the exhaustion rule in the Supreme Court cases as mere dictum because in those cases there was either no restriction imposed or the restriction would otherwise violate the antitrust laws. But the cases impose no such qualification on the rule announced. The Supreme Court has repeatedly advised the courts of appeals that our task is to follow the rules proclaimed by the Court, and not to attempt to distinguish Supreme Court cases on their facts."
 "Second, the majority relies on 35 U.S.C. §§ 271(a) and 154(a)(1) to suggest that a broad reading of the exhaustion doctrine is inconsistent with statutory language making an act of infringement . . . any use or sale of a patented invention 'without authority' of the patent owner, and providing the patent owner with a 'right to exclude.'" But the patent exhaustion doctrine is a limitation on the operation of those sections, and applies notwithstanding them.
 "Third, the majority claims that giving full sweep to the articulation of the exhaustion doctrine in Quanta and other cases would be inconsistent with the Supreme Court's decision in General Talking Pictures Corp. v. Western Electric Co. . . . The majority suggests it would be incongruous if 'a patentee cannot preserve its patent rights against uses of a patented article . . . if, instead of licensing someone else to make and sell the article, it chooses to make and sell the article itself.' "
But General Talking Pictures was a case of a license to manufacture in a limited field,  not a sale with a post-sale restriction. The cases recognize that distinction. Thus, in Quanta the Supreme Court stated that General Talking Pictures "held that exhaustion did not apply because the manufacturer had no authority to sell the amplifiers for commercial use."553 U.S. at 636. And where the manufacturer in that case (Intel) did have a general authority to make and sell, the Supreme Court held that exhaustion applied to the sale.
The majority found "tension" between "the Supreme Court's broad statement of the exhaustion rule and General Talking Pictures" and sought to resolve it by extending the rule of General Talking Pictures and contracting the exhaustion doctrine in the area of possible conflict. But, Dyk maintained:
[I]t is not our task to ignore Supreme Court rulings as "unjustifi[ed]" or "unsound" because they are purportedly inconsistent with other Supreme Court cases. The distinction between restrictions on sales (impermissible) and restrictions on licensees (permissible) exists in the Court's precedent, and it is not for us to decide if it is a sound distinction.
 "Finally, the majority proposes that we should somehow sustain the restriction here because it may be pro-competitive. Exhaustion does not turn on whether a particular post-sale restriction is desirable or undesirable, pro-competitive or anti-competitive, but whether the sale was authorized and the item has passed beyond the scope of the patent monopoly." Furthermore, the Supreme Court said in Kirtsaeng that a prohibition on resale is "manifestly anti-competitive."Kirtsaeng, 133 S.Ct. at 1363.
Dyk concluded his discussion of domestic exhaustion with the statement: "There is, in sum, no colorable basis for the majority's failure to follow the exhaustion rule for domestic sales as articulated by the Court in Quanta and numerous other cases."
International exhaustion
In this part of the dissent, Judge Dyk argued for a nuanced balance that called for different results depending on whether the patentee was responsible for the sale abroad that was alleged to trigger exhaustion.
He began by pointing out that because Lexmark's foreign sales were made without any restrictions or reservations, "even under the majority's cramped view of exhaustion, there is no question that the sales would have exhausted Lexmark's domestic patent rights. The issue is whether the foreign location of the sale should lead to a different result, as we previously held in Jazz Photo."
He then turned to "the centerpiece of the majority's holding that there is a doctrinal blanket ban on foreign exhaustion, namely the Supreme Court's decision in Boesch v. Graff. But "Boesch announced no such blanket ban," he said. "It did not even involve an authorized sale by the holder of U.S. patent rights but rather a sale by a third party under a foreign law's prior use exception." But "Boesch does not apply here because the foreign sales were made by Lexmark."
In every US lower court decision before Jazz Photo: "When the sale was made by an entity not holding U.S. patent rights, as in Boesch, or when the authorized foreign seller clearly reserved U.S. rights, there was no exhaustion." In contrast, "where the foreign sale was made by a seller holding U.S. patent rights without a contractual reservation of U.S. rights, exhaustion occurred as a result of an authorized foreign sale."
Dyk maintained that "Kirtsaeng provides significant guidance and cannot be dismissed as simply a copyright case, or as limited to the 'first sale' provision of the Copyright Act." Rather, the policies that animated Kirtsaeng typically apply to patent exhaustion. But because in some cases a difference may be significant, there should be abalanced approach. Dyk argued for "put[ting] the burden on the U.S. rights holder to provide notice of a reservation of U.S. rights to the purchaser." Thus, he "would recognize foreign exhaustion where the U.S. rights holder has not notified the buyer of its retention of the U.S. patent rights."
Supreme Court
In March 2016, Impression filed a petition for certiorari in the U.S. Supreme Court.See Petition for a Writ of Certiorari, Impression Products, Inc. v. Lexmark International, Inc., No. 15-1189. Impression presented these questions in its petition:Br. Pet. at i.
   1. Whether a "conditional sale" that transfers title to the patented item while specifying post-sale restrictions on the article's use or resale avoids application of the patent exhaustion doctrine and therefore permits the enforcement of such post-sale restrictions through the patent law's infringement remedy.
   2. Whether, in light of this Court's holding in Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 133 S. Ct. 1351, 1363 (2013), that the common law doctrine barring restraints on alienation that is the basis of exhaustion doctrine "makes no geographical distinctions," a sale of a patented article—authorized by the U.S. patentee—that takes place outside of the United States exhausts the U.S. patent rights in that article.
thumb|Supreme Court oral argument 03/21/17
On June 20, 2016, the Court invited the Solicitor General to file briefs in this case expressing the views of the United States.Impression Prods. v. Lexmark Int'l, Inc., No. 15-1189, 2016 U.S. LEXIS 3982, at *1 (June 20, 2016). In October 2016, the government filed the requested amicus curiae brief. It recommended grant of certiorari on both questions. The brief argues that the "Federal Circuit's decision misreads" the Supreme Court's precedents and "would substantially erode the exhaustion doctrine."Brief For The United States As Amicus Curiae on petition for certiorari at 5. The Supreme Court granted certiorari on December 2, 2016Impression Prods. v. Lexmark Int'l, Inc., 2016 U.S. LEXIS 7275. and heard oral argument in the case on March 21, 2017.Ronald Mann. Argument analysis: Justices skeptical of categorical "exhaustion" of patent rights, SCOTUSblog (March 21, 2017). The Court published its decisions on May 30, 2017.
Majority
A unanimous Court found that Lexmark exhausted its patent rights upon first sale domestically, even with the single-use/no-resale restrictions imposed by Lexmark in contracts with its customers, although such restrictions could be enforced under contract law.Impression Prods., slip op. at 5. The Court noted that the exhaustion doctrine has a long historyImpression Prods., slip op. at 5-9. and that any change would have significant effects on commerce in the modern world, noting that "extending the patent rights beyond the first sale would clog the channels of commerce, with little benefit from the extra control that the patentees retain,"Impression Prods., slip op. at 7-8. noting that complex modern supply chains can involve large numbers of patents.Impression Prods., slip op. at 8 (citing Brief for Costco Wholesalers, Corp. et al. as Amicus Curiae at 7-9; Brief for Intel, Corp. et al. as Amicus Curiae at 17, n. 5). Chief Justice Roberts, in his opinion, compared the situation to automobile repair shops: "The business works because the shop can rest assured that, so long as those bringing in the cars own them, the shop is free to repair and resell those vehicles. That smooth flow of commerce would sputter if companies that make the thousands of parts that go into a vehicle could keep their patent rights after the first sale."
Seven justices joined the Court's opinion extending that reasoning to items imported from abroad.Impression Prods., syllabus at 5.Impression Prods., slip op. at 13-18. Lexmark had argued, and the Federal Circuit agreed, that sale abroad "does not trigger patent exhaustion unless the patentee 'expressly or implicitly transfers or licenses' its rights."Impression Prods., slip op. at 13 (quoting Brief for Respondent 36-37)(some internal punctuation marks removed). The Court, however, ruled that "[a]n authorized sale outside the United States, just as one within the United States, exhausts all rights under the Patent Act."Impression Prods., slip op. at 13. The Court relied on its 2013 decision in Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. on a nearly identical issue under copyright law. Because the underlying statute was not clear as to its geographical scope, the Court in Kirtsaeng decided that, because the statute was based in the common law exhaustion doctrine, which is not limited in geographic extent, the statute at issue was therefore not intended to be limited to only U.S. sales.Impression Prods., slip op. at 13-14. Applying the same principle to patent law, which historically has a close connection with copyright law, was "straightforward"Impression Prods., slip op. at 14. and "the bond between [copyright and patent law] leaves no room for a rift on the question of international exhaustion".Impression Prods., slip op. at 14-15.
Partial dissent
Justice Ginsburg dissented from the Court's holding with respect to imported items. Adhering to substantially the same reasoning of her dissent in Kirtsaeng, Justice Ginsburg argued that because patent law is territorial and the sale of an item abroad is "independent[] of the U.S. patent system, it makes little sense to say that such a sale exhausts an inventor's U.S. patent rights."Impression Prods., slip op. at 2 (Ginsburg, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). She would have upheld the Federal Circuit's decision that sale abroad does not exhaust a patentee's rights in the United States.Impression Prods., slip op. at 2-3 (Ginsburg, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).
Commentary
Gerstein
Robert M. Gerstein concluded that further review in the Supreme Court was likely:
Given the Supreme Court's interest in patent cases, a vigorous dissent in Lexmark that relies on a number of Supreme Court precedents, including Quanta and Kirtsaeng, and the position of the Justice Department that Quanta overruled Mallinckrodt, it would not be surprising to see the Supreme Court take up Lexmark in its next term.Robert M. Gerstein, Federal Circuit Sidesteps Supreme Court Twice in Exhaustion Ruling (Feb. 15, 2016).
Dodd and Dowd
Jeff C. Dodd and Matthew J. Dowd viewed the decision as an affirmation of strong patent rights:
Lexmark embraces a very strong view of patent rights and a narrow view of the scope of exhaustion. It affirms that patent holders have wide latitude to segment and control distribution in the market channels for products covered by patents. This latitude is particularly wide with respect to limiting the import into the United States of patented goods sold in authorized sales in foreign markets even where restrictions on resale were not proven to have been communicated to foreign buyers. Even so, the court left open the possibility that foreign sales, under the right circumstances, may incorporate an implied license to import and use the product within the United States.Jeff C. Dodd and Matthew J. Dowd, The En Banc Federal Circuit Holds That Patent Rights Are Not Exhausted by Prior Restricted Sales or by Foreign Sales (Feb. 19, 2016).]
Cukierski and Masia
Kevin J. Cukierski and Adam H. Masia see the decision as "pro-patent owner" but warn again premature celebration:
But take caution—it is likely that the Supreme Court will be asked to hear the case. Given the tension between this case and the Supreme Court's language in Quanta and Kirtsaeng, along with the discord at the district court level and among commentators before the Federal Circuit's decision, there's a good chance the Supreme Court will do so. Until the Supreme Court has its say, you should take precautions in case the Supreme Court takes an expansive view of patent exhaustion and decides to remove these exceptions.Kevin J. Cukierski and Adam H. Masia, Federal Circuit Affirms Pro-Patent Owner Limits on Patent Exhaustion (Feb. 16, 2015),
"Without Precedent"
Another commentator (unsigned comment) indicated a skeptical view of the Federal Circuit's tendency to march to a different drummer. After quoting Judge Dyk's admonition, "We exceed our role as a subordinate court by declining to follow the explicit domestic exhaustion rule announced by the Supreme Court," he (or she) observed:
For present purposes, it is simply worth noting that the Federal Circuit appears to be inching closer again to the concept that patent law is simply a unique beast, with unique rules and requirements. The Supreme Court has taken a skeptical view of that approach in the past. And may well again.
Without Precedent (Feb. 16, 2016).
Jahn, Pichler, and Lo
Paul Jahn, Rufus Pichler and Lincoln Lo raise many questions (mostly about "clear communication") about what the Lexmark majority opinion left unresolved:
 Conflict or tension with Quanta: "Quanta expressly distinguished implied licenses and exhaustion, holding that disclaimers of license rights are 'irrelevant' where 'the right to practice the patents is based not on implied license but on exhaustion.' " But "the Federal Circuit appears to treat exhaustion like an implied license—one that the patentee can disclaim by 'clearly communicate[d]' restrictions." Quanta appears to hold that the patentee's attempt to impose a post-sale restriction on a manufacturing licensee is ineffective if the license does not conform to the General Talking Pictures case.
 "[W]hat arrangement between a seller and buyer is sufficient to deny 'authority.'? It was undisputed in Lexmark that there was 'an express and enforceable contractual agreement' between Lexmark and each end-user, and that the no-resale and no-reuse restrictions were binding on end users.  Yet throughout the Lexmark opinion, the majority suggests that restrictions may be sufficient if 'clearly communicated'—even if well short of a contractual meeting of the minds."
 Another way to put this is what is a "clear communication"? In Jazz Photo, the Federal Circuit noted that the "package instructions [were] not in the form of a contractual agreement by the purchaser to limit reuse of the cameras."  Accordingly, "There was no showing of a 'meeting of the minds' whereby the purchaser, and those obtaining the purchaser's discarded camera, may be deemed to have breached a contract or violated a license limited to a single use of the camera."Jazz Photo, 264 F.3d at 1108. The writers conclude, therefore, "It is unclear if the Federal Circuit intended an expansion of the patentee-seller's ability to avoid exhaustion."
 Also, how clear must a "clear communication" be? "The Federal Circuit appears to limit infringement claims against subsequent downstream buyers to those 'having knowledge of the restrictions.' The appellate court did not elaborate on what defenses a subsequent downstream purchaser without knowledge may have, assuming no exhaustion. The court only mentions in passing that 'we do not have before us the questions that would arise, whether under principles governing bona fide purchasers or otherwise, if a downstream re-purchaser acquired a patented article with less than actual knowledge of the restriction.' "
 Finally, does the court's focus on "clear communication" have a negative impact on post-sale restrictions that a limited licensee under General Talking Pictures is required to impose? "The Federal Circuit suggested repeatedly that buyers' knowledge of the licensee's field of use limitation may be required for a licensee's sale to be non-exhaustive. While General Talking Pictures did not clearly resolve this question, many licensors have assumed that sales by a licensee outside of its licensed field are unauthorized altogether and are therefore non-exhaustive regardless of the purchaser's knowledge of the field of use limitation." Therefore, does the emphasis, here "on the buyer's knowledge, even if dicta, add to the uncertainty concerning this issue"?Paul Jahn, Rufus Pichler, and Lincoln Lo. Federal Circuit Holds that Restricted Sales and Foreign Sales Do Not Exhaust Patent Rights (Feb. 22, 2016).
Castanias, Nix, and Kazhdan
Gregory A. Castanias, Kelsey I. Nix, and Daniel Kazhdan also point to unresolved issues over which patent owners "must still be cautious":
Lexmark explicitly left open several fact-specific questions, including (i) what happens if someone acquires a patented article with "less than actual knowledge" of the restrictions placed on the original sale by the patent owner and (ii) when would a foreign buyer have an "implied license" to sell in the United States, independent of patent exhaustion. These issues will surely be raised in future cases.Gregory A. Castanias, Kelsey I. Nix, and Daniel Kazhdan,  En Banc Federal Circuit Reaffirms that Foreign Sales and Restricted Domestic Sales Don't Exhaust Patent Rights (Feb. 2016).
Crouch
Dennis Crouch, in Patently-O commented on the issues and provided a summary of the merits briefs filed in the Supreme Court as of January 31, 2017. Crouch opposed the Federal Circuit's ruling on these grounds:
With personal property courts long ago rejected servitudes (such as use and resale restrictions) that bind subsequent purchasers. Unlike real property, personal property moves and is often transferred without substantial paperwork or record-keeping, and allowing a set of unique restrictions has the potential of gumming up the marketplace.  The Federal Circuit in this case went all the way to the other side — holding that the presumption in foreign sales is that no US patent rights are exhausted.  I purchased my last couple of smart phones through the used market – and have also repaired them several times.  Under the law, I probably should have taken steps to ensure that all of the original equipment manufacturers affirmatively granted repair and resale rights.  Coming together, the Federal Circuit's approach here has the potential to limit the market for the repair and reselling of goods.  I would suggest that those activities are incredibly beneficial to our society in terms of resource allocation and avoiding waste as well as empowering citizens and avoiding anticompetitive market behavior.Dennis Crouch, Can Your Patent Block Repair and Resale and Prevent Arbitrage?,  (Jan. 31, 2017).
Notes and references
Notes
References
External links
 SCOTUSblog coverage
 Podcast – Interview with proprietor of Impression Products
Category:Intellectual property law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:2017 in United States case law
Category:Lexmark
"""

From "In re Debs" ==> """
In re Debs, 158 U.S. 564 (1895), was a US labor law case of the United States Supreme Court decision handed down concerning Eugene V. Debs and labor unions.
Background
Eugene V. Debs, president of the American Railway Union, had been involved in the Pullman Strike earlier in 1894 and challenged the federal injunction ordering the strikers back to work where they would face being fired. The injunction had been issued because of the violent nature of the strike. However, Debs refused to end the strike and was subsequently cited for contempt of court; he appealed the decision to the courts.
The main question being debated was whether the federal government had a right to issue the injunction, which dealt with both interstate and intrastate commerce and shipping on rail cars.
Judgment
thumb|alt=The Fuller Court.|The Fuller Court.
Justice David Josiah Brewer for a unanimous court held that the U.S. government had a right to regulate interstate commerce and ensure the operations of the Postal Service, along with a responsibility to "ensure the general welfare of the public." Justice Brewer said the following in summing up the judgment:
Significance
In Loewe v. Lawlor the Supreme Court stated that unions were in fact potentially liable for antitrust violations. In response Congress passed the Clayton Act of 1914 to take unions out of antitrust law. Debs would go on to lose another Supreme Court case in Debs v. United States.
See also
US labor law
 In re
 Debs v. United States
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 158
Notes
References
 Papke, David Ray. (1999) The Pullman Case: The Clash of Labor and Capital in Industrial America. Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas 
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:1895 in United States case law
Category:Rail transport strikes
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Eugene V. Debs
"""

From "In re Electronic Privacy Information Center" ==> """
In Re Electronic Privacy Information Center, 134 S.Ct. 638 (2013), was a direct petition to the Supreme Court of the United States regarding the National Security Agency's (NSA) telephony metadata collection program. On July 8, 2013, the Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC) filed a petition for a writ of mandamus and prohibition, or a writ of certiorari, to vacate an order of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC) in which the court compelled Verizon to produce telephony metadata records from all of its subscribers' calls and deliver those records to the NSA. On November 18, 2013, the Supreme Court denied EPIC's petition.
Background
The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) is a United States federal law which prescribes procedures for the physical and electronic surveillance and collection of "foreign intelligence information" between "foreign powers" and "agents of foreign powers" (which may include American citizens and permanent residents suspected of espionage or terrorism).Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act The Act created the FISC to oversee the FISA requests. The FISC is a secret court populated with judges appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States. The secret nature of the court means that all proceedings are behind closed doors and all decisions are classified. Concerns about the government's surveillance efforts and its use of the Patriot Act were present for years before the case. Two members of the Senate Intelligence Committee, Senator Ron Wyden (D-OR) and Senator Mark Udall (D-CO), had been warning the public about this issue, although they were unable to go into detail because of the confidential nature of the information. In 2012, they wrote an open letter to Attorney General Eric Holder about this issue, saying, "We believe most Americans would be stunned to learn the details of how these secret court opinions have interpreted Section 215 of the Patriot Act."
On June 6, 2013, The Washington Post and The Guardian published a classified FISC order leaked by Edward Snowden. The leaked order compelled Verizon to produce telephony metadata records on an ongoing daily basis to the NSA. This disclosure of the bulk telephony metadata collection initiated public debate about the constitutionality of NSA's surveillance program and brought forth the question of whether the FISC court had exceeded its statutory authority in granting the Verizon order. EPIC, the petitioner in this action, is a public interest research center focused on First Amendment and other constitutional issues of privacy, open government, free speech, and other civil liberties.
Facts
The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) filed an application with the FISC to compel Verizon to produce telephony metadata from its customers' calls for 90 days. According to the FISA order, telephony metadata includes "comprehensive communications routing information, including but not limited to session identifying information (e.g., originating and terminating telephone number, International Mobile Subscriber Identity (IMSI) number, International Mobile station Equipment Identity (IMEI) number, etc.), trunk identifier, telephone calling card numbers, and time and duration of call. Telephony metadata does not include the substantive content of any communication, as defined by 18 U.S.C. § 2510(8), or the name, address, or financial information of a subscriber or customer."
On April 25, 2013, the FBI was successful in getting the FISC to grant a FISA order compelling Verizon to produce the metadata of its entire customer base for 90 days and provide it to the National Security Agency (NSA). Judge Roger Vinson presided over the proceeding. This particular FISA order came to light as part of the uncovering actions taken by Edward Snowden.
EPIC's Petition
 Requirements for Writ of Mandamus 
Mandamus is a remedy available for "extraordinary circumstances amounting to a judicial 'usurpation of power'" or a "clear abuse of discretion," and is guided by 28 U.S.C. § 1651(a) and Supreme Court Rule 20.1.Cheney v. U.S. Dist. Court for the Dist. of Columbia
Cheney v. United States District Court laid out three conditions to using this type of relief: "(1) the party must have no other adequate means to attain the relief he deserves, (2) the party must satisfy the burden of showing that his right to issuance of the writ is clear and indisputable, and (3) the issuing court must be satisfied that the writ is appropriate under the circumstances."In re Electronic Privacy Information Center
 EPIC's Arguments 
In EPIC's filing, it laid out the following arguments for why the Supreme Court should grant the Petition:
1. EPIC cannot obtain relief from any other court or forum
a. EPIC cannot seek relief from the FISC or Court of Review
b. No other court can grant EPIC the relief it seeks
2. The FISC order exceeded the scope of the FISC's jurisdiction under the FISA
a. Mandamus aids the Court's appellate jurisdiction when it prevents a lower court from exceeding its lawful authority
b. The FISC lacks the legal authority to order programmatic domestic surveillance under 50 U.S.C. § 1861
3. The FISC order creates exceptional circumstances warranting mandamus
a. Telephony metadata reveals significant private information about EPIC and millions of other americans
b. EPIC is in active litigation against the very agencies tracking EPIC's privileged attorney-client communications
c. EPIC confidentially communicates with members of congress, agency officials, journalists, and others to further its First Amendment-protected advocacy
d. The FISC order compels disclosure of judicial and congressional communications, raising separation of powers concerns
Statutory authority
EPIC asked the Court to consider whether the FISC was acting beyond its authority by applying the FISA order to telephonic communications that were "wholly within the United States, including local telephone calls." Under FISA, the FBI "may make an application for an order requiring the production of any tangible things . . . for an investigation to obtain foreign intelligence information not concerning a United States person or to protect against international terrorism or clandestine intelligence activities." EPIC challenged the connection between the FISA order and the government's anti-terrorist efforts, arguing that "[i]t is simply unreasonable to conclude that all telephone records for all Verizon customers in the United States could be relevant to an investigation" (emphasis added).
Jurisdiction and relief
Is the Supreme Court the appropriate forum for this case? Would the FISC or the United States Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court of Review (FISCR) be a better place for this to be heard? EPIC argues that those courts would not have the authority to provide the relief it seeks. However, at least one academic is of the belief that this is an erroneous argument and that starting in one of those two lower courts would, even if denied, provide a better path to the Supreme Court.
Amicus briefs
There were four amicus briefs filed with the Court: (1) brief amici curiae of Professors of Information Privacy and Surveillance Law; (2) brief amici curiae of Professors James E. Pfander, and Stephen I. Vladeck;http://epic.org/privacy/nsa/in-re-epic/Pfander-Vladeck-Amici-Brief.pdf  (3) brief amici curiae of Former Members of the Church Committee, and Law Professors;http://epic.org/privacy/nsa/in-re-epic/Church-Committee-Amicus.pdf  and (4) brief amicus curiae of Cato Institute.http://epic.org/privacy/nsa/in-re-epic/Cato-Amicus.pdf  All four briefs were in support of the Petitioner EPIC.
Decision
On November 18, 2013, the Supreme Court denied EPIC's petition, likely on procedural grounds. In its October 11, 2013 response to EPIC's petition, the government had also argued that the proper procedure would be to first file an action in a federal district court.https://epic.org/privacy/nsa/in-re-epic/13-58-SG-Brief.pdf 
Effects of the decision
By denying EPIC's petition, the Supreme Court avoided having to wrestle with the privacy issue at hand. There are, however, other cases addressing the same or similar issues in the pipeline, such as ACLU v. Clapper, that the Supreme Court may choose to hear arguments for and write a full opinion.
References
Category:United States Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court of Review case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2013 in United States case law
"""

From "In re Gault" ==> """
In re Gault, 387 U.S. 1 (1967), was a landmark U.S. Supreme Court decision which held the Due Process Clause of the 14th Amendment applies to juvenile defendants as well as to adult defendants. Primary Holding  Juveniles accused of crimes in a delinquency proceeding must be afforded many of the same due process rights as adults, such as the right to timely notification of the charges, the right to confront witnesses, the right against self-incrimination, and the right to counsel. The court's opinion was written by Justice Abe Fortas, a noted proponent of children's rights.
Background
In June of 1964, the sheriff of Gila County, Arizona, took 15-year-old Gerald Gault into custody, without notifying Gault's parents, after a neighbor, Ora Cook, complained of receiving an inappropriate and offensive telephone call.. Fortas noted that it was sufficient "to say that the remarks or questions put to her were of the irritatingly offensive, adolescent, sex variety." After returning home from work that evening to find her son missing, Gault's mother eventually located him at the county jail, but was not permitted to take him home.387 U.S. at 5.
According to Gault, his friend Ronald Lewis made the call from the Gault family's trailer. Gault claims that Lewis had asked to use the telephone while Gault was getting ready for work. Then, not yet knowing to whom Lewis was speaking, Gault said, "I heard him, ahem, using some pretty vulgar language... so I – all I did was walk out, took the phone off him, hung it up, and told him – I said, 'Hey, there's the door. Get out.Gerald Gault, in National Constitution Center, "Children under the Constitution" panel discussion, November 7, 2007. Archived at the Wayback Machine.
Judge McGhee of the Gila County superior court, acting as a juvenile court judge,387 U.S. at 5, n.1. presided over Gault's preliminary hearing the next morning, which he ended by saying he would "think about it," and Gault remained in custody for several more days until he was released, without explanation. On Gault's release, his mother received a note from the superintendent of the detention home informing her that "Judge McGhee has set Monday June 15, 1964 at 11:00 A.M. as the date and time for further Hearings on Gerald's delinquency." That was the family's only notification of the hearing.387 U.S. at 6.
At the hearing, McGhee found "that said minor is a delinquent child, and that said minor is of the age of 15 years" and ordered him confined at the State Industrial School "for the period of his minority [that is, until 21], unless sooner discharged by due process of law." The charge listed in the report prepared by the county probation officers was "Lewd Phone Calls."387 U.S. at 7–8. Had Gault been convicted as an adult for a violation of ARS § 13-377, the punishment was a maximum prison sentence of two months and a fine of $5 to $50.
Gault's accuser, Cook, was not present at either hearing; McGhee said "she didn't have to be present."387 U.S. at 7. More than forty years later, Gault said, "I still don't know what that lady looks like."
With no witnesses having been sworn and the court making no transcript of either hearing, those present later disagreed about what had occurred during the June 1964 hearings. In particular, Gault's parents contested McGhee's claim that the teenager had admitted in court to making any of the alleged lewd statements.
Arizona law then permitted no appeal in juvenile cases and Gault's parents petitioned the Arizona Supreme Court for a writ of habeas corpus to obtain their son's release; the Supreme Court referred the case back to McGhee for hearing. On August 17, "McGhee was vigorously cross-examined as to the basis for his actions."387 U.S. at 8. He testified:
Well, there is a – I think it amounts to disturbing the peace. I can't give you the section, but I can tell you the law, that when one person uses lewd language in the presence of another person, that it can amount to – and I consider that when a person makes it over the phone, that it is considered in the presence, I might be wrong, that is one section. The other section upon which I consider the boy delinquent is Section 8-201, Subsection (d), habitually involved in immoral matters.387 U.S. at 8, n.5.
The first law McGhee mentioned was Arizona Revised Statutes (ARS) § 13-377, which made a misdemeanor of using "vulgar, abusive or obscene language" while "in the presence or hearing of any woman or child." Violating that law, then, would meet the ARS § 8-201(6)(a) criterion for classification as a "delinquent child," a "child who has violated a law of the state or an ordinance or regulation of a political subdivision thereof."387 U.S. at 9, n.6. The alternate criterion McGhee cited was that of ARS § 8-201(6)(d): "A child who habitually so deports himself as to injure or endanger the morals or health of himself or others." McGhee found Gault delinquent for (1) on one occasion using obscene language on the telephone with a woman and (2) being "habitually" dangerous. The evidence for the latter, according to McGhee's testimony, was that (a) two years earlier there had been a vague report, which the court had not acted upon due to, in McGhee's words, a "lack of material foundation" concerning the theft of a baseball glove; and (b) Gault's admission that in the past he had made telephone calls the judge described as "silly calls, or funny calls, or something like that."387 U.S. at 9. On that basis, Judge McGhee ordered the teenager to serve six years in juvenile detention.
After McGhee dismissed the habeas petition, the Gaults appealed to the state Supreme Court (99 Ariz. 181 (1965)), based on the following:
 the Arizona Juvenile Code was unconstitutional because it (a) did not require that either the accused or his parents be notified of the specific charges against him; (b) did not require that the parents be given notice of hearings; and (c) allowed no appeal; and
 the Juvenile Court's actions constituted a denial of due process because of (a) the lack of notification of the charges against Gault or of the hearings; (b) the court's failure to inform the Gaults of their right to counsel, right to confront the accuser, and right to remain silent; (c) the admission of "unsworn hearsay testimony;" and (d) the lack of any records of the proceedings.387 U.S. at 10.
The Arizona Supreme Court affirmed the dismissal of the petition. The court acknowledged that the constitutionality of the Juvenile Court proceedings required adherence to due process387 U.S. at 12. and that the Arizona Juvenile Code, in general, and the Gault proceedings, in specific, did not violate due process. The case was appealed to the US Supreme Court, where it was argued by Norman Dorsen, who later became president of the ACLU.
Decision
In an 8–1 decision, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that Gault's commitment to the State Industrial School was a violation of the Sixth Amendment since he had been denied the right to an attorney, had not been formally notified of the charges against him, had not been informed of his right against self-incrimination, and had had no opportunity to confront his accusers.
Justice Potter Stewart was the sole dissenter. He argued that the purpose of juvenile court was correction, not punishment, and so the constitutional procedural safeguards for criminal trials should not apply to juvenile trials.
 References 
 External links 
 National Constitution Center, "Children under the Constitution" panel discussion, November 7, 2007
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:Confrontation Clause case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment assistance of counsel case law
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:United States children's rights case law
Category:1967 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:History of Gila County, Arizona
Category:Prank calling
"""

From "In re Kansas Indians" ==> """
In re Kansas Indians, 72 U.S. (5 Wall.) 737 (1867), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the state of Kansas was not authorized to levy taxes on, and seize for forfeiture, lands which are set aside for Indian tribes by the United States government, under treaty or otherwise.
 Background 
The Kansas Indians case developed from three separate cases. Both Kansas and New York tried to tax the land of individual Indians.Carole Goldberg, The State-Tribe Relationship, in 2  68 (Garrick A. Bailey & William C. Sturtevant eds. 2008). The Shawnee tribe moved to Kansas from Ohio and Missouri from 1825 to 1831, and were not to be considered part of the land of any state.In re Kansas Indians,  (procedural preface to opinion of the Court). In 1854, the tribe partitioned the land among its members, with the restriction that the land could not be sold without the permission of the United States.In re Kansas Indians, 72 U.S. at 740 (preface). The  Wea tribe was in a similar position, as was the Miami tribe.In re Kansas Indians, 72 U.S. at 741-42 (preface).
In all three cases, the local counties levied property taxes on land belonging to members of the tribe, and the tribes objected. The Kansas Supreme Court heard two of the cases, and ruled that the taxes were proper as the Indians held fee simple title to the land.In re Kansas Indians, 72 U.S. at 750-51 (preface).
Supreme Court
Justice David Davis delivered the opinion of the Court. The Court held that a state could not levy taxes on the property of a tribe while the tribe was recognized by the United States.Lincoln B. Smith, Indians, in 3  745 n.23 (Charles J. Kappler ed. 1913).
 References 
External links
Category:Kansas Supreme Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
"""

From "In re Neagle" ==> """
In re Neagle, 135 U.S. 1 (1890), is a United States Supreme Court decision holding that federal officers are immune from State prosecution when acting within the scope of their federal authority.
Facts
Deputy U.S. Marshal David Neagle (1847–1925) was appointed by the United States Attorney General to serve as Justice Stephen J. Field's bodyguard while Field rode circuit in California. On August 14, 1889, David S. Terry approached Field inside the Lathrop, California train station in California's San Joaquin Valley. Terry, a former California Supreme Court justice, had a grudge with Field. Fearing Terry was about to attack Field, Neagle shot and killed Terry. Field and Neagle were arrested by the San Joaquin Sheriff, Thomas Cunningham. Cunningham later released Field on his own recognizance, but took Neagle to jail.
The United States Attorney in San Francisco filed a writ of habeas corpus for Neagle's release. The circuit court issued the writ after a hearing and ordered Neagle's release. Sheriff Cunningham, with the aid of the State of California, appealed to the United States Supreme Court. In a 6-2 decision (Justice Field abstained), the Supreme Court affirmed the lower court. The decision recognized that, as the source of all executive authority, the President could act in the absence of specific statutory authority since there were no laws that provided for protection of federal judges by the executive branch. Constitutionally, the decision determined that the executive branch exercised its own "necessary and proper" authority.
 See also 
 In re, the legal term
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 135
References
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:1890 in United States case law
Category:United States Marshals Service
Category:History of San Joaquin County, California
Category:Lathrop, California
"""

From "In re NLRB" ==> """
In re Labor Board, 304 U.S. 486 (1938), is a 5-to-2 decision by the Supreme Court of the United States which held that the National Labor Relations Act requires the filing of a petition and a transcript in order for an enforcement order to proceed in federal court, and that a writ of prohibition and writ of mandamus are appropriate measures to take in quashing a petition when no transcript has been filed.In re Labor Board, . 
Background
After the passage of the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) in 1935, the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) found itself attempting to enforce the law against hundreds of employers, most of whom refused to acknowledge the constitutionality of the NLRA or obey the Board's orders. The Board's practice was to have its Economic Division study the issues and report to the Board; order its attorneys in its Review Division to analyze the case and report to the Board; review the transcripts of the field office trial de novo; receive an oral report about the case from the trial examiner; and have the Chief Counsel's staff prepare a draft decision for Board consideration.Gross, p. 31-32. But in Morgan v. United States, 298 U.S. 468 (1936) and Morgan v. United States, 304 U.S. 1 (1938), the Supreme Court held that parties in quasi-judicial hearings before the government had the right to be presented with the issues the government was considering, present the agency with a statement, review the proposed findings, review any tentative reports, and submit exceptions and argument to the agency before a final determination is made.Gross, p. 30.
The Steel Workers Organizing Committee (SWOC), a union affiliated with the Congress of Industrial Organizations, had attempted to organize the plants of Republic Steel for several years. On May 26, 1937, members of SWOC to strike Republic Steel. The strike soon spread to Bethlehem Steel, Inland Steel, Jones and Laughlin Steel Company, and Youngstown Sheet and Tube—the so-called "Little Steel" group (because each company was smaller than the giant U.S. Steel).Gross, p. 27. The Little Steel Strike became one of the most famous in American history. Violence quickly engulfed many of the strikes, with both side employing violence. On May 30, 1937, members of the Chicago Police Department shot and killed 10 unarmed union demonstrators near the Republic Steel plant in Chicago in what later became known as the Memorial Day massacre. However, almost 200 SWOC members pleaded guilty to various felony charges (possession of explosives, destruction of property, obstructing passage of the mails, carrying concealed weapons, obstruction of the railroads, etc.) as well.
On June 18, 1937, SWOC filed unfair labor practice charges against Republic Steel for its actions in the Little Steel strike. On April 8, 1938, the NLRB ruled against Republic Steel, ordering the company to reinstate all but 11 strikers on the grounds that the company's "brutal acts of violence" had prompted the union violence.Gross, p. 26-27. It also ordered Republic Steel to lay off all the replacement workers it had hired.Gross, p. 27-28. Republic Steel President Tom M. Girdler denounced the decision in a lengthy interview on the front-page of The New York Times the next day, and declared he would not obey it."Girdler Sees Bias in NLRB Decision," New York Times, April 11, 1938.Gross, p. 28.
Republic Steel filed a suit in federal court on April 18 to have the NLRB's order overturned.  The second Morgan decision was issued on April 25, 1938. On May 16, 1938, the NLRB filed a writ of prohibition and writ of mandamus with the U.S. Supreme Court to have the petition quashed, since the agency was considering withdrawing its decision in light of the Morgan decisions.
Decision
Majority ruling
Associate Justice Owen Roberts wrote the decision for the majority, joined by Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes and Associate Justices Louis Brandeis, Hugo Black, and Stanley Forman Reed.
Roberts held that filing and serving a petition are not enough to complete a filing with the court of appeals regarding NLRB enforcement actions, and that a transcript of the Board's proceedings also must be filed.In re Labor Board, 304 U.S. at 491. If the transcript has not been filed, the NLRB (not the court of appeals) retains the power to withdraw the decision, and the court has no authority to force it to file the transcript.In re Labor Board, 304 U.S. at 491-494. Failure to file the transcript does not deny the petitioner of due process.In re Labor Board, 304 U.S. at 495. A writ of prohibition and writ of mandamus, Roberts concluded, were appropriate remedies if the NLRB decided to withdraw its decision before it had filed the transcript.In re Labor Board, 304 U.S. at 496.
Dissent
Associate Justice Pierce Butler dissented, joined by Associate Justice James Clark McReynolds.
Relying on In re New York & Porto Rico Steamship Co., 155 U.S. 523 (1895) and Ex Parte Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific Railway Company, 255 U.S. 273 (1921), Butler held that writs of prohibition and mandamus were appropriate only when the lower court had no jurisdiction to hear a case.In re Labor Board, 304 U.S. at 497. The majority's ruling was flawed, he said, because it would allow the NLRB to avoid judicial review of its orders simply by not filing transcripts. Butler would have refused the writs.
Footnotes
Bibliography
Gross, James A. The Reshaping of the National Labor Relations Board: National Labor Policy in Transition, 1937-1947. Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press, 1981.
"Girdler Sees Bias in NLRB Decision." New York Times. April 11, 1938.
External links
Category:1938 in United States case law
Category:National Labor Relations Board litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United Steelworkers litigation
"""

From "In re Oliver" ==> """
In re Oliver, 333 U.S. 257 (1948), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court involving the application of the right of due process in state court proceedings.  The Sixth Amendment in the Bill of Rights states that criminal prosecutions require the defendant  "... to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation...and to have the Assistance of Counsel for his defence."  In this case, a witness in a Michigan grand jury hearing was convicted and sentenced to jail without either notice or attorney assistance.
Prior history
On September 11, 1946 William Oliver was summoned by subpoena to a grand jury in Oakland County, Michigan.  Circuit Court Judge George B. Hartrick had been appointed as a one-man secret grand jury to investigate organized crime participation in local gambling and public corruption.  A local pinball operator, Oliver was examined under oath as a witness and was not accused of any crime or represented by an attorney.  At the conclusion of his testimony, Hartrick and two other circuit judges (who were not members of the grand jury but present as advisors) agreed that Oliver had given "false and evasive answers" to Hartrick's questions.  Without pausing the proceeding or permitting Oliver counsel, Hartrick convicted Oliver of contempt of court and sentenced him to 60 days in the county jail.
After three days, Oliver was able to secure an attorney who filed for writs of Habeas corpus and certiorari to the Michigan Supreme Court challenging the conviction.  Because Michigan state law authorizing the one-man grand jury proceedings allowed judge/grand jury to punish contempt at their sole discretion, The Michigan Supreme Court dismissed Oliver's due process claims as being "without merit" and upheld the conviction and sentence.
Decision
The United States Supreme Court took the case in part to decide if, contrary to the lower Court's opinion, the Sixth Amendment protections applied to state court hearings.  The Court's majority opinion began by evaluating the Michigan one-man grand jury process, calling it "unique" and "peculiar." The Court had long accepted that grand juries, operating as investigative tools, needed and were allowed to operate in secrecy.  The Michigan grand jury law, however, impermissibly mixed this traditional investigative function with circuit court conviction and punishment.  It held that:
 The secrecy of the (irregular and abbreviated) trial for criminal contempt violated the due process clause
The need for secrecy of grand jury investigative proceedings did not justify secrecy in accusing Oliver of an offense for which he faced jail time
An accused is entitled to a public trial no matter the offense charged
The failure to afford Oliver a reasonable opportunity to defend himself against the contempt charge was a denial of due process of law
At a minimum due process required reasonable notice, the right to examine the witnesses, the right to testify, and the right to counsel
The judgment of Hartrick that Oliver committed contempt of court in the court's actual presence was insufficient justification to deny Oliver these rights
The Michigan Supreme Court and Oakland County Circuit Court rulings were overturned.  Justice Black likened the Michigan grand jury's discretionary contempt convictions to English Star Chamber secret convictions and French pre-Revolutionary lettres de cachet allowing imprisonment without the opportunity for defense.
Effects of the decision
Michigan later eliminated one-person grand juries.  Michigan law currently requires citizen's grand juries presided over by a circuit judge.  This case was later cited by , , , , and .
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 333
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
External links
27 N.W.2d 323 (Mich. 1948)-Lower court opinion
Category:1948 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:Incorporation case law
"""

From "In re Primus" ==> """
In re Primus, 436 U.S. 412 (1978), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that solicitation of prospective litigants by nonprofit organizations that engage in litigation as a form of political expression and political association constitutes expressive and associational conduct entitled to First Amendment protection.
 Background 
Primus was an attorney for the South Carolina affiliate of the ACLU.  South Carolina had a policy of sterilizing certain women as a condition of receiving welfare.  Primus sent letters to women who had been thus sterilized, offering the legal assistance of the ACLU.   The South Carolina's Supreme Court disciplinary board reprimanded Primus for violating South Carolina bar rules against soliciting business.  The  South Carolina Supreme Court approved the discipline.   Primus appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
The U.S. Supreme Court overturned the discipline, ruling that solicitation of prospective litigants by nonprofit organizations that engage in litigation as a form of political expression and political association constitutes expressive and associational conduct entitled to First Amendment protection.
The opinion in In re Primus was released the same day as another First Amendment case relating to attorney solicitation Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Ass’n, 436 U.S. 447 (1978), which upheld a ban on attorney solicitation of accident victims within 30 days of the incident. The holdings were distinguished on account of the political expression and association elements present in Primus and absent in Ohralik.
 See also 
 NAACP v. Button, 
 Ambulance chasing
 References 
External links
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States professional responsibility case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States reproductive rights case law
"""

From "In re Ross" ==> """
In re Ross, or Ross v. McIntyre, 140 U.S. 453 (1891), was a US Supreme Court case decided on May 21, 1891, that dealt with the application of American law by US consular courts over foreign sailors on American-flagged ships in countries in which the United States exercised extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Background
John M. Ross, a Canadian sailor on the American ship Bullion, was convicted in the US consular court in Yokohama of murder on the ship while it was in that city before the US consul general at Kanagawa, Thomas van Buren. Ross was sentenced to death, but US President Rutherford B. Hayes commuted the sentence to a life sentence of hard labor at Albany 
Penitentiary.
Although Ross accepted the commutation, he later sought a writ of habeas corpus for his release on the grounds that having been born on Prince Edward Island, he was a British subject and so was not subject to the jurisdiction of a US consular court.
Decision
The Supreme Court upheld the jurisdiction of the court on the basis that having enrolled on a US ship, Ross became subject to the jurisdiction of US courts.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 140
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States admiralty case law
Category:1891 in United States case law
Category:History of Yokohama
Category:Canada–United States relations
"""

From "In re Snyder" ==> """
In re Snyder, 472 U.S. 634 (1985), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that an attorney's curt letter to a court employee, followed by the attorney's refusal to apologize for sending the letter, did not justify suspending the attorney from practicing law in federal court.
Background
Robert J. Snyder was an attorney in Bismarck, North Dakota. His practice included serving as a criminal defense lawyer for indigent defendants in federal cases, with his compensation provided by government funds under the Criminal Justice Act (CJA). In 1983, Snyder submitted an application for CJA compensation for a case he had handled before Judge Bruce Van Sickle in the District Court. Because the request exceeded $1,000, it was subject to review by the Chief Judge of the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals, Donald P. Lay. Judge Lay's secretary returned Snyder's application, advising Snyder that his documentation was insufficient. Snyder discussed the situation with Judge Van Sickle's secretary, who suggested that Snyder write her a letter expressing his views.
Snyder wrote to Judge Van Sickle's secretary as she had suggested. In this letter, Snyder complained that the compensation provided under the CJA was inadequate, and protested that "[n]ow, however, not only are we paid an amount of money which does not even cover our overhead, but we have to go through extreme gymnastics even to receive the puny amounts which the federal courts authorize for this work." He said that he would not provide any additional paperwork to support his compensation request, and that "[y]ou can take it or leave it." Snyder closed his letter by stating: "Further, I am extremely disgusted by the treatment of us by the Eighth Circuit in this case, and you are instructed to remove my name from the list of attorneys who will accept criminal indigent defense work. I have simply had it. Thank you for your time and attention."
District Judge Van Sickle viewed Snyder's letter as seeking changes in the court system's procedures for awarding fees under the CJA, and forwarded it to Chief Judge Lay. Lay, however, opined that Snyder's letter was "totally disrespectful to the federal courts and to the judicial system. It demonstrates a total lack of respect for the legal process and the courts." Lay expressed displeasure about Snyder's failure to follow the procedures for fee requests, and opined that this cast doubt on whether Snyder should be allowed to continue practicing law in federal court.
Judge Van Sickle responded that Snyder viewed the letter "an expression of an honest opinion, and an exercise of his right of freedom of speech." The judge himself described it as "a youthful and exuberant expression of annoyance which has now risen to the level of a cause." Snyder declined to apologize for the letter, although he "assured [Judge Van Sickle] he did not intend the letter as [Judge Lay] interpreted it."
Eighth Circuit proceedings
Judge Lay then issued an order to show cause directing Snyder to explain why he should not be suspended from practicing law in the Eighth Circuit. The stated basis for the order to show cause was Snyder's statement that he would no longer accept case assignments under the CJA. However, at a hearing before the court, the Eighth Circuit judges focused on whether Snyder would apologize for the contents of his letter to the District Court's secretary. Both at the hearing and in writing afterwards, Snyder stated that he would be glad to accept CJA assignments under a revised CJA plan for the District of North Dakota. However, in response to the request for an apology, Snyder wrote:
A three-judge panel of the Eighth Circuit then issued an opinion and order suspending Snyder from practicing law both in the Eighth Circuit and in the District of North Dakota for at least six months. The full Eighth Circuit denied Snyder's request for rehearing en banc with two judges dissenting, but voted to cancel the suspension if Snyder submitted an apology within ten days. Snyder did not apologize, and the suspension took effect.
Snyder asked the Supreme Court to review the suspension order, contending that the order violated his First Amendment and due process rights and was unjustified. The Supreme Court granted certiorari.469 U.S. 1156 (1985).
Opinion of the Court
Chief Justice Warren E. Burger delivered the opinion of the Court, which spoke for a unanimous Court, except that Justice Harry A. Blackmun did not participate in the case.Supreme Court Justices do not ordinarily provide the reasons for their recusal in a given case, but Blackmun served as Circuit Justice for the Eighth Circuit (of which he had been a member before being appointed to the Supreme Court), and worked closely with the judges of the Eighth Circuit in that capacity. Burger's opinion held that Snyder's conduct did not constitute cause for suspending him under Rule 46 of the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure. Because the case could be resolved on non-constitutional grounds, Burger wrote, the Court need not address Snyder's arguments under the First Amendment or the Due Process Clause.
Burger stated that courts have the power to suspend or disbar lawyers from practicing before them for "conduct unbecoming a member of the bar of the court." This authority is inherent in the nature of a court, and in the case of the United States Courts of Appeals, is codified in Rule 46.
Here, the Eighth Circuit had concluded that Snyder had engaged in "contumacious conduct" and demonstrated unfitness to practice law in federal court when he submitted his letter to a court employee and refused to apologize for it. However, the Supreme Court did "not consider a lawyer's criticism of the administration of the [Criminal Justice] Act or criticism of inequities in assignments under the Act as cause for discipline or suspension."
The Court's opinion concluded:
The record indicates the Court of Appeals was concerned about the tone of the letter; petitioner concedes that the tone of his letter was "harsh," and, indeed it can be read as ill-mannered. All persons involved in the judicial process—judges, litigants, witnesses, and court officers—owe a duty of courtesy to all other participants. The necessity for civility in the inherently contentious setting of the adversary process suggests that members of the bar cast criticisms of the system in a professional and civil tone. However, even assuming that the letter exhibited an unlawyerlike rudeness, a single incident of rudeness or lack of professional courtesy—in this context—does not support a finding of contemptuous or contumacious conduct, or a finding that a lawyer is "not presently fit to practice law in the federal courts." Nor does it rise to the level of "conduct unbecoming a member of the bar" warranting suspension from practice.
Accordingly, Snyder's suspension was reversed.
 See also 
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 472
 References 
Linda Greenhouse, "Court Reinstates Angry Lawyer, 33", New York Times, June 25, 1985.
External links
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "In re Stolar" ==> """
In re Stolar, 401 U.S. 23 (1971), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that requiring bar applicants to list every organization that one belonged to since age 17 is unconstitutional..
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 401
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States professional responsibility case law
Category:1971 in United States case law
"""

From "In re Summers" ==> """
In re Summers, 325 U.S. 561 (1945), is a 5-to-4 ruling by the United States Supreme Court which held that the First and Fourteenth amendment freedoms of a conscientious objector were not infringed when a state bar association declined to admit him to the practice of law.. The Illinois Constitution requiredThis provision has subsequently been removed. citizens to serve in the state militia in time of war, and all lawyers admitted to the bar were required to uphold the state constitution.Sheffer, God Versus Caesar: Belief, Worship, and Proselytizing Under the First Amendment, 1999, p. 159. Petitioner Clyde Summers could not uphold that constitutional requirement due to his religious beliefs, and the Supreme Court upheld the denial of his license of practice.Schultz, West, and MacLean, Encyclopedia of Religion in American Politics, 1999, p. 237-238.
 Background 
Clyde Summers entered the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign at the age of 16, earning a Bachelor of Science in Accounting in 1939 and a Juris Doctor (cum laude) in 1942.Greenhouse, Steven. "Clyde Summers, Advocate of Labor Union Democracy, Is Dead at 91." New York Times. November 11, 2010.Joseph, Black Mondays: Worst Decisions of the Supreme Court, 1987, p. 47. While an undergraduate and law student, Summers became active in the Methodist Student Movement and a believer in the social gospel.Goldberg, "Present at the Creation: Clyde Summers and the Field of Union Democracy Law," Employee Rights and Employment Policy Journal, 2010, p. 122.
The United States entered World War II on December 8, 1941.  Summers, opposed to the use of force, declared himself a conscientious objector.Shearer, Home Front Heroes, 2007, p. 790. In 1942, Summers sought admission to the Illinois State Bar Association, a prerequisite to the practice of law in the state of Illinois.  The bar association admitted he was of high moral character and exhibited excellent knowledge of the law, but in January 1943 denied him admission due to his conscientious objector status.Konvitz, Fundamental Liberties of a Free People: Religion, Speech, Press, Assembly, 2003, p. 224-225; In re Summers, 325 U.S. at 564. Article 12 of the Illinois constitution required citizens to serve in the state militia in time of war, and all lawyers admitted to the bar were required to uphold the state constitution. However, Illinois had not drafted citizens into its state militia since 1864, Article 12 prohibited the drafting of conscientious objectors into the militia during peacetime, and the article permitted conscientious objectors to engage in work of significant national importance during war in lieu of military service. Nonetheless, Summers could not uphold the relevant constitutional requirement due to his religious beliefs, the bar association said.
With representation by the American Civil Liberties Union,Kutulas, The American Civil Liberties Union and the Making of Modern Liberalism: 1930-1960, 2006, p. 130. Summers sued, alleging that the bar association's actions had infringed his First and Fourteenth amendment rights. The Supreme Court of Illinois held that 1) The courts had no jurisdiction over the issue, and thus no "case or controversy" existed under Article Three of the Constitution; and 2) The bar association had not discriminated against Summers on the basis of his religion but rather on the basis of his ability to uphold the military service section of the Illinois state constitution.In re Summers, 325 U.S. at 564-565.
Summers appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, and which granted certiorari.
 Opinion of the Court 
 Majority 
Associate Justice Stanley Forman Reed wrote the decision for the majority, joined by Chief Justice Stone and Associate Justices Frankfurter, Jackson, and Burton.
Reed first reviewed the case proceedings.In re Summers, 325 U.S. at 562-565. Regarding the "case or controversy" aspect of the issue, Reed concluded that the admission of a lawyer to the bar was "a ministerial act which is performed by virtue of the judicial power, such as the appointment of a clerk or bailiff or the specification of the requirements of eligibility or the course of study for applicants for admission to the bar, rather than a judicial proceeding."In re Summers, 325 U.S. at 565-566. However, under Osborn v. Bank of the United States, 22 U.S. 738 (1824), because the judicial power is invoked, this allows a case to arise.In re Summers, 325 U.S. at 566-567. But was there a controversy?  For a controversy to exist, Reed said, it must follow the rule laid down in Muskrat v. United States, 219 U.S. 346 (1911), which held that there must be actual disagreement and merely a hypothetical or potential disagreement.In re Summers, 325 U.S. at 567. The record in In re Summers was incomplete and the response for petition of certiorari from the Illinois Supreme Court was oddly formed, leaving the issue of a controversy muddied.  But the majority concluded that since the bar association committee had formed at the request of the Illinois Supreme Court and that court had acted on Summers' petition for relief, a true controversy existed.In re Summers, 325 U.S. at 567-568. Without discussion, Reed furthermore asserted that denial of the right to practice law is a controversy, and a denial of that right by a state court triggers federal jurisdiction under Article Three of the U.S. Constitution.In re Summers, 325 U.S. at 568-569.
In addressing Summers' conscientious objector claim, Reed denigrated Summers as a "religionist."In re Summers, 325 U.S. at 570. Reed next asserted that the Fourteenth Amendment applied only to federal rights, not to purely state-guaranteed rights such as the right to practice law.In re Summers, 325 U.S. at 571. But were Summers' First Amendment rights implicated?  The majority concluded they were not. Reed asserted that the Illinois Supreme Court had not discriminated against Summers on the basis of his religion, but rather on his ability to uphold the Illinois Constitution's requirement that he serve in the militia:
It is said that the action of the Supreme Court of Illinois is contrary to the principles of that portion of the First Amendment which guarantees the free exercise of religion. Of course, under our Constitutional system, men could not be excluded from the practice of law, or indeed from following any other calling, simply because they belong to any of our religious groups, whether Protestant, Catholic, Quaker, or Jewish, assuming it conceivable that any state of the Union would draw such a religious line. We cannot say that any such purpose to discriminate motivated the action of the Illinois Supreme Court.
Reed reviewed Summers' beliefs, noting that he had been certified a conscientious objector by the federal government, his beliefs were religiously founded, and his beliefs were sincerely held.In re Summers, 325 U.S. at 571-572. But the Illinois Supreme Court had held that Summers would not serve in the militia if drafted, a claim which Summers had failed to challenge.In re Summers, 325 U.S. at 572.
But these pacifist religious beliefs were not protected by the First Amendment, Reed said. Relying on Hamilton v. Regents of the University of California, 293 U.S. 245 (1934), he declared conscientious objection a "grace of Congressional recognition" and noted that the state of Illinois recognized no such rights.
The judgment of the Illinois Supreme Court was affirmed.In re Summers, 325 U.S. at 573.
 Dissent 
Associate Justice Hugo Black wrote a dissent, in which he was joined by Associate Justices Douglas, Murphy, and Rutledge.
Black bluntly phrased the issue in terms starkly different than the majority's: "It has denied him a license on the ground that his present religious beliefs disqualify him for membership in the legal profession." Black reviewed Summers' qualifications for the bar, which were exceptionally high and otherwise undisputed.In re Summers, 325 U.S. at 574. He also reviewed the foundation for Summers' deep religious convictions and opposition to the use of force.In re Summers, 325 U.S. at 574-575.
Black found the majority's distinction between upholding the Illinois Constitution and discriminating against Summers' religious beliefs "circuitous". The Illinois Constitution, he said, would discriminate against entire religions, and could lead to the inescapable conclusion that the state could bar a conscientious objector from a wide range of constitutional protections merely by refusing to grant these protections to nonresistors.  He wrote:In re Summers, 325 U.S. at 575.
I cannot believe that a state statute would be consistent with our constitutional guarantee of freedom of religion if it specifically denied the right to practice law to all members of one of our great religious groups, Protestant, Catholic, or Jewish. Yet the Quakers have had a long and honorable part in the growth of our nation, and an amicus curiae brief filed in their behalf informs us that, under the test applied to this petitioner, not one of them, if true to the tenets of their faith, could qualify for the bar in Illinois. And it is obvious that the same disqualification would exist as to every conscientious objector to the use of force, even though the Congress of the United States should continue its practice of absolving them from military service. The conclusion seems to me inescapable that, if Illinois can bar this petitioner from the practice of law it can bar every person from every public occupation solely because he believes in nonresistance, rather than in force.
Black concluded that the Illinois Constitution's requirement was essentially a "test oath," an oath designed to test one's loyalty before any illegal act had actually occurred.  But, relying on Cummings v. Missouri, 71 U.S. 277 (1867) and Ex parte Garland, 71 U.S. 333 (1866), Black said that test oaths were anathema to the Constitution.In re Summers, 325 U.S. at 576. "This feeling was made manifest in Article VI of the Constitution, which provides that 'no religious Test shall ever be required as a Qualification to any Office or public Trust under the United States.'" Illinois has the power to draft its citizens, and to punish them for refusing to serve in its militia, Black said, but it does not have the right to assume beforehand that Summers would take the bar association oath in bad faith and fail to fulfill it at some indeterminate time in the future.In re Summers, 325 U.S. at 576-577. This thinking had been rejected by Associate Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. in his dissent in United States v. Schwimmer, 279 U.S. 644 (1929), and by Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes in his dissent in United States v. Macintosh, 283 U.S. 605 (1931), and Black embraced their views. Finally, Black noted that Illinois had not imposed a draft since 1864 and that the majority was engaging in mere speculation about imposing one in the future. There was no violation of the oath, and no actual inability to uphold the state constitution, Black concluded. "[T]he probability that Illinois would ever call the petitioner to serve in a war has little more reality than an imaginary quantity in mathematics. I cannot agree that a state can lawfully bar from a semi-public position a well qualified man of good character solely because he entertains a religious belief which might prompt him at some time in the future to violate a law which has not yet been and may never be enacted."In re Summers, 325 U.S. at 577-578.
Black would have overturned the decision of the Illinois Supreme Court.In re Summers, 325 U.S. at 578.
 Subsequent developments 
Chief Justice Stone cast the deciding vote in the case. Although his vote contradicted the vast majority of his previous "freedom of religion" votes and decisions, Stone's reasons for deciding against free exercise in this case are not recorded.
Legacy
The Court's ruling in In re Summers has been sharply criticized. Despite Justice Reed's stated respect for Summers' religious beliefs, Reed denigrated him as a "religionist" (someone whose beliefs are not thought through and imfirmly held). Reed also imposed his own theology on the Christian Bible, openly criticizing Summers for misinterpreting its tenets and for practicing (rather than merely reading) it. One historian has said that "Justice Stanley Reed's majority opinion [is] lacking in anay analysis of the serious constitutional issue involved".Kramer, The Price of Rights: The Courts, the Welfare State, and Civil Liberties, 2003, p. 126. A legal scholar has said that Reed's decision is "merely" that Illinois had the right to interpret its oath however it chose.Konvitz, Fundamental Liberties of a Free People: Religion, Speech, Press, Assembly, 2003, p. 224.
The dissents of Holmes in Schwimmer, Hughes in Macintosh, and Black in In re Summers have since become the majority view of the Supreme Court.Konvitz, Fundamental Liberties of a Free People: Religion, Speech, Press, Assembly, 2003, p. 225. Schwimmer and Macintosh were overruled in Girouard v. United States, 328 U.S. 61 (1946). But even though the cases which formed the basis of the decision in In re Summers were disavowed, the Court reaffirmed Summers in 1950 in American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382 (1950).Konvitz, Fundamental Liberties of a Free People: Religion, Speech, Press, Assembly, 2003, p. 226. In re Summers became the basis for the Court to uphold a number of loyalty oath cases during the Cold War.Walker, In Defense of American Liberties: A History of the ACLU, 1999, p. 153.
Litigant's later activities
Summers later was admitted to the New York State Bar Association and became one of the most respected legal educators in the United States. He was highly influential in the field of labor law, and was considered the nation's leading expert on union democracy.Jacobs, Mobsters, Unions, and Feds: The Mafia and the American Labor Movement, 2006, p. xxv. "What Louis Brandeis was to the field of privacy law, Clyde Summers is to the field of union democracy," wrote Widener University School of Law professor Michael J. Goldberg in the summer of 2010. "Summers, like Brandeis, provided the theoretical foundation for an important new field of law."Goldberg, "Present at the Creation: Clyde Summers and the Field of Union Democracy Law," Employee Rights and Employment Policy Journal, 2010, p. 121.
 References 
 Bibliography 
Goldberg, Michael J. "Present at the Creation: Clyde Summers and the Field of Union Democracy Law." Employee Rights and Employment Policy Journal. 14:121 (2010).
Jacobs, James B. Mobsters, Unions, and Feds: The Mafia and the American Labor Movement. New York: New York University Press, 2006.
Konvitz, Milton Ridvas. Fundamental Liberties of a Free People: Religion, Speech, Press, Assembly. New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Publishers, 2003.
Kramer, Daniel C. The Price of Rights: The Courts, the Welfare State, and Civil Liberties. Frankfurt, Ky.: P. Lang, 2003.
Kutulas, Judy. The American Civil Liberties Union and the Making of Modern Liberalism: 1930-1960. Chapel Hill, N.C.: University of North Carolina Press, 2006.
Schultz, Jeffrey D.; West, John G.; and MacLean, Iain S. Encyclopedia of Religion in American Politics. Phoenix, Ariz.: Oryx Press, 1999.
Shearer, Benjamin F. Home Front Heroes. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 2007.
Sheffer, Martin S. God Versus Caesar: Belief, Worship, and Proselytizing Under the First Amendment. Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press, 1999.
Walker, Samuel. In Defense of American Liberties: A History of the ACLU. Carbondale, Ill.: Southern Illinois University Press, 1999.
External links
Category:1945 in United States case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:American bar associations
Category:Conscientious objection
Category:United States home front during World War II
Category:Legal history of Illinois
"""

From "In re Winship" ==> """
In re Winship, 397 U.S. 358 (1970), was a United States Supreme Court decision that held that "the Due Process Clause protects the accused against conviction except upon proof beyond a reasonable doubt of every fact necessary to constitute the crime charged."Criminal Law - Cases and Materials, 7th ed. 2012, Wolters Kluwer Law & Business; John Kaplan, Robert Weisberg, Guyora Binder, ,  It established this burden in all cases in all states (constitutional case). The decision did not specify which facts constitute the charged crime. 
In an opinion authored by Justice Brennan, the Court held that when a juvenile is charged with an act that would be a crime if committed by an adult, every element of the offense must be proved beyond reasonable doubt, not preponderance of the evidence.Varat, J.D. et al. Constitutional Law Cases and Materials, Concise Thirteenth Edition. Foundation Press, New York, NY: 2009, p. 356 The case has come to stand for a broader proposition, however: in a criminal prosecution, every essential element of the offense must be proved beyond reasonable doubt. See, e.g., Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466, 477 (2000); Sullivan v. Louisiana, 508 U.S. 275, 278 (1993).Varat, p. 357 This case marked a rejection of the preponderance of evidence standard in any criminal cases and expanded the protections afforded by the Due Process Clause. 
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 397
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States criminal burden of proof case law
Category:United States children's rights case law
Category:Juvenile case law
Category:1970 in United States case law
"""

From "Indiana State Police Pension Trust v. Chrysler LLC" ==> """
Indiana State Police Pension Trust v. Chrysler LLC was a lawsuit brought in United States federal court June 2009 by several pension funds against Chrysler LLC and the United States Department of the Treasury, to block the planned sale of Chrysler LLC assets to a "New Chrysler" entity in the Chrysler bankruptcy.
The case arose from the high-profile bankruptcy of Chrysler, in which the U.S. Treasury orchestrated a sale under Section 363 of the Bankruptcy Code to avoid the debtors' having to fully compensate a group of first lien priority creditors, which included roughly 100,000 retired teachers and police officers from Indiana.  The United Auto Workers Union (UAW), which was closely allied with the Obama Administration, was a junior, unsecured creditor who stood to gain from the plan of sale.
The plaintiff (pensioners) asked for the U.S. Treasury's redistribution of value in the bankruptcy from senior, secured creditors with priority liens to junior, unsecured creditors to be struck down, and also argued that the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (EESA) authorizes the federal government to use TARP (Troubled Asset Relief Program) moneys [sic] only to "bail out" financial institutions and not automakers.
In Dec 2008, Congress declined to authorize the Auto industry bailout bill. 
The defendant (U.S. Government) asked to allow the bankruptcy plan to proceed, noting that the needs of the economy outweigh the needs of the deal's detractors. Government lawyers defended the use of funds from TARP and argued that Indiana's appeal lacked legal merit.
The sale had been ordered to proceed by the decision in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York. The order was appealed by the pensioners to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, and from there to the United States Supreme Court, who decided not to hear the case, and dropped the stay allowing the asset sale to proceed.  As a result of the sale the United Auto Workers Union (UAW) gained a 55 percent ownership stake in the automaker.
Six months later the Supreme Court vacated the lower court's ruling, thereby ensuring that the controversial opinion would retain no precedential value going forward; no ruling was issued to explain the Court's actions.
Background
Chrysler LLC and General Motors both carried a substantial debt and interest-cost burden that would make restructuring for future viability difficult, unless bondholders' claims were reduced or exchanged for equity by agreement. The original U.S. government plan was for both companies to enter a Chapter 11 bankruptcy, obtain critical agreements from most stakeholders, and minimize objections, allowing the companies to  exit the bankruptcy process without a prolonged battle with stakeholders affected by the filing.  Fiat's agreement permitted Fiat to decline to consummate the proposed partnership with the new Chrysler Group company if it were not completed by June 15, 2009, which in turn could force the liquidation of all Chrysler assets.
Four major U.S. financial institutions (including JP Morgan Chase and Bank of America) which had received Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) bailout funds from the U.S. federal government held 70 percent of the Chrysler bonds, and agreed to the proposed deal of 33 cents on the dollar.  
The remaining holders of the debt formed a group known as the Committee of Chrysler Non-Tarp Lenders that accused the TARP bondholders of having a conflict of interest.Statement from non-Tarp Chrysler lenders, Financial Times, April 30, 2009 
Under federal government pressure, most key members of the Non-TARP Lenders acceded to a bankruptcy agreement, raising the total of bondholders agreeing to 92 percent. 
However, since not all stakeholders had agreed before the deadline, Chrysler filed for bankruptcy on April 30, 2009. In the bankruptcy court, the U.S. government lowered the debt exchange offer to 29 cents on the dollar. The Indiana State Police funds, plaintiffs in the lawsuit, had obtained their Chrysler bonds in July 2008 at 43 cents per dollar of face value.
Case overview
The plaintiffs claim that the Department of the Treasury treated Chrysler's secured creditors in a manner that is contrary to that called for under U.S. bankruptcy law. Indiana State Treasurer Richard Mourdock originally filed a motion in the New York's federal bankruptcy court to stop the pending sale of Chrysler; it was rejected along with 300 other motions when the court order for the sale was issued.
On Friday, May 29, 2009, the Indiana group's motion was rejected, and on Sunday, May 31, 2009, bankruptcy Judge Arthur J. Gonzalez approved a proposed government restructuring plan and sale of Chrysler's assets that allowed most of the assets of Chrysler to be purchased by the new entity.  The plaintiffs appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, which affirmed the sale on June 5, 2009. The Second Circuit, however, stayed its decision, pending possible review by the Supreme Court, until 4 P.M. Monday, June 8, 2009. Fiat was to receive 20% of the new Chrysler entity, and have the future option of purchasing equity up to an additional 15% of the company.
The autoworker's union retirement health care trust (voluntary benefit association "VEBA") would get 55%, and the U.S. Government and Canadian government would be minority stakeholders.
On Sunday (June 7), the Indiana State Police Pension Fund, the Indiana Teacher's Retirement Fund, and the state's Major Moves Construction Fund filed a petition with the U.S. Supreme Court requesting an emergency stay to delay the sale while they challenged the deal.U.S. top court asked to delay Chrysler sale, Reuters, June 7, 2009.  The funds argued that the sale went against U.S. bankruptcy law because it unlawfully rewarded unsecured creditors ahead of secured creditors since, under the proposed sale, Fiat would not initially contribute cash, but would instead contribute its vehicle platforms to the New Chrysler in exchange for its equity share.Court asked to stop Chrysler sale, BBC, June 7, 2009
Chrysler estimated the market value of Fiat's proposed contribution to be as much as US$8 to 10 billion.  The pension funds also challenged the constitutionality of using funds from the Troubled Asset Relief Program to pay for the Chrysler bailout, and claimed that Congress never gave approval for the funds to be used in that manner.Indiana state pension and construction funds ask Supreme Court to block Chrysler sale to Fiat, Los Angeles Times, June 7, 2009
Fiat had the right to withdraw from participation in the "New Chrysler" if the deal did not close by June 15. However, the head of Fiat said it "would never walk away" from the Chrysler deal, even if it did not close by June 15. If Fiat did abandon the deal, since there is no other known entity willing to participate in the purchase of Chrysler assets as a block, the liquidation of all Chrysler assets would ensue.Court puts Chrysler deal in jeopardy, Globe and Mail, June 8, 2009 In briefs filed at the Supreme Court, the administration of U.S. President Barack Obama supported the completion of the asset sale .Chrysler Fiat Sale Delayed by U.S. Justice Ginsburg, Bloomberg News, June 8, 2009
On Monday, June 8, 2009, Supreme Court Associate Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, presiding over emergency motions arising from the Second Circuit, issued a temporary stay in a one-sentence order, pending a further order by her or by the Supreme Court.
Supreme Court declines to hear the case
On Tuesday, June 9, 2009, the Supreme Court declined to hear the case.  It issued a per curiam denial of the applications for a stay of the sale from the three Indiana funds, allowing the sale of assets to "New Chrysler" to proceed. It did not discuss the underlying issues raised, and its opinion cautioned that its denial of the stay was not a judgment on the underlying merits. According to the two-page decision and order, the Indiana funds "have not carried the burden" of demonstrating that the Supreme Court was required.  The U.S. Department of the Treasury then issued a statement saying: "We are gratified that not a single court that reviewed this matter, including the U.S. Supreme Court, found any fault whatsoever with the handling of this matter by either Chrysler or the U.S. government."
On Wednesday, June 10, 2009, the sale of most of Chrysler assets to "New Chrysler" (formally known as Chrysler Group LLC) was completed. As had been proposed, Fiat received equity in the New Chrysler through its contribution of automobile platforms as a base for a new line of Chrysler cars. The federal government financed the deal with the US$6.6 billion in financing that it had paid to the "Old Chrysler", formally called Chrysler LLC.
The transfer did not include eight manufacturing locations, nor many parcels of real estate, nor equipment leases. Contracts with 789 U.S. auto dealerships, which are being dropped by Chrysler, were not transferred.
As a result of the asset sale the United Auto Workers Union (UAW) gained a 55 percent ownership stake in the automaker.
Supreme Court vacates the underlying Second Circuit opinion
On December 14, 2009, the Supreme Court granted the cert petition in Indiana State Police Pension Trust v. Chrysler LLC and vacated the underlying Second Circuit opinion, but remanded the case with instructions to dismiss the appeal as moot.
While the Court had declined to hear the case on June 9 which allowed the Obama administration's wealth redistribution BK plan to proceed without ruling on its merits, its Dec 14 action effectively de-legitimized the BK plan, yet the Court did not issue a ruling to explain its actions. This was far from the ideal outcome for the Indiana pensioners who sought equitable relief from the high court, but the vacatur of a flawed lower court decision is nevertheless an important development that will maintain the integrity of bankruptcy law going forward.
Opinions on the case
Plaintiff (Indiana pension group) argument
During a May 29, 2009 interview with Human Events, Mourdock said, "This is the first time in the history of American bankruptcy law when secured creditors received less than unsecured creditors." Mourdock also stated, "The Chrysler deal is a clear violation of the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution and more than 150 years of bankruptcy law." Mourdock also stated that under the Fifth Amendment, private property cannot "be taken without due process of law. That clearly has not happened in this case. There has been no process of law consistent with long-standing precedent whatsoever."Interview With Richard Mourdock , Human Events, June 1, 2009
On May 26, 2009, while speaking in front of U.S. District Judge Thomas Griesa, Mourdock stated, "As fiduciaries, we can't allow our retired police officers and teachers to be ripped off by the federal government. The Indiana state funds suffered losses when the Obama administration overturned more than 100 years of established law by redefining 'secured creditors' to mean something less ... The court filing is aimed not only at recouping those losses but also reasserting the rule of law ..."Judge denies challenge to Chrysler asset sale, The Detroit News, May 27, 2009
During a May 21, 2009, interview with Reuters, Mourdock stated, "They bought according to the rules, and then the rules got changed," and, "Our portfolios are no longer going to buy the secured debt of American corporations that are accepting bailout monies. It is an unacceptable risk for us to purchase that debt."Indiana treasurer challenges Obama's Chrysler plan, Reuters, May 22, 2009
Defendant (U.S. government) argument
Chrysler said in a statement that Mr. Mourdock, a Republican, was politically motivated and was willing to put Chrysler in liquidation over less than 1 percent of the three funds' assets.
U.S. Solicitor General Elena Kagan, later an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court, defended the use of TARP funds for helping Chrysler, and argued that the pension funds' appeal to block the sale to Fiat lacked legal merit. She said that the losses that the pension funds would incur "cannot outweigh" the potential larger problems that a collapse of Chrysler would create. She wrote, "As an economic matter ... blocking the transaction would undoubtedly have grave consequences."Obama lawyer: Chrysler-Fiat must be allowed, CNN, June 8, 2009 She also said, "The liquidation of Chrysler would have very severe effects on the American and Canadian economies ... More than 38,000 Chrysler employees would lose their jobs; 23 manufacturing facilities and 20 parts depots will be shuttered; more than 3,000 Chrysler dealers would suffer significant and possibly fatal harm to their businesses; and billions of dollars in health and pension benefits for current and former Chrysler workers would be wiped out."U.S. top court considering Chrysler sale, Reuters, June 8, 2009
Other responses
U.S. Representative Joe Donnelly (D-Indiana), objecting to the lawsuit, declared, "This claim endangers the present offer made by Chrysler and threatens to provide the pension funds with a much lower return than has already been offered."
U.S. Representative Gary Peters (D-Michigan), with a district that includes Auburn Hills, Michigan, where Chrysler's headquarters is located, said, 
It is quite clear that Indiana's case is not in the best interest of the people of Indiana. Indiana officials are fighting over $4.8 million at the risk of costing their state over $20 million in tax revenue, tens of millions more in related costs and putting 4,000 of their own people out of work.
U.S. Representative John Dingell (D-Michigan), stated, 
By refusing to make the relatively small sacrifices that would avert a calamity. The pension funds will instead create a great catastrophe, which is the same kind of short-sighted thinking that got us into the Great Depression.Supremes Rebuff Chrysler Creditors , National Review, June 10, 2009
Shelly Lombard, a credit analyst and portfolio manager of high yield and distressed corporate securities at Gimme Credit, defended the Treasury Department's actions by saying, "Even though the debt was secured, it was clear the auto industry was very, very troubled at this time ... If it wasn't, it wouldn't have been offered at such a steep discount." Lombard also pointed out that during the current recession, even secured bank debt is not a guarantee. She explained that the market's low price could have been due to a relative lack of buyers or because the debt was faulty. She also compared the transaction to purchasing a house at a bargain price, and stated, "Either there's a divorce and the people just want to get out of there, or the foundation is cracked. In an industry in such turmoil, due diligence becomes even more critical."Indiana Teachers and Cops vs. Chrysler, Business Week, June 4, 2009
Hedge fund managers from Pacific Investment Management, Barclays Capital, Fridson Investment, and Schultze Asset Management Advisors have predicted that the Treasury Department's actions will discourage them from lending money to unionized companies with underfunded pension and medical obligations, such as airlines and auto suppliers.Fund Managers Burned by Obama Now Say They Are Wary, Bloomberg, May 20, 2009 The Financial Times wrote that the Obama administration's treatment of Chrysler's secured creditors "disturbed the security of expectation that has made lenders willing to provide capital as secured credit, thus handicapping all US industry and undermining what has been, for all its flaws, one of the best financial reorganisation processes in the world, now emulated elsewhere."How Washington blew GM’s bankruptcy, Financial Times, June 1, 2009
An editorial in The Economist argued that the Treasury Department's actions could "establish a terrible precedent. Bankruptcy exists to sort legal claims on assets. If it becomes a tool of social policy, who will then lend to struggling firms in which the government has a political interest?"An offer you can't refuse, The Economist, May 7, 2009 (Editorial)
A Wall St. Journal editorial by James Taranto stated, 
Congress established bankruptcy courts to provide for the orderly restructuring and liquidation of financially distressed companies, and the decisions of these tribunals are subject to review by the ordinary judicial courts. The Obama administration's plan for Chrysler – which involved giving a politically favored constituency (the United Auto Workers) priority at the expense of both taxpayers and legally privileged secured creditors – was an effort to circumvent the rule of law.Speaking Ruth to Power, Wall St. Journal, June 9, 2009
Former U.S. Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich wrote, 
In a rigged proceeding in which the federal government disregarded bankruptcy law in favor of the political outcome it desired, the Chrysler bankruptcy laid the predicate for the much larger General Motors bankruptcy to come. Against law and precedent, the unions were moved to the front of the line when it came to who would benefit from the bankruptcy. The Obama Treasury Department strong-armed Chrysler's creditors into a deal in which the UAW was given 55 percent ownership of the company while Chrysler's secured creditors – investors who would have received priority in a non-political bankruptcy proceeding – were left with just 29 cents on the dollar.Once, We Would Have Called It a Scandal , by Newt Gingrich, Human Events, June 10, 2009
Francis Cianfrocca, the CEO of Bayshore Networks, wrote,
The administration's management of the Chrysler bankruptcy has led to an astonishingly reckless abrogation of contract law that will introduce a new level of uncertainty into business transactions at all levels, and make wealth generation more difficult going forward ... An extraordinary uncertainty has been created when the most powerful man in the world can rewrite contracts and choose winners and losers in private negotiations as he sees fit. Since this is an unquantifiable uncertainty, and not a quantifiable risk, its effect on business and investor confidence will be large and unpredictable. As in the 1930s, a time when government also cavalierly rewrote private contracts, the prudent approach for business will be to invest minimally and wait for another administration.Wealth Creation Under Attack , Commentary magazine, June 2009
Governor of Indiana Mitch Daniels wrote an Op-Ed in the Wall Street Journal just before the one year anniversary of the Court's reversal of the underlying Second Circuit ruling:
But thanks to a quiet correction by the Supreme Court — and a little Hoosier stubbornness — the rule of law has been re-established. The greatest benefits will accrue not to lenders and borrowers but to all those whose jobs are created because investors once again can trust that the money they've risked is safe from seizure by the state.Mitch Daniels: Hoosiers vs. crony capitalism, WSJ re-published by Howey Politics Indiana, June 2010
In the 2012 US Senate race
Shortly after losing the Chrysler case, Richard Mourdock launched a primary campaign to "retire" Dick Lugar from the United States Senate and won over Lugar by 20 points in the primaries. The unsuccessful Chrysler lawsuit was mentioned many times in his campaign, including in a TV commercial in the general election where it was stated that Mourdock "fought back... all the way to the Supreme Court."
Mourdock lost the general election to former lawsuit critic Joe Donnelly by over 5 points due to a multitude of factors.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 556
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Petition of Indiana Pensioners to stay Chrysler sale order Filed with Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Associate Justice, United States Supreme Court. June 7, 2009.
Slip opinion of denial of stay, from the U.S. Supreme Court
Supreme Court ruling vacates the underlying Second Circuit opinion
Category:Chrysler
Category:Retirement in the United States
Category:Economy of Indiana
Category:Great Recession in the United States
Category:Federal court cases involving Indiana
Category:United States bankruptcy case law
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Indiana v. Edwards" ==> """
Indiana v. Edwards, 554 U.S. 164 (2008), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the standard for competency to stand trial was not linked to the standard for competency to represent oneself.
Background
Prior jurisprudence
The Court had recognized these two rights on competency for some time.  In Dusky v. United States, , and in Drope v. Missouri, , the Court established the standard for competency to stand trial—the defendant must have a "rational and factual understanding" of the nature of the proceedings, and must be able to rationally assist his lawyer in defending him.  In Faretta v. California, , the Court held that a criminal defendant cannot be forced to have a lawyer if he does not wish it, but that before the defendant relinquishes his right to counsel the trial judge must ensure that the defendant understands the "dangers and disadvantages" of representing himself. With the decision in Godinez v. Moran, , the Court held that a defendant may plead guilty (and thereby waive both his right to counsel and his right to represent himself) if he is competent to stand trial.  Until Edwards, however, it remained an open question whether a criminal defendant could be simultaneously competent to stand trial and yet not competent to represent himself.  The Court answered that question in the affirmative.  The logic is that representing oneself at trial is more complicated than deciding what to plead.
Edwards' trial
Ahmad Edwards, who suffers from schizophrenia, tried to steal a pair of shoes from a department store in Indiana.  Store detectives caught him in the act, and he drew a gun, fired at a store security officer, and wounded an innocent bystander.  He was charged with attempted murder, battery with a deadly weapon, criminal recklessness, and theft.
In 2000, he was deemed not competent to stand trial, and ordered to the state hospital for treatment.  After seven months of treatment, he was restored to competency.  Yet in 2002, his lawyers asked for another competency evaluation.  That second competency evaluation resulted in a determination that Edwards was indeed competent to stand trial, although he still suffered from a mental illness.  As trial preparations proceeded, his lawyers asked for a third competency evaluation, and in 2003 Edwards was again found not competent to stand trial and again committed to the state hospital.  Eight months later, Edwards was again restored to competence, and trial preparations began again.
In June 2005, as trial began, Edwards asked to represent himself and asked for a continuance in the trial.  The judge denied the request for a continuance, and Edwards therefore proceeded to trial with counsel.  He was convicted of criminal recklessness and theft, but the jury could not reach a verdict as to the attempted murder and battery charges.  Before the second trial on the attempted murder and battery charges, Edwards again asked to represent himself.  The judge denied that request, pointing to the lengthy record of Edwards's mental illness.  Edwards proceeded to trial with appointed counsel, and was convicted of the attempted murder and battery charges.
Appeals
Edwards appealed to the Indiana Court of Appeals, arguing that his right to represent himself at trial was violated.  The court agreed with Edwards and ordered a new trial.  The State then appealed to the Indiana Supreme Court, which also agreed with Edwards.  It reasoned that Faretta and Moran required the state to allow Edwards to represent himself at trial.  The State of Indiana asked the U.S. Supreme Court to review the decision, and it agreed to do so.
Opinion of the Court
As Justice Breyer noted in his majority opinion for the Court, the Court's competency and self-representation cases "frame the question presented, but they do not answer it."  A defendant who has a rational and factual understanding of the proceedings and who can rationally assist trial counsel is competent to stand trial.  And a defendant who voluntarily and intelligently elects to stand trial without counsel—something he can only do if he is competent to stand trial to begin with—may do so.  Even so, the right of self-representation is not absolute, and standby counsel may be appointed to assist the pro se defendant in matters of procedure and courtroom decorum.  The Court came closest to answering the question presented by this case when it held that the standard for competency to stand trial and competency to plead guilty are the same, because the decision not to stand trial is "no more complicated than the sum total of decisions that a [represented] defendant may be called upon to make during the course of a trial." The crucial difference in Edwards, was that the pro se defendant was asking to proceed to trial without counsel.  The difference, in other words, is the difference between the ability to end trial proceedings on one's own and the ability to conduct trial proceedings on one's own.
The Court ultimately concluded that, in light of these rules, a state may require an otherwise competent criminal defendant to proceed to trial with the assistance of counsel.  The standard for competency to stand trial presumes that the defendant will have a lawyer to assist him at that trial.  Implicit therefore in the Dusky rule is the idea that the standard for competency to stand trial must be lower than the standard for competency to represent oneself.  The right to represent oneself at trial is qualified by the trial court's interest in preserving courtroom decorum and promoting the orderly presentation of evidence, questioning of witnesses, and advancement of legal argument.  For the Court, it was "common sense" that a defendant's mental illness might impair his ability to accomplish these tasks—tasks that any lawyer must if he is to press his client's case effectively.  "A right of self-representation at trial will not affirm the dignity of a defendant who lacks the mental capacity to conduct his defense without the assistance of counsel."
Moreover, the Court separated the standards for competency to stand trial and for competency to represent oneself out of a concern for the fairness of the trial process.  Criminal trials "must not only be fair, they must appear fair to all who observe them."  "No trial can be fair that leaves the defense to a man who is insane, unaided by counsel, and who by reason of his mental condition stands hopeless and alone before the court."  For these reasons, the Constitution allows trial courts to "take realistic account of the particular defendant's mental capacities by asking whether a defendant who seeks to conduct his own defense at trial is mentally competent to do so."
Dissenting opinion
Characterizing the right of self-representation as "a specific right long understood as essential to a fair trial,"  Justice Scalia disputed the Court's conclusion that "a State may... strip a mentally ill defendant of the right to represent himself when that would be fairer."  Because counsel's role under the Sixth Amendment is merely one of "assistance," or because the "right of self-representation could also be seen as a part of the traditional meaning of the Due Process Clause," Faretta had held that a state may not force a lawyer upon a defendant who does not want one.  Faretta required the trial judge to inform Edwards about the dangers and disadvantages of representing himself, and Scalia believed that Edwards had taken that warning to heart.  For Scalia, ultimately the right of self-representation rests on the right to present one's own case to the jury, however foolhardy an endeavor that might be.
Scalia also rejected the "dignity" premise that supported the Court's decision.  "While there is little doubt that preserving individual dignity (to which the Court refers) is paramount," he wrote, "there is equally little doubt that the loss of dignity the right [of self-representation] is designed to prevent is not the defendant's making a fool of himself by presenting an amateurish or even incoherent defense.  Rather, the dignity at issue is the supreme human dignity of being master of one's fate rather than a ward of the State—the dignity of individual choice."  Scalia necessarily overlooks the possibility that a mental illness could impair a person's ability to rationally make a dignified individual choice whether or not to have representation and as to the proper defense while at the same time not impair his ability to understand the nature of the proceedings of which he is at the center and rationally assist his representation, as required under Dusky.  Godinez had found that the competency standard for pleading guilty or waiving one's right to counsel was the same as the standard for standing trial; therefore in Scalia's view if Edwards had the right to waive his defense completely he surely had the lesser right to mount a (presumably inferior) pro se defense.
Finally, consistent with his originalist theory, Scalia sought to quell doubts regarding the authenticity of the right of self-representation.  "The right is not explicitly set forth in the text of the Sixth Amendment, and some Members of this Court [including Justice Breyer] have expressed skepticism about Faretta'''s holding."  But, Scalia pointed out, the Sixth Amendment gave the defendant personally, and not his lawyer, the right to call witnesses on his behalf, the right to confront the prosecution's witnesses against him, and to have counsel assist him (assuming he so wishes).  If the defendant is bound by counsel's decisions not to call certain witnesses or not to cross-examine others, he must have the right to represent himself in order to give substance to those other rights the Sixth Amendment protects.  "Otherwise, the defense presented is not the defense guaranteed him by the Constitution, for in a very real sense, it is not his'' defense."
Implications
Alan R. Felthous notes that an implication of this decision is that after a defendant has been found competent to stand trial, if he then wishes to represent himself, a separate evaluation may be required to determine whether he meets the higher standard of competency required to be his own lawyer, unless the earlier evaluation already assessed both competencies. Since the Supreme Court did not establish a specific standard for competence to represent oneself, this task has been left to the legislatures and lower courts.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 554
List of United States Supreme Court cases
Further reading
References
External links
 Amicus brief of the Criminal Justice Legal Foundation
 Transcript of oral argument 
 Amicus brief of the Solicitor General
 Commentary from The Atlantic
 Amicus brief of the American Psychiatric Association
 Opening brief of State of Indiana as Petitioner
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2008 in United States case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment self-representation case law
Category:Adjudicative competence case law
Category:Self-representation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "INDOPCO, Inc. v. Commissioner" ==> """
INDOPCO, Inc. v. Commissioner, 503 U.S. 79 (1992), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that expenditures incurred by a target corporation in the course of a friendly takeover are nondeductible capital expenditures..
Question presented
Are certain professional expenses incurred by a target corporation in the course of a friendly takeover deductible by that corporation as "ordinary and necessary" business expenses under § 162(a) of the Internal Revenue Code?.
Key facts
In 1977, Unilever (a Delaware corporation) expressed interest in acquiring INDOPCO (formerly named National Starch and Chemical Corporation). In order to adequately prepare for being bought out, National Starch hired Morgan Stanley to be its investment banker on this transaction. The fees charged by Morgan Stanley amounted to $2,200,000, in addition to $7,586 for out-of-pocket expenses and $18,000 in legal fees. National Starch tried to claim all of these fees as deductions. The Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service disallowed the claimed deduction. The Tax Court and the Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit affirmed the Commissioner’s decision. The courts held that the amount spent towards Morgan Stanley added to the long-term betterment of National Starch.
Opinion of the Court
In a unanimous opinion delivered by Justice Blackmun, the Court held that expenses incurred in a friendly takeover do not qualify for tax deduction as “ordinary and necessary” expenses under § 162(a).
The key here is that National Starch did not demonstrate that the investment banking, legal, and other costs it incurred in connection with Unilever’s acquisition of its shares are deductible as ordinary and necessary business expenses under §162(a). In addition to the analysis provided by the two previous courts, the Supreme Court cited the fact that there is a long history of finding that the purpose of changing the corporate structure for the benefit of future operations is not an ordinary and necessary business expense.  General Bancshares Corp. v. Commissioner, 326. F.2d, at 715.
INDOPCO Treasury Regulations
Treasury Regulation 1.263(a)-4(b) requires the taxpayer to capitalize listed intangible assets.
Specifically, the taxpayer must capitalize
Amounts paid to acquire or create intangible assets.
Amounts paid to create or enhance separate and distinct intangible assets – i.e. property interests with ascertainable value protected under state, federal, and foreign law, that are capable of being sold, transferred, or pledged, and are separate from a trade or business. Amounts to create computer software or package design are not included.
Amounts paid to create or enhance future benefits identified as intangibles requiring capitalization under the Federal Register or Internal Revenue Bulletin.
Amounts facilitating the acquisition or creation of intangible assets.
To simplify application, Treasury Regulation 1.263-4(f)(1) enacts a “12-month rule” allowing the taxpayer a current deduction for amounts paid to create rights or benefits that last beyond one year of the taxpayer realizing the right or benefit if that benefit doesn’t last beyond the taxable year following the tax year the initial payment is made.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 503
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:Unilever
"""

From "Industrial Union Department v. American Petroleum Institute" ==> """
Industrial Union Department v. American Petroleum Institute (also known as the Benzene Case), 448 U.S. 607 (1980), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States.  This case represented a challenge to the OSHA practice of regulating carcinogens by setting the exposure limit "at the lowest technologically feasible level that will not impair the viability of the industries regulated."  OSHA selected that standard because it believed that (1) it could not determine a safe exposure level and that (2) the authorizing statute did not require it to quantify such a level. The AFL Industrial Union Department served as the petitioner; the American Petroleum Institute was the respondent. A plurality on the Court, led by Justice Stevens, wrote that the authorizing statute did indeed require OSHA to demonstrate a significant risk of harm (albeit not with mathematical certainty) in order to justify setting a particular exposure level. 
Perhaps more important than the specific holding of the case, the Court noted in dicta that if the government's interpretation of the authorizing statute had been correct, it might violate the nondelegation doctrine.  This line of reasoning may represent the "high-water mark" of recent attempts to revive the doctrine.
 Background 
The Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 delegated broad authority to the Secretary of Labor to promulgate standards to ensure safe and healthful working conditions for the Nation's workers (the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) being the agency responsible for carrying out this authority). According to Section 3(8), standards created by the secretary must be “reasonably necessary or appropriate to provide safe or healthful employment and places of employment.” Section 6(b)(5) of the statute sets the principle for creating the safety regulations, directing the Secretary to “set the standard which most adequately assures, to the extent feasible, on the basis of the best available evidence, that no employee will suffer material impairment of health or functional capacity…”. At issue in the case, is the Secretary's interpretation of "extent feasible" to mean that if a material is unsafe he must “set an exposure limit at the lowest technologically feasible level that will not impair the viability of the industries regulated.”
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court held the Secretary applied the act inappropriately. To comply with the statute, the secretary must determine 1) that a health risk of a substance exists at a particular threshold and 2) Decide whether to issue the most protective standard, or issue a standard that weighs the costs and benefits. Here, the secretary failed to first determine that a health risk of substance existed for the chemical benzene when workers were exposed at 1 part per million. Data only suggested the chemical was unsafe at 10 parts per million. Thus, the secretary had failed the first step of interpreting the statute, that is, finding that the substance posed a risk at that level.
In its reasoning, the Court noted it would be unreasonable to assume that congress intended to give the Secretary “unprecedented power over American industry.” Such a delegation of power would likely be unconstitutional. The Court also cited the legislative history of the act, which suggested that Congress meant to address major workplace hazards, not hazards with low statistical likelihoods.
 Concurring opinion 
In a famous concurrence, Justice Rehnquist argued that the section 6(b)(5) of the statute, which set forth the "extent feasible" principle, should be struck down on the basis of the non-delegation doctrine. The non-delegation doctrine, which has been recognized by the Supreme Court since the era of Chief Justice Marshall, holds that Congress cannot delegate law-making authority to other branches of government. Rehnquist offered three rationales for the application of the non-delegation doctrine. First, ensure Congress makes social policy, not agencies; delegation should only be used when the policy is highly technical or the ground too large to be covered. Second, agencies of the delegated authority require an “intelligible principle” to exercise discretion which was lacking in this case. Third, the intelligible principle must provide judges with a measuring stick for judicial review.
 Subsequent developments 
Most scholars have said that the interpretation of statute ignored a foundational principle of statutory interpretation. Generally, specific language governs general language. In this case, the court read the more general provision of Section 3(8) as governing the specific process specified in Section 6(b)(5).
The case also marks the current state of affairs for the non-delegation doctrine. When the court is faced with a provision that appears to be an impermissible delegation of the authority, it will use tools of statutory interpretation to try to narrow the delegation of power.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:Chemical safety
Category:1980 in the environment
Category:1980 in United States case law
Category:Occupational Safety and Health Administration
Category:American Petroleum Institute
Category:AFL–CIO
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States nondelegation doctrine case law
"""

From "Ingersoll-Rand Co. v. McClendon" ==> """
Ingersoll-Rand Co. v. McClendon, 498 U.S. 133 (1990), is a US labor law case, concerning the scope of labor rights in the United States..
Facts 
Mr. McClendon claimed his job was terminated to prevent his pension benefits from "vesting" (full rights becoming irrevocable if the employment contract ended) under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974. He argued this violated Texas state law public policy and sought damages for wrongful termination, mental anguish, including punitive damages. He sought to avoid a question of preemption of his claim by ERISA 1974 §514(a),. by not claiming lost pension benefits, or referring to pension plan details, and instead basing a claim solely upon state law.
The Texas Courts held that he had a claim.
Judgment
Justice O’Connor held that Mr McClendon’s claim was pre-empted. The Texas public policy ‘referred to’ a pension plan, to protect its integrity against employer misconduct. The state action would also be preempted by implication as it conflicted potentially by the anti-discrimination provisions of ERISA (29 USC §1140).
O'Connor J said the following, with which the whole court concurred.
This meant, in the court's view, that a civil action under §502(a) - not including punitive damages, potentially available in state law - was the only available remedy.
In addition, Justice O'Connor offered an opinion that McClelland's claim was preempted in general. Justice Rehnquist, Justice White, Justice Scalia, Justice Kennedy, Justice Souter joined. Justice Marshall, Justice Blackmun and Justice Stevens offered no view.
See also
United States labor law
References
External links
Category:1990 in United States case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974
"""

From "Ingraham v. Wright" ==> """
Ingraham vs. Wright, 430 U.S. 651 (1977), was a United States Supreme Court case that upheld the disciplinary corporal punishment policy of Florida's public schools by a 5–4 vote. The judgment specified that such corporal punishments have no prohibition in public schools unless those punishments are “degrading or unduly severe”. 
Background
James Ingraham was a 14-year-old eighth grade student at Charles R. Drew Junior High SchoolCharles R. Drew Junior High School is today known as Charles R. Drew Middle School. in 1970. On October 6, 1970, Ingraham was accused of failing to promptly leave the stage of the school auditorium when asked to do so by a teacher.Virginia Lee (1979). "A Legal Analysis of Ingraham v. Wright". In Corporal Punishment in American Education: Readings in History, Practice, and Alternatives. Irwin A. Hyman and James H. Wise, editors. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Temple University Press. Page 173. He was then taken to the school principal's office, where he stated that he was not guilty of the accusation against him. Willie J. Wright, Jr., the principal, ordered Ingraham to bend over so that Wright could spank Ingraham with a spanking paddle. When Ingraham declined to bend over and allow himself to be paddled, he was forcibly placed face-down on the top of a table. Lemmie Deliford, the assistant principal, held Ingraham's arms and Solomon Barnes, an assistant to the principal, held Ingraham's legs. While Ingraham was being restrained, Wright used a spanking paddle to hit Ingraham more than 20 times.Ibid., p. 174.
The paddling was so severe that he suffered a hematoma requiring medical attention. Physicians instructed Ingraham to rest at home for a total of eleven days.United States Court of Appeals, Fifth Circuit; 498 F.2d 248, paragraph 29, July 29, 1974. He and his parents sued the school, calling it "cruel and unusual punishment" and loss of liberty, but lost the initial trial. The Florida state court held that Florida tort laws provided sufficient remedies to satisfy Ingraham's due process loss of liberty claims. The court also held that the U.S. Constitution's prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment does not apply to the corporal punishment of children in public schools, and that the constitution's due process clause does not require notice and a hearing prior to the imposition of corporal punishment in public schools.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court declined to consider the plaintiffs' substantive due process claims in Ingraham v. Wright. Lower courts have adopted a variety of approaches to the substantive due process issue, none of which offer much protection for students who are subjected to corporal punishment at school. The Supreme Court has repeatedly denied certiorari (judicial review) on the issue of whether school corporal punishment constitutes a substantive due process constitutional violation.Deana Pollard Sacks (2009). "State Actors Beating Children: A Call For Judicial Relief." University of California Davis Law Review,  42, pp. 1165—1229.
As of 1994, Lemmie Deliford, one of the administrators involved, was still a proponent of corporal punishment in schools.
See also
 School corporal punishment in the United States
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:Spanking
Category:United States civil due process case law
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Miami-Dade County Public Schools
"""

From "Insular Cases" ==> """
The Insular Cases are a series of opinions by the Supreme Court of the United States in 1901 about the status of U.S. territories acquired in the Spanish–American War. Some scholars also include cases regarding territorial status decided up until 1914, and others include related cases as late as 1979. 
The term "insular" signifies that the territories were islands administered by the War Department's Bureau of Insular Affairs. Today, the categorizations and implications put forth by the Insular Cases still govern the United States' territories.
When the war ended in 1898, the United States had to answer the question of whether or not people in newly acquired territories were citizens, a question the country had never faced before. The preliminary answer came from a series of Supreme Court rulings, now known as the Insular Cases, which responded to the question of how American constitutional rights apply to those in United States territories. The Supreme Court held that full constitutional protection of rights does not automatically (or ex proprio vigore—i.e., of its own force) extend to all places under American control. This meant that inhabitants of unincorporated territories such as Puerto Rico—"even if they are U.S. citizens"—may lack some constitutional rights (e.g., the right to remain part of the United States in case of de-annexation) because they were not part of the United States. Today, many legal scholars such as José Julián Álvarez González, Christina Burnett, and others refer to the Insular Cases as a constitutional justification for colonialism and annexation of places not within United States boundaries. The Insular Cases "authorized the colonial regime created by Congress, which allowed the United States to continue its administration—and exploitation—of the territories acquired from Spain after the Spanish–American War." These Supreme Court rulings allowed for the United States government to extend unilateral power over these newly acquired territories.
The Court also established the doctrine of territorial incorporation, under which the Constitution applied fully only in incorporated territories such as Alaska and Hawaii. Incorporated territories are those that the United States Congress deems on a path to statehood. Meanwhile, the Supreme Court ruled the Constitution applied only partially in the newly unincorporated Puerto Rico, Guam and the Philippines. The Supreme Court created the distinction that unincorporated territories were not on the path to statehood, which effectively allowed for the Constitution to apply differently. PDF .
The rulings are widely considered racist. Archived. Archived. Archived. Archived. Archived. Archived. Archived. The Downes v. Bidwell called the people of the insular areas "alien races" and the De Lima v. Bidwell ruling termed them "savage tribes."The Most Racist Supreme Court Cases You’ve Probably Never Heard Of: Why does the Biden administration's Department of Justice continue to rely on cases that presume people in the territories are “alien races” composing “savage tribes”?. Alejandro Agustin Ortiz and Adriel I. Cepeda Derieux. American Civil Liberties Union. 10 February 2022. Accessed 7 March 2023. Archived. The Downes v. Bidwell case further suggested the administration of "alien races" may be "impossible". The District Court of the Virgin Islands called out the cases' "racist doctrine" and the era's "intrinsically racist imperialism".
 Background 
In 1898, the United States signed the Treaty of Paris (which entered into force on April 11, 1899), which ended the Spanish–American War and granted the United States the Philippines, Puerto Rico, and Guam. Additionally, Cuba remained under the jurisdiction of the United States Military Government until its independence on May 20, 1902. Since there was nothing in the United States Constitution about governing newly acquired territories, the government used the guideline from Title IX of the Treaty of Paris. Those that were born in Spain but living in one of the territories—known as —"could retain their Spanish citizenship", or even eventually have the option to become United States citizens. Title IX of the Treaty of Paris did not grant the same rights to the indigenous population. Edguardo Melendez writes, "Puerto Ricans and Filipinos—'the natives of the islands'—not only remained colonial subjects but became stateless peoples too: they were denied the right to keep their Spanish citizenship, as well as their right to become U.S. citizens."
After Title IX of the Treaty of Paris came the Foraker Act of 1900, which established American rule in Puerto Rico for all of the twentieth century. The act allowed the United States to appoint the governor, a portion of the legislature, and the entirety of the Puerto Rico Supreme Court. These two documents precede the Insular Cases and set a precedent on the status of the United States' new territories prior to the Supreme Court's rulings.
In addition to the Treaty of Paris and the Foraker Act, the Citizenship Clause found within the 14th Amendment of the United States Constitution informed the Insular Case decisions. Lisa Marie Perez writes in the Virginia Law Review that "[t]he Citizenship Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment provides that 'All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States. However, the Insular Cases soon set a precedent that the territories are not inherently part of the United States and therefore the Citizenship Clause or other portions of the United States Constitution do not automatically apply. Furthermore, the Citizenship Clause was crucial throughout the 1800s in the United States as the country expanded and full citizenship was extended. Yet, the discussion never centered around citizenship in terms of overseas expansion. Soon, the precedent from the Insular Cases became very different from early interpretations of the Citizenship Clause.
 List of the Insular Cases 
Various authorities have listed what they consider are the legitimate constituents of the Insular Cases.
Juan R. Torruella, a judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the First Circuit (the federal appeals court with jurisdiction over the Federal Court for the District of Puerto Rico), considers that the landmark decisions consist of six fundamental cases only, all decided in 1901: "strictly speaking the Insular Cases are the original six opinions issued concerning acquired territories as a result of the 1898 Treaty of Paris". (Registration/subscription required for DOI version.) These six cases were: (Registration/subscription required for DOI version.)
 De Lima v. Bidwell, ; Argued: January 8–11, 1901; Decided: May 27, 1901
 Goetze v. United States, ; Argued: December 17–20, 1900; January 14–15, 1901; Decided: May 27, 1901
 Dooley v. United States, ; Argued: January 8–11, 1901. Decided: May 27, 1901
 Armstrong v. United States, ; Argued: January 8–11, 1901; Decided: May 27, 1901
 Downes v. Bidwell, ; Argued: January 8–11, 1901; Decided: May 27, 1901
 Huus v. New York and Porto Rico Steamship Co., ; Argued: January 11, 14, 1901; Decided: May 27, 1901
Other authorities, such as José Trías Monge, former Chief Justice of the Puerto Rico Supreme Court, states that the list also includes these additional two cases also decided in 1901:
 Dooley v. United States, 
 Fourteen Diamond Rings v. United States, ; Argued: December 17–20, 1900. Decided: December 2, 1901
Law professor Pedro A. Malavet wrote in his book America's Colony: The Political and Cultural Conflict Between the United States and Puerto Rico that while many law experts include cases from 1903 to 1979, some scholars limit the number of cases in the list to just nine, adding Crossman v. United States, .
The U.S. Congress passed a resolution that collected the relevant records, briefs, and oral arguments of the 1901 cases concerning the U.S. Territories. In the compilation, the cases considered at the time of their decision as the Insular Cases were DeLima, Goetze, Dooley, Dooley, Armstrong, Downes, Crossman, and Huus.
Six of the nine Insular Cases deal exclusively with Puerto Rico.
Constitutional law professor Efrén Rivera-Ramos argues that the "Insular Cases" designation has been extended beyond the first nine cases in 1901 to include additional cases decided between 1903 and 1914:
 Hawaii v. Mankichi, 
 Gonzales v. Williams, 
 Kepner v. United States, 
 Dorr v. United States, 
 Mendozana v. United States, As cited in 
 Rasmussen v. United States, 
 Trono v. United States, 
 Grafton v. United States, 
 Kent v. Porto Rico, 
 Kopel v. Bingham, 
 Dowdell v. United States, 
 Ochoa v. Hernández, 
 Ocampo v. United States, 
Some include the later Supreme Court rulings of:
 Balzac v. Porto Rico (1922)
 Dorr v. United States (1904)
In Balzac, the Supreme Court found that Puerto Ricans, extended statutory citizenship by the Jones Act (1917), are not guaranteed a trial by jury, an inherent aspect of the United States Constitution. Similarly, in Dorr v. United States (1904), the Supreme Court ruled against right to trial by jury for Philippines residents, another unincorporated territory at the time. These two cases exemplify the idea implemented by the Insular Cases that the Constitution does not automatically extend to territories , or by its own force.
 Doctrine of incorporation 
The Insular Case decisions created a doctrine allowing for the United States to acquire and govern colonial territories. The most important doctrinal lines from the Insular Cases include the idea of incorporated and unincorporated territories and the overarching principle that the Constitution does not inherently extend to unincorporated territories. 
The first Insular Case, Downes v. Bidwell (1901), created the distinction between incorporated and unincorporated territories. The Supreme Court came to this decision by examining Congress' right to impose tariffs on states and territories. Bartholomew Sparrow writes that in Downes v. Bidwell, "the Court found that Congress could tax trade between Puerto Rico and the states. Puerto Rico was thus not a part of the United States for tariff purposes—contrary to the Uniformity Clause." Although the Uniformity Clause states that Congress must enforce tariffs equally throughout the United States, the Supreme Court created a distinction between territories that were fully part of the union and those that were not, allowing them to ignore the Uniformity Clause. The line drawn by the Supreme Court created "incorporated territories", those destined to be states, and "unincorporated territories", which were not on the path to statehood. In 1901 and the era of the Insular Cases, the areas that became unincorporated territories were Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines. With the establishment of the legality of unincorporated territories, the Court also found that in these said territories, the Constitution "did not apply in full". This means the Constitution does not extend "" (by its own force) to unincorporated territories. Instead, it could be extended at Congress' discretion. The lines of reasoning from Downes v. Bidwell created legal precedent for the remainder of the Insular Cases.
In De Lima v. Bidwell (1901), the Supreme Court found "Puerto Rico was part of the United States for the purpose of the Uniformity Clause." Therefore, duties could not be collected from Puerto Rico. The Supreme Court set alternative precedents in Downes v. Bidwell and De Lima v. Bidwell based on the differing interpretation of the Uniformity Clause of the United States Constitution and the subsequent implications of these rulings.
 Political debate 
The Insular Cases came at a time when America was building its empire. Throughout history, empire-building and colonial expansion have been a contentious topic. The reaction within the United States to the Insular decisions was no different, with both supporters and dissenters voicing their opinions. In Downes, Justice Henry Brown claimed that the United States should be able to possess the same power over the insular territories that Spain had. Krishanti Vigarajah argues that this allowed the insular territories to be seen as satellite colonies, and for the United States to exert colonial-style rule. This was controversial, due to the idea that the founding anti-colonial values of the United States were not compatible with exertion of colonial power.
The political debate surrounding the Insular Cases was split between expansionists and anti-expansionists, which largely followed Democratic-Republican party lines. Following the American Civil War and preceding the Spanish-American War, the Reconstruction Constitution that had guaranteed any inhabitants of American annexed territories the full benefit of United States citizenship and ultimate statehood. Historian Sam Erman notes that the strength of the Reconstruction Constitution had become weakened by the time of the Insular Cases, as a result of Southern Democrats' efforts to disenfranchise African-Americans in the South, and Republicans' waning support for Reconstruction measures.
For anti-expansionists, this discouraged overseas territorial acquisition during reconstruction by guaranteeing any annexed territories' eventual statehood and its people the full rights of citizenship.
Expansionists wished to separate U.S. action from the behavior of Spain, whose colonialism they viewed as motivated only by commercial interests and a continued desire to subjugate. The United States presented its own imperial ambitions as a path to liberation for former colonial subjects and an opportunity to gain republican government and modernity. However, expansionists also had to contend with questions about how to expand U.S. borders without extending citizenship to those they considered "alien".
 American reaction 
Bartholomew Sparrow notes that almost all of the Insular Case opinions were 5–4 within the Supreme Court, demonstrating the contentious nature of the topic even from the highest voice of law in the United States. In Downes v. Bidwell (1901), the Supreme Court reached a decision after one of the most spirited discussions ever held within the sacred circle of the Supreme Court bench,' the Associated Press reported." Reactions to the Insular Cases also exemplify the divide that existed at the time in the United States government surrounding empire building.
Republicans, who favored expansion and authored the Foraker Act supported the decisions: "the decision is a complete vindication of the position held by the Republican party with respect to the power of Congress to legislate for Porto Rico and the Philippines." Additionally, "Solicitor General John Richards noted, 'they sustain to the fullest extent the so-called insular policy of the administration. The government now has the sanction of the Supreme Court for governing these islands as their needs require. These examples show the support for the decisions at the time they were handed down.
However, there were many who did not support the decisions. Many former congressmen spoke out against the decisions. Charles E. Littlefield wrote in the Harvard Law Review, "the Insular Cases, in the manner in which the results were reached, the incongruity of the results, and the variety of inconsistent views expressed by the different members of the court, are, I believe, without parallel in our judicial history." George. S. Boutwell, former congressman and U.S. Senator commented, "the opinion of the majority seems to justify the conclusion that the power of acquiring territories is an indefinite power." Thus, the divisive nature of the Insular decisions was revealed through the opinions held by those active in government.
Outside of the government, the announcement of the Downes v. Bidwell decision in 1901 drew the largest crowd in Supreme Court history, displaying the interest the American public had in the outcome of the case. Newspapers around the country also took great interest in the outcome of the Insular Cases, and many were highly critical of the decisions. The New York Herald wrote that the Supreme Court "by a bare majority of one holds that the constitution is supreme only in the States, and that a million square miles, or one-fourth of the national domain, and ten million people are subject to no law but the will of Congress." Furthermore, The Denver Post exclaimed the "Downes decision 'at one fell swoop' brought the United States 'into the ownership of colonies and putting us into the rank of land grabbing nations of Europe.
 Scholarly criticism 
thumb|The Insular Cases drew unabashedly on ideas of racial inferiority. (Puck cartoon, 1899)
It is now commonly acknowledged that the decisions made in the Insular Cases were influenced by racist ideas of the period. Scholar Rick Baldoz notes that American political “anxieties about immigration, race, and economic competition” strongly influenced the debate surrounding the Insular Cases.
Downes and De Lima have been criticized for their inconsistency, and the alternative precedents sent in each one, in which Puerto Rico was first defined in Downes as not a "foreign country" but defined in De Lima as not part of the United States. 
The Insular Cases have also been criticized for having been inconsistent in application between the two largest insular territories, the Philippines and Puerto Rico. Puerto Rico was seen as "an important geo-strategic asset" for emerging U.S. imperialism and a gateway to Latin America, while insular control over the Philippines was a "temporary attachment born of political expediency". This was attributed to the relative geographic proximity of the two nations, and the relative commercial capabilities of each at the time.
Notably, American beliefs about race at the time also characterized the difference in treatment between Puerto Rico and the Philippines. Puerto Ricans were more likely to be viewed as white by Americans than Filipinos were. However, both Puerto Ricans and Filipinos were seen as too "alien" to be considered for U.S. citizenship and statehood, unlike other former U.S. territories that had achieved statehood. This has been criticized by scholar Mark Weiner as Teutonic Constitutionalism.
Writing in 2001, former Puerto Rico Supreme Court Chief Justice José Trías Monge contends that the Insular Cases were based on premises that would be legally and politically unacceptable in the 21st century, premises such as:
 Democracy and colonialism are "fully compatible".
 There is "nothing wrong when a democracy such as the United States engages in the business of governing other" subjects that have not participated in their democratic election process.
 People are not created equal, some races being superior to others.
 It is the "burden of the superior peoples, the white man's burden, to bring up others in their image, except to the extent that the nation which possesses them should in due time determine".
Scholar Krishanti Vignarajah has also argued that the courts decisions in the Insular Cases could have been considered judicial overreach. They were initially were considered a political issue, and the Treaty of Paris specified that "the civil rights and political status of the native inhabitants of the territories ... shall be determined by the Congress", but was later transformed into a legitimate judicial issue. This set a new standard for judicial involvement in issues of international affairs.
 Judicial criticism and later challenges 
In Harris v. Rosario, 446 U.S. 651 (1980), the Court applied Califano v. Torres, 435 U.S. 1 (1978) in a succinct per curiam order, holding that less aid to Puerto Rican families with dependent children did not violate the Equal Protection Clause, because in U.S. territories Congress can discriminate against its citizens applying a rational basis review. Justice Thurgood Marshall wrote a staunch dissent, noting that Puerto Ricans are U.S. citizens and that the Insular Cases are questionable.
In Torres v. Puerto Rico, 442 U.S. 465 (1979), cited above, Justice William Brennan, with whom Justice Potter Stewart, Justice Marshall, and Justice Harry Blackmun joined, concurring in the judgment, cited Reid v. Covert, 354 U.S. 1, 14 (1957), in which Justice Hugo Black said the "concept that the Bill of Rights and other constitutional protections against arbitrary government are inoperative when they become inconvenient or when expediency dictates otherwise is a very dangerous doctrine and if allowed to flourish would destroy the benefit of a written Constitution and undermine the basis of our Government".
In United States v. Vaello Madero, 596 U.S. ___ (2022), Justice Neil Gorsuch concurred with the majority opinion excluding Puerto Rico from the Supplemental Security Income program, but he criticized the Insular Cases and stated that they are "shameful," "have no foundation in the Constitution and rest instead on racial stereotypes," and "deserve no place in our law."
The Supreme Court had the opportunity to overturn the Insular Cases in the case of Fitisemanu v. United States, but in October 2022, denied certiorari.Supreme Court declines to consider challenge to racist citizenship laws The United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit had ruled in this case that the insular cases should stand.
 Impacts 
The Philippines was recognized as an independent country in 1946, following World War II. Guam and Puerto Rico have remained unincorporated territories and are two amongst the sixteen existing insular areas. Baldoz suggests that U.S. rule over Puerto Rico as a result of the Insular Cases previewed attempts in the 20th century at American attempts at interventionism and occupation in Latin America.
The United States now has only one incorporated territory left: the United States Territory of Palmyra Island, a remote, uninhabited coral atoll in the middle of the Pacific Ocean. It had been part of the incorporated Territory of Hawaii until 1959, when Palmyra was deliberately excluded from the new State of Hawaii by the Hawaii Admission Act, so Palmyra was left as a remnant of the old federal territory, still "incorporated", so the Constitution applies there in full.
For Puerto Rico, the outcomes of the Insular Cases laid a foundation for the modern "political question" of Puerto Rican status in relation to the United States, in which Puerto Ricans continue to be classified as alien. The incorporation doctrine's "uncertainty" has allowed U.S. courts the ability to discriminate against Puerto Rican plaintiffs on issues of individual welfare and entitlement into the current day.
Amy Kaplan argues that the Insular Cases helped create the legal backing of the Guantánamo Bay Detention Camp in Guantánamo, Cuba, where constitutional rights "remain indeterminate".
 See also 
 Insular area
 Guano Islands Act
 Guantánamo Bay
 Philippine–American War
 Puerto Rico
 Unincorporated territories of the United States
 References 
 Further reading 
 Neuman, Gerald L., and Tomiko Brown-Nagin, eds. Reconsidering the Insular Cases: The Past and Future of the American Empire (Harvard University Press, 2015).
 Rennie, Russell. "A qualified defense of the Insular Cases." New York University Law Review 92 (2017): 1683+ online.
 Sparrow, Bartholomew H. “The Centennial of Ocampo v. United States: Lessons from the Insular Cases.” in Reconsidering the Insular Cases: The Past and Future of the American Empire, edited by Gerald L. Neuman and Tomiko Brown-Nagin, (Harvard University Press, 2015), pp. 39–60. online
 Sparrow, Bartholomew H. The insular cases and the emergence of American empire (Landmark Law Cases & American, 2006).
 Torruella, Juan R. "Ruling America's colonies: The insular cases." Yale Law and Policy Review 32 (2013): 57+ online.
Cases
 Consejo de Salud Playa de Ponce v. Rullan. 586 F.Supp.2d 22 (2008). Consejo de Salud Playa de Ponce, et al., Plaintiffs v. Johnny Rullan, Secretary of Health of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Defendant. Civil Nos. 06-1260(GAG), 06-1524(GAG). United States District Court, D. Puerto Rico. October 10, 2008. As Corrected November 10, 2008. Retrieved April 1, 2013.
 Opinion and Order: Consejo de Salud de la Playa de Ponce vs. Johnny Rullan, Secretary of Health of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.  Gustavo A. Gelpi.  USDC, D of Puerto Rico. San Juan, PR. Civil Numbers 06-1260 (GAG) and 06-1524 (GAG) (Consolidated). November 10, 2008. Retrieved April 1, 2013.
 Boumediene v. Bush 553 U.S. 723 (2008)
 Reid v. Covert 354 U.S. 1 (1957)
 Posadas de Puerto Rico Associates v. Tourism Company of Puerto Rico (478 U.S. 328) (1986)
 External links 
 The Insular Empire: America in the Mariana Islands, a one-hour PBS documentary by New Day Films.
Category:1901 in United States case law
Category:Insular areas of the United States
Category:Law of insular areas of the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:History of racism in the United States
"""

From "Integrity Staffing Solutions, Inc. v. Busk" ==> """
Integrity Staffing Solutions, Inc. v. Busk, 574 U.S. 27 (2014), was a unanimous decision by the United States Supreme Court, ruling that time spent by workers waiting to undergo anti-employee theft security screenings is not "integral and indispensable" to their work, and thus not compensable under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). The Court delivered their ruling on December 9, 2014.
Background
Jesse Busk was among several workers employed by the temp agency Integrity Staffing Solutions to work in Amazon.com's warehouse in Nevada to help package and fulfill orders. At the end of each day, they had to spend about 25 minutes waiting to undergo anti-theft security checks before leaving. Busk and his fellow workers sued their employer, claiming they were entitled to be paid for those 25 minutes under the Fair Labor Standards Act. They argued that the time waiting could have been reduced if more screeners were added, or shifts were staggered so workers did not have to wait for the checks at the same time. Furthermore, since the checks were made to prevent employee theft, they only benefited the employers and the customers, not the employees themselves.
The District Court originally dismissed the case, ruling that the security checks were made after the regular work shift and therefore not "an integral and indispensable part" of the job. The Ninth Circuit disagreed, ruling that the checks were necessary to the principal work of the job.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Clarence Thomas delivered the unanimous judgment of the Court. He wrote that "an activity is integral and indispensable to the principal activities that an employee is employed to perform — and thus compensable under the FLSA — if it is an intrinsic element of those activities and one with which the employee cannot dispense if he is to perform his principal activities". Thomas then argued that the security checks were not integral to Busk's job because they could be eliminated without adversely affecting the required work. In addition, the time waiting could have been reduced if the employer hired more screeners or stagger work shifts, which also would not adversely affect the required work.
Justice Sonia Sotomayor, joined by Justice Elena Kagan, delivered a concurring opinion, emphasizing that any activity related to worker safety and efficiency is also "integral and indispensable" and therefore should still remain covered. However, the security checks did not have anything to do with worker safety and efficiency.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 574
References
External links
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Intel Corp. Investment Policy Committee v. Sulyma" ==> """
Intel Corp. Investment Policy Committee v. Sulyma, 589 U.S. ___ (2020), was a United States Supreme Court case. It decided that, for purposes of the requirement in the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 that plaintiffs with “actual knowledge” of an alleged fiduciary breach file suit within three years of gaining that knowledge, a plaintiff does not necessarily have “actual knowledge” of the information contained in disclosures that he receives but does not read or cannot recall reading.. This affirmed the decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.
Oral argument & decision
Intel argued that “actual knowledge” meant that the person just got the information and didn't have to actually do anything to qualify under “actual knowledge” clause for the 3-year protection instead of the 6-year protection. The Supreme Court unanimously rejected that argument, arguing that “actual knowledge” meant that the person read and could recall the document.
Sulyma argued that “actual knowledge” under the 6-year plan qualified because he didn't read the document until after the 3-year protection had ended, and because he got less information than the Department of Labor, it would fully qualify for 6-year protection.}
The Supreme Court unanimously ruled in favor of Sulyma, ruling that “actual knowledge” meant that the person read and was able to recall the facts. The court affirmed the decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.
Lower court rulings
The United States District Court for the Northern District of California ruled in favor of Intel, the Court argued that “actual knowledge” meant that the person got the information and didn't have to read or know about it for the 3-year protection to begin.
Sulyma filed an appeal with the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, who reversed the decision and remanded the case. The court argued that “actual knowledge” meant that the person read and could successfully recall the information presented to them and that the information was including all necessary information.
 References 
External links
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974
"""

From "Intel Corp. v. Advanced Micro Devices, Inc." ==> """
Intel Corp. v. Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., 542 U.S. 241 (2004), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States involving , which authorizes United States district courts to enforce discovery requests made in connection with litigation being conducted in foreign tribunals.  Prior to Intel, there had been substantial disagreement as to the availability of Section 1782 discovery.
The Intel case originated from Advanced Micro Devices' antitrust claims against Intel in Europe. AMD filed a complaint against Intel in the European Union's antitrust enforcement agency (the Directorate-General for Competition), and then filed a lawsuit in the U.S. for discovery of certain Intel documents in order to further their complaint.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 542
List of United States Supreme Court cases
 External links 
 PDFs 
Intel's petition on the merits
AMD's Response brief on the merits
Intel's reply brief
The Solicitor General's Amicus brief
The oral arguments before the Supreme Court
 Other links 
 Obtaining Evidence in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States discovery case law
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:Intel litigation
Category:AMD
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Inter-Island Steam Navigation Co. v. Ward" ==> """
Inter-Island Steam Navigation Co. v. Ward, 242 U.S. 1 (1916), was a civil lawsuit that came before the Supreme Court of the United States in 1916. It involved the Inter-Island Steam Navigation Company, a shipping company operating in the Hawaiian Islands. The Supreme Court declined to review a judgment of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals.
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1916 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "International Ass'n of Machinists v. Street" ==> """
International Association of Machinists v. Street, 367 U.S. 740 (1961), was a United States labor law decision by the United States Supreme Court on labor union freedom to make collective agreements with employers to enroll workers in union membership, or collect fees for the service of collective bargaining.
Facts
Judgment
The Supreme Court held that "a union may constitutionally compel contributions from dissenting nonmembers in an agency shop only for the costs of performing the union's statutory duties as exclusive bargaining agent."
See also
US labor law
 Duplex Printing Press Co. v. Deering
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 367
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States labor case law
Category:1961 in United States case law
Category:International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers
