"""

From "Botiller v. Dominguez" ==> """
Botiller v. Dominguez, 130 U.S. 238 (1889), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court dealing with the validity of Spanish or Mexican land grants in the Mexican Cession, the region of the present day southwestern United States that was ceded to the U.S. by Mexico in 1848 under the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo.
The action was in the nature of ejectment, brought in the Superior Court of the Los Angeles County by Dominga Dominguez against Brigido Botiller and others, to recover possession of a tract of land situated in said county, known as 'Rancho Las Virgenes'. The title of the plaintiff was a grant claimed to have been made by the government of Mexico to Nemecio Dominguez and Domingo Carrillo, on October 1, 1834, but no claim under this grant had ever been presented for confirmation to the board of land commissioners, appointed under the California Land Act of 1851 (9 St. 631,) 'to ascertain and settle the private land claims in the state of California,' and no patent had ever issued from the United States to any one for the land, or for any part of it.
The Court held that no title to land in California dependent upon Spanish or Mexican land grants can be of any validity unless presented to and confirmed by the board of land commissioners within the time prescribed by the United States Congress.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 130
Alta California
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo
Aboriginal title in California
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States land use case law
Category:Mexican-American history
Category:1889 in United States case law
Category:Ranchos of Los Angeles County, California
Category:Mexico–United States relations
"""

From "Bouie v. City of Columbia" ==> """
Bouie v. City of Columbia, 378 U.S. 347 (1964), was a case in which the US Supreme Court held that due process prohibits retroactive application of any judicial construction of a criminal statute that is unexpected and indefensible by reference to the law that has been expressed prior to the conduct in issue.. The holding is based on the Fourteenth Amendment prohibition by the Due Process Clause of ex post facto laws.
Background
On March 14, 1960, two African-American students from Allen University conducted a sit-in demonstration by sitting down at a booth at the lunch counter restaurant in an Eckerd's drugstore in Columbia, South Carolina. The policy at the store was to allow African-Americans to shop anywhere in the store and to use any facilities except for being served at the restaurant.
After they had sat down, an employee put up a "no trespassing sign," and the two students were asked to leave. Both were arrested on charges of breach of the peace and criminal trespass but convicted only for trespass in violation of the state code. The trespass convictions were upheld by the South Carolina Supreme Court.
Decision
The majority opinion by Justice Brennan noted that the South Carolina trespass statute criminalized entry upon the lands of another after notice from an owner or tenant prohibiting such entry. The South Carolina Supreme Court, in upholding the convictions, had construed the statute as also covering the act of remaining on the premises of another after receiving notice to leave, a construction that had been adopted in another case in 1961.
The Court stated that a judicial construction that has the effect of broadening the activities that constitute a crime and is applied retroactively operates precisely like an ex post facto law. Since an ex post facto application of criminal statutes violates the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, the Court reversed the convictions.
The concurring opinions of Justice Goldberg and Justice Douglas stated simply that they would reverse based upon their opinions in Bell v. Maryland, 378 U.S. 226 (1964), another case involving a sit-in demonstration by African-American students that was announced the same day as Bouie.
The dissenting opinion by Justice Black argued that the conduct of remaining after being told to leave was understood to violate the South Carolina trespass statute, and Bell stated that the Fourteenth Amendment did not require an owner of a restaurant to serve customers.
Critical response
Bouie v. City of Columbia was one of five cases involving segregation protests that were decided on June 22, 1964. The other four cases were Griffin v. Maryland, 378 U.S. 130 (1964), Barr v. City of Columbia, 378 U.S. 146 (1964), Robinson v. Florida, 378 U.S. 153 (1964), and Bell v. Maryland. In none of these cases did the Supreme Court reach the merits of any argument addressing whether private actions of segregation that are enforced by state courts constituted a state action, which violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. These decisions were announced two days after the Senate ended a filibuster and passed the bill which would become the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which outlawed segregation in public accommodations. It has been suggested that the Supreme Court refrained from reaching the merits in these cases in consideration of the Act; had it done so, it would have eliminated the basis for passage of the legislation.
See also
Civil Rights Movement
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 378
 References 
External links
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:African-American history of South Carolina
Category:Allen University
Category:History of Columbia, South Carolina
Category:Lunch counters
Category:Restaurants in South Carolina
Category:United States racial desegregation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Void for vagueness case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
"""

From "Boumediene v. Bush" ==> """
Boumediene v. Bush, 553 U.S. 723 (2008), was a writ of habeas corpus submission made in a civilian court of the United States on behalf of Lakhdar Boumediene, a naturalized citizen of Bosnia and Herzegovina, held in military detention by the United States at the Guantanamo Bay detention camps in Cuba.. Guantánamo Bay is not formally part of the United States, and under the terms of the 1903 lease between the United States and Cuba, Cuba retained ultimate sovereignty over the territory, while the United States exercises complete jurisdiction and control. The case was consolidated with habeas petition Al Odah v. United States. It challenged the legality of Boumediene's detention at the United States Naval Station military base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba as well as the constitutionality of the Military Commissions Act of 2006. Oral arguments on the combined cases were heard by the Supreme Court on December 5, 2007.
On June 12, 2008, Justice Kennedy delivered the opinion for the 5–4 majority, holding that the prisoners had a right to the writ of habeas corpus under the United States Constitution (and in particular the Suspension Clause) and that the Military Commissions Act of 2006 was an unconstitutional suspension of that right. The Court applied the Insular Cases, by the fact that the United States, by virtue of its complete jurisdiction and control, maintains de facto sovereignty over this territory, while Cuba retained ultimate sovereignty over the territory, to hold that the aliens detained as enemy combatants on that territory were entitled to the writ of habeas corpus protected in Article I, Section 9 of the U.S. Constitution. The lower court had expressly indicated that no constitutional rights (not merely the right to habeas) extend to the Guantanamo detainees, rejecting petitioners' arguments, but the Supreme Court held that fundamental rights afforded by the Constitution extend to the Guantanamo detainees as well. Invoking Marbury v. Madison (1803), the Court concluded: 
The Nation’s basic charter cannot be contracted away like this. The Constitution grants Congress and the President the power to acquire, dispose of, and govern territory, not the power to decide when and where its terms apply. To hold that the political branches may switch the Constitution on or off at will would lead to a regime in which they, not this Court, say 'what the law is'.
Along with Rasul v. Bush (2004), Hamdi v. Rumsfeld (2004), and Hamdan v. Rumsfeld (2006), this was a landmark case in the Court's detainee jurisprudence.
Background
Following the September 11 attacks in 2001, the United States launched a "Global War on Terror". In November 2001, President Bush asserted authority to try captives from the War before "military commissions" instead of through the civilian court system. Many captives from the war were held at Camp X-Ray, which was opened at the United States' Guantanamo Bay Naval Base in Cuba in January 2002. While the United States has an indefinite lease on Guantanamo Bay, Cuba still maintained de jure sovereignty over the area. Because of the mixed jurisdiction, the Bush administration stated that the captives are not subject to American law and have no right to protection under the United States Constitution nor the American justice system.
Beginning in 2002, family and friends of approximately 200 captives initiated habeas corpus submissions to challenge the detentions. These submissions eventually worked their way through the courts, and on June 28, 2004, the United States Supreme Court issued its decision in Rasul v. Bush (2004). In a 6–3 decision, the Court dismissed the administration's argument that the Naval Base is outside civilian courts' jurisdiction and ruled that the captives must be given an opportunity to hear and attempt to refute whatever evidence had caused them to have been classified as "enemy combatants". As a result, the Department of Defense created the Combatant Status Review Tribunals.
At the end of 2005, the United States Congress passed the Detainee Treatment Act, which explicitly states that all captives held by the United States are protected against torture. The Act restricted the submission of additional habeas corpus submissions to the courts, though it did not affect already filed habeas corpus submissions.
Seven months later, the Supreme Court ruled in Hamdan v. Rumsfeld (2006) that only Congress and not the Executive Branch has the Constitutional authority to set up military commissions to try captives taken in the "war on terror". Congress passed the Military Commissions Act of 2006 in October, creating Military Commissions similar to those set up by the Executive Branch and retaining most of the features that had concerned critics. For example, the Commissions were empowered to hear and consider "hearsay evidence", suspects were restricted from attempting to refute or learn about evidence against them that was classified, and submission of evidence extracted from persons using "enhanced interrogation techniques," prior to the passage of the Detainee Treatment Act, was allowed. The Act attempted to mandate that all outstanding habeas corpus submissions on behalf of the captives should be quashed.
In February 2007, a three-judge panel of the Appeals Court for the D.C. Circuit considered Lakhdar Boumediene's habeas corpus submission, and in a split decision, upheld the Congress's authority to quash the outstanding habeas corpus submissions. In April 2007, the Court declined to review the Circuit Court's decision.
Within a few months, it reversed this decision; on June 29, 2007, it granted a writ of certiorari to Boumediene and his co-defendants.
Over the following six months, in addition to the briefs submitted by the United States government and the petitioner, over 20 amicus briefs were filed on behalf of Boumediene and his co-defendants by the American Civil Liberties Union, the Center for Constitutional Rights, the American Bar Association, and numerous other persons and organizations.
The Supreme Court received over two dozen briefs of amicus curiae on the case, including some written strictly on the history and application of Habeas Corpus in England, Scotland, Hanover, Ireland, Canada, British-controlled territories, India, and the United States. Twenty-two amicus briefs were filed in support of the petitioners, Boumediene and Al Odah, and four were filed in support of the respondents, the Bush Administration.
Oral arguments were held on December 5, 2007, and the Supreme Court announced its decision on June 12, 2008.
Opinion of the Court
The majority opinion, written by Justice Anthony Kennedy, found that the constitutionally guaranteed right of habeas corpus review applies to persons held in Guantanamo and to persons designated as enemy combatants on that territory.  If Congress intends to suspend the right, the Court said that an adequate substitute must offer the prisoner a meaningful opportunity to demonstrate he is held pursuant to an erroneous application or interpretation of relevant law, and the reviewing decision-making must have some ability to correct errors, to assess the sufficiency of the government's evidence, and to consider relevant exculpating evidence. The court found that the petitioners had met their burden of establishing that the Detainee Treatment Act of 2005 failed to provide an adequate substitute for habeas corpus.
Kennedy's majority opinion begins with an over-twenty page review of the history of habeas corpus in England from its roots in the due process clause of Magna Carta of 1215 to the 19th century. Next, the opinion surveys American historical jurisprudence on the writ from 1789 until shortly after World War II, concentrating on the application of habeas corpus to aliens and territories outside the borders of the United States that still fall under United States control, comparing these areas to the Channel Islands, where the writ did apply. While noting that habeas corpus did not apply in Scotland, a country under the control of the English crown (as the same monarch held the crown of Scotland), the Court distinguished that fact by stating that Scotland kept its unique system of laws even after union with England in 1707. The Court turned to Ireland for a more amenable historical example, pointing out that while it was nominally a sovereign country in the 18th century, English habeas corpus review did apply there since Ireland was under de facto English control and shared the English legal system.
The majority opinion rejected the government's argument comparing the habeas corpus restriction under the MCA to those affected by the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996, which were ruled constitutional after a suspension clause challenge. The Court explained the restrictions of AEDPA on habeas review were not a complete suspension on habeas corpus, but simply procedural limitations, such as limiting the number of successive habeas petitions a prisoner can file, or mandating a one-year time limit for the filing of federal habeas review that begins when the prisoner's judgment and sentence become final.
The main distinction between the MCA and AEDPA, the Court went on to explain, was that AEDPA applies in practice to those prisoners serving a sentence after having been tried in open court and whose sentences have been upheld on direct appeal, whereas the MCA suspends the application of the writ to those detainees whose guilt has not yet been legally determined. In other words, the comparison to AEDPA was found by the majority to be misplaced, in that AEDPA's limitations on habeas review stemmed from cases that had already been to trial, whereas the cases involving MCA had not been to trial and therefore habeas review would have been appropriate.
The Court also concluded that the detainees are not required to exhaust review procedures in the court of appeals before pursuing habeas corpus actions in the district court. The majority distinguished between de jure and de facto sovereignty, finding that the United States had in effect de facto sovereignty over Guantanamo. Distinguishing Guantanamo base from historical precedents, this conclusion allowed the court to conclude that Constitutional protections of habeas corpus run to the U.S. military base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
In the majority ruling, Justice Kennedy called section 7 "not adequate". He explained, "to hold that the political branches may switch the constitution on or off at will would lead to a regime in which they, not this court, 'say what the law is'.""Stuck with Guantánamo", The Economist The decision struck down section 7 of the MCA, but left intact the remainder of the MCA and the Detainee Treatment Act.
Other opinions
Justice Souter's concurrence
Justice Souter's concurrence was joined by Justices Ginsburg and Breyer. According to Justice Souter, "subsequent legislation eliminated the statutory habeas jurisdiction" over the claims brought by Guantanamo Bay detainees, "so that now there must be constitutionally based jurisdiction or none at all."US Supreme Court, Boumediene et al. v. Bush, President of the United States, et al., p. 79. No. 06–1195.  Citing the Supreme Court's decision in Rasul v. Bush (2004), he added that the ""[a]pplication of the habeas statute to persons detained at [Guantanamo] is consistent with the historical reach of the writ of habeas corpus."US Supreme Court, Boumediene et al. v. Bush, President of the United States, et al., p. 80. No. 06–1195.  Justice Souter pointed to the lengthy imprisonments, some of which have exceeded six years, as "a factor insufficiently appreciated by the dissents." He denied the dissenters' criticism that the Court's majority "is precipitating the judiciary into reviewing claims that the military (subject to appeal to the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit) could handle within some reasonable period of time."
Justice Scalia's dissent
Justice Scalia's dissent was joined by Chief Justice Roberts and Justices Alito and Thomas. Justice Scalia argued that "the procedures prescribed by Congress in the Detainee Treatment Act provide the essential protections that habeas corpus guarantees; there has thus been no suspension of the writ, and no basis exists for judicial intervention beyond what the Act allows."US Supreme Court, Boumediene et al. v. Bush, President of the United States, et al., p. 111. No. 06–1195.  The commission of terrorist acts by some former prisoners at Guantanamo Bay after their release "illustrates the incredible difficulty of assessing who is and who is not an enemy combatant in a foreign theater of operations where the environment does not lend itself to rigorous evidence collection."US Supreme Court, Boumediene et al. v. Bush, President of the United States, et al., p. 113. No. 06–1195.  A consequence of the Court's majority decision will be that "how to handle enemy prisoners in this war will ultimately lie with the branch [the judiciary] that knows least about the national security concerns that the subject entails."US Supreme Court, Boumediene et al. v. Bush, President of the United States, et al., p. 115. No. 06–1195.  A conflict between the Military Commissions Act and the Suspension Clause "arises only if the Suspension Clause preserves the privilege of the writ for aliens held by the United States military as enemy combatants at the base in Guantanamo Bay, located within the sovereign territory of Cuba."US Supreme Court, Boumediene et al. v. Bush, President of the United States, et al., p. 115–16. No. 06–1195. 
Justice Scalia added that the Court's majority "admits that it cannot determine whether the writ historically extended to aliens held abroad, and it concedes (necessarily) that Guantanamo Bay lies outside the sovereign territory of the United States."US Supreme Court, Boumediene et al. v. Bush, President of the United States, et al., p. 116. No. 06–1195.  Justice Scalia pointed out that Johnson v. Eisentrager (where the Supreme Court decided that U.S. courts had no jurisdiction over German war criminals held in a U.S.-administered German prison in Germany) "thus held—held beyond any doubt—that the Constitution does not ensure habeas for aliens held by the United States in areas over which our Government is not sovereign."US Supreme Court, Boumediene et al. v. Bush, President of the United States, et al., p. 119. No. 06–1195. 
According to Justice Scalia, the Court's majority's "analysis produces a crazy result: Whereas those convicted and sentenced to death for war crimes are without judicial remedy, all enemy combatants detained during a war, at least insofar as they are confined in an area away from the battlefield over which the United States exercises 'absolute and indefinite' control, may seek a writ of habeas corpus in federal court." Justice Scalia added that the Constitution allows suspension of the writ of habeas corpus only in cases of rebellion or invasion, both domestic disturbances; he asked "[i]f the extraterritorial scope of habeas turned on flexible, 'functional' considerations, as the [Court's majority] holds, why would the Constitution limit its suspension almost entirely to instances of domestic crisis?"US Supreme Court, Boumediene et al. v. Bush, President of the United States, et al., p. 132. No. 06–1195. 
Chief Justice Roberts' dissent
Chief Justice Roberts' dissent focused on whether the process afforded the Guantanamo detainees in the Detainee Treatment Act were an adequate substitute for the Habeas protections the Constitution guaranteed. By arguing in the affirmative, he implied that the issue of whether the detainees had any Suspension Clause rights was moot (since, if they did, he found that those rights were not violated anyway). This line of reasoning was arguably more in line with the plain reading of Johnson v. Eisentrager (1950) (which denied German prisoners of war habeas rights primarily due to both practical logistical concerns and the determination that they had been afforded an adequate substitute: traditional military war crimes trials, which complied with the Geneva Conventions) than that of Justice Scalia, and also avoided the more controversial and complicated issue of whether the detainees were entitled to file habeas petitions in the first place.
Aftermath
On November 20, 2008, following his review of their case files, Judge Richard J. Leon of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia ordered the release of five Guantánamo detainees, including Boumediene. Judge Leon ordered the continued detention of a sixth, Belkacem Bensayah.
In the decision, he wrote: 
To allow enemy combatancy to rest on so thin a reed would be inconsistent with this court's obligation; the court must and will grant their petitions and order their release. This is a unique case. Few if any others will be factually like it. Nobody should be lulled into a false sense that all of the ... cases will look like this one.Judge Leon's order  "Judge orders release of 5 terror suspects at Gitmo""US judge orders Algerians freed"
On October 28, 2009, President Obama signed into law the Military Commissions Act of 2009, which amended the Military Commissions Act of 2006 and provided new rules for the handling of commission trials and commission defendants' rights.
In Boumediene v. Bush (2008), the Supreme Court had ruled for the first time that Guantánamo detainees were entitled to submit habeas corpus petitions directly to federal judges in Washington to determine whether the U.S. government had enough evidence to justify their continued open-ended detention without charge.
The decision said in part: "We do consider it uncontroversial … that the privilege of habeas corpus entitles the prisoner to a meaningful opportunity to demonstrate he is being [unlawfully] held." The decision added: "The habeas court must have sufficient authority to conduct a meaningful review of both the cause for detention and the Executive's power to detain."
Following the Boumediene decision, federal judges began closely scrutinizing the quality of evidence offered by the government. Government lawyers started losing cases.
In 2010 the D.C. Circuit Court began requiring federal judges to stop submitting the government's evidence to such rigorous examination. The appeals court said judges must embrace a pro-government presumption that the Guantánamo evidence is reliable. Government lawyers had argued that such a presumption was justified because much of the evidence against the detainees was collected under battlefield conditions amid the "fog of war." Specifically, the US appeals court required federal judges hearing Guantánamo cases to accord a special presumption of accuracy to US intelligence reports being used to justify continued detention.
This ruling by the appeals court provoked strong criticism from attorneys representing detainees at Guantanamo as well as from within the appeals court. Lawyers said such a special presumption does not comply with the requirements set by the Supreme Court in its Boumediene decision.
"The court of appeals through its actions in this and other cases has created a regime in which Guantánamo habeas cases are becoming exercises in futility", wrote the Washington lawyer S. William Livingston, in his brief on behalf of Adnan Farhan Abdul Latif. "The entire point of the habeas hearing is to force the government to justify its detention of people who have been neither charged nor convicted, not to allow it to skate by with presumption," Livingston said.
Appeals Court Judge David Tatel wrote a dissenting opinion in the Latif case. He said the appeals court's requirement of a pro-government presumption in favor of US intelligence reports "comes perilously close to suggesting that whatever the government says must be treated as true."
According to a study by legal scholars at the Center for Policy and Research at Seton Hall University School of Law, between 2008 and July 2010, Guantánamo detainees won 56 percent of their habeas challenges in federal court. After July 2010 and the appeals court ruling, the win rate fell to 8 percent. That means that prior to July 2010, a federal judge agreed with 19 of 34 detainees who claimed there was insufficient evidence to justify his open-ended detention at Guantánamo and ordered the release of each. After July 2010, a federal judge agreed with only 1 of 12 detainees. The change is attributed to rulings by the federal appeals court, which has taken up 19 of the Guantánamo habeas cases and reversed or remanded every case in which a federal judge ordered a detainee's release.
Release to France
On May 15, 2009, Boumediene was transferred to France, where he has relatives. His wife and children, who had moved from Bosnia to Algeria following his arrest, have joined him in France since his release.
Detainees whose cases were consolidated with Boumediene v. Bush
 Belkacem Bensayah
 Saber Lahmar
 Mohammed Nechle
 Mustafa Ait Idir
 Lakhdar Boumediene
 Hadj Boudella
See also
 Algerian Six
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 553
 Ex Parte Quirin
 Ex Parte Milligan
 Johnson v. Eisentrager
References
External links
 Petitioner's attorney's website with all the briefs
 Audio: complete oral arguments before the court from Oyez.org
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Suspension Clause case law
Category:2008 in United States case law
Category:Guantanamo captives' habeas corpus petitions
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Bosnia and Herzegovina–United States relations
"""

From "Bounds v. Smith" ==> """
Bounds v. Smith, 430 U.S. 817 (1977), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court tested the basic constitutional right of prison inmates’ access to legal documents prior to court.  Prison authorities would consequently be required to provide legal assistance or counsel to inmates, whether it be through a trained legal professional or access to a legal library. 
Multiple prisoners alleged that they were denied access to the courts due to lack of an adequate legal library and assistance with court related documents.
 Background 
The case of Bound v. Smith was preceded by Johnson v. Avery, a similar case brought before the U.S. Supreme Court in 1969 concerning, once again, the extent of prisoners’ rights within the confines of a jail or penitentiary.  Johnson v. Avery involved a Tennessee convict who petitioned the courts regarding the prison's disciplinary action exacted on the inmate after breaking a prison rule.  The rule states, "No inmate will advise, assist or otherwise contract to aid another, either with or without a fee, to prepare Writs or other legal matters. It is not intended that an innocent man be punished. When a man believes he is unlawfully held or illegally convicted, he should prepare a brief or state his complaint in letter form and address it to his lawyer or a judge. A formal Writ is not necessary to receive a hearing. False charges or untrue complaints may be punished. Inmates are forbidden to set themselves up as practitioners for the purpose of promoting a business of writing Writs."  The Court ruled in favor of the prisoners. Johnson v. Avery established that the assistance of a prisoner by a prisoner in filing and research of legal papers related to the criminal prosecution of said prisoner was completely legal under the facts of this case.
There have been many cases, similar to Bounds v. Smith, that have established reasonable precedent regarding a prisoner's access to the courts.  In the case of Cochran v. Kansas of 1942, it was confirmed that prisoners have a right of access to the courts and the prohibition of this access is unconstitutional.   Specifically, Cochran v. Kansas ruled in favor of a petitioner, who was a prisoner, who wished to file with the federal courts a writ of habeas corpus.  Again, a similar instance preceded Bounds v. Smith.  In Burns v. Ohio of 1959, the Supreme Court ruled that docket and other fees imposed on inmates were constitutional violations. By 1963, in Douglas v. California, the Court even went as far as to rule that a prisoner must be provided legal counsel if it means he will receive a “meaningful appeal.” Time and time again, the rulings of additional court cases have struck down hindrances obstructing the right of prisoners access to the courts.
Conflict
In the case of Bounds v. Smith, respondents of the courts are those incarcerated within the Division of Prisons of the North Carolina Department of Correction.  These respondents filed three actions alleging a violation of their Fourteenth Amendment rights through denial of proper avenues to bresearch. Eventually the case was heard at District Court. The courts approved the motion based on a number of valid claims made by the respondents, specifically citing the lack of an adequate prison library system reason enough for a trial. Due to precedent established in, first, Johnson v. Avery, and then Younger v. Gilmore, the courts found that equality under law had been disregarded because of a severe lack of assistance for inmates wishing to prepare legal documents.  Specifically in the case of North Carolina's prison system however, the substance of valuable legal assistance was scarce and thus presented a possibly more logistical problem than argued by the respondents. The District Courts did recognize this fact. 
The District Court ruled that North Carolina must develop and institute a plan that provided inmates with a form of legal assistance that satisfied a degree of Constitutionality. It was suggested to Senators that they create an effective and economic plan possibly providing lawyers and other legal professionals along with the expansion of state law libraries.
And so, the state responded.  A proposal designed to redefine the State's legal informational system was drawn up.  The establishment of seven new libraries, spread across the state, was planned, along with the creation of additional smaller libraries.  Use of the libraries required an appointment.  Appointments were preferentially given to those with court dates within the next month.  In accordance with the fact that libraries were not always located within prisons, transportation and housing would also be provided by the State.
The State then sought to create a legal library system, in accordance to what the courts determined to be “adequate.”  The revamped libraries included a vast collection of law books, type writers, and a supply of legal forms.  Additionally, the State trained inmates as assistants and typists, who were made readily available to aid fellow inmates.  The new library system supported about 350 prisoners per week.  Despite the changes and obvious improvements, prisoners were still unsatisfied with the new library and research system.  Protestors of the new plan claimed it was inadequate in that it failed to satisfy the basic legal needs of every prisoner, thus denying citizens access to the courts.  Respondents demanded a library in every prison.
At the level of the District Court, however, the plan was seen as not only legally adequate, but economically sustainable.  With these two conditions seemingly met, the Court rejected the respondents’ objections.
Along with the overruling of this objection, the District Court also concluded that, constitutionally, the State was not required to provide legal assistance to prisoners.  Individual legal assistance was not necessary and the furnishings of attorneys were not necessary, with such a sufficient library at hand.  This was the final decision of the District Court.
With the approval of the plan, the State then applied for federal aid, hoping to cover up to 90% of the costs of building and maintaining the new prison libraries.  The grant that the State applied to is the Federal Law Enforcement Assistance Administration.  Under federal laws, the applicants must satisfy a set of criteria in order to receive any sort of monetary aid.  The State of North Carolina's application proposed what they believed to be “meaningful and effective access to the court…” According to the evaluators, however, the proposal lacked legal assistance in women's prisons across the state and thus the case was ordered to judicial evaluation.
Both the State and respondents appealed the ruling, each discontent with the Court's rulings adverse to them.  The case was then brought to the Court of Appeals, who denied the plan funding and additionally ordered it be abolished. The State of North Carolina then petitioned the Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari, which was granted..
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Marshall delivered the opinion of the court.  He started by establishing that the court accepted the precedent built up from previous cases and confirmed that prisoners have a right to access of the courts.   He states “Petitioners' hyperbolic claim is particularly inappropriate in this case, for the courts below scrupulously respected the limits on their role. The District Court initially held only that petitioners had violated the "fundamental constitutional guarantee," ibid., of access to the courts. It did not thereupon thrust itself into prison administration. Rather, it ordered petitioners themselves to devise a remedy for the violation, strongly suggesting that it would prefer a plan providing trained legal advisors. Petitioners chose to establish law libraries, however, and their plan was approved with only minimal changes over the strong objections of respondents. Prison administrators thus exercised wide discretion within the bounds of constitutional requirements in this case. The judgment is: Affirmed.”
Justice Rehnquist issued the dissenting opinion.  He stated, “There is nothing in the United States Constitution which requires that a convict serving a term of imprisonment in a state penal institution pursuant to a final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction have a "right of access" to the federal courts in order to attack his sentence... In any event, the Court's opinion today does not appear to proceed upon the guarantee of equal protection of the laws, a guarantee which at least has the merit of being found in the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution. It proceeds instead to enunciate a "fundamental constitutional right of access to the courts," ante, at 828, which is found nowhere in the Constitution. But if a prisoner incarcerated pursuant to a final judgment of conviction is not prevented from physical access to the federal courts in order that he may file therein petitions for relief which Congress has authorized those courts to grant, he has been accorded the only constitutional right of access to the courts that our cases have articulated in a reasoned way.”
Subsequent developments
In Lewis v. Casey, the court limited the application of Bounds. Justice Scalia, writing for the court, stated: "In other words, Bounds does not guarantee inmates the wherewithal to transform themselves into litigating engines capable of filing everything from shareholder derivative actions to slip-and-fall claims. The tools it requires to be provided are those that the inmates need in order to attack their sentences, directly or collaterally, and in order to challenge the conditions of their confinement. Impairment of any other litigating capacity is simply one of the incidental (and perfectly constitutional) consequences of conviction and incarceration."Lewis v. Casey, 518 U.S. at 355. Then-Chief Justice Rehnquist, who authored the dissent in Bounds v. Smith as an associate justice, joined in the court's opinion in Lewis v. Casey.
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Bourdieu v. Pacific Western Oil Co." ==> """
Bourdieu v. Pacific Western Oil Co., 299 U.S. 65 (1936), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court, which held that an inquiry into indispensability would be unnecessary where the complaint did not state a cause of action.
Background
Pacific Western Oil Corporation was established by Edward L. Doherty in 1928 before later coming under the control of J. Paul Getty and owned oil and gas drilling rights for large sections of Fresno County, California. An agricultural landowner had "mining" rights for the same area and sued. The oil companies asserted that, since their leases were issued by the United States Secretary of State, that they could not be sued without including the U.S. government but the court disagreed.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 299
Further reading
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States civil procedure case law
Category:1936 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:Texaco
Category:History of Fresno County, California
Category:Petroleum in California
Category:Oil and gas law
"""

From "Bourke v. Beshear" ==> """
The lead cases on same-sex marriage in Kentucky are Bourke v. Beshear, and its companion case Love v. Beshear. In Bourke, a U.S. district court found that the Equal Protection Clause requires Kentucky to recognize valid same-sex marriages from other jurisdictions. In Love, the same court found that this same clause renders Kentucky's ban on same-sex marriage unconstitutional. Both decisions were stayed and consolidated upon appeal to the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals, which heard oral arguments in both cases on August 6, 2014. On November 6, the Sixth Circuit upheld Kentucky's ban on same-sex marriage.
On January 16, 2015, the U.S. Supreme Court consolidated these cases with three others and agreed to review the case under the name Obergefell v. Hodges. Oral arguments were heard on April 28, 2015, and the Court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs in June 2015.
District court proceedings
On July 26, 2013, Gregory Bourke and Michael DeLeon, who were legally married in Ontario, Canada, filed a lawsuit in U.S. District Court for the Western District of Kentucky challenging Kentucky's refusal to recognize their marriage on behalf of themselves and DeLeon's two adopted children. They later added as plaintiffs a couple married in Iowa and another in California, and the four children of one of them. On August 16, a fourth couple, married in Connecticut, filed a related suit in the same court but then joined the suit as plaintiffs. Named as defendants were Kentucky Governor Steve Beshear and Attorney General Jack Conway, as well as Sue Carole Perry, Shelby County Clerk. Their suit, Bourke v. Beshear, argued that Kentucky should recognize same-sex marriages from other jurisdictions. The case was assigned to Judge John G. Heyburn II.
Bourke decision
In a decision issued February 12, 2014, Judge Heyburn found that Kentucky must recognize same-sex marriages from other jurisdictions because withholding recognition violates the U.S. Constitution's guarantee of equal protection. He wrote:
He pointed out the evolution of judicial recognition of same-sex marriage: "In Romer, Lawrence, and finally, Windsor, the Supreme Court has moved interstitially ... establishing the framework of cases from which district judges now draw wisdom and inspiration. Each of these small steps has led to this place and this time, where the right of same-sex spouses to the state-conferred  benefits of marriage is virtually compelled." He told attorneys he would hold a hearing before issuing an order implementing his decision.
Bifurcation of case
On February 14, two same-sex couples who were denied marriage licenses in Jefferson County, Timothy Love, Lawrence Ysunza, Maurice Blanchard, and Dominique James, asked to be allowed to intervene in the suit because their challenge to Kentucky's ban on same-sex marriage within the state raises substantially the same arguments as the original suit. On February 27, 2014, before the final order was issued, the state attorney general asked Judge Heyburn to stay enforcement of his Bourke order for 90 days, noting that even if the state does not appeal the decision it needs time to implement it. Judge Heyburn issued a final order in Bourke on the same day ordering the state to recognize same-sex marriages from other jurisdictions at once, which created de jure legalization of recognition of out-of-state same-sex marriages; being a final order it was then immediately subject to appeal. He then bifurcated the case and allowed the new plaintiffs to intervene and argue against Kentucky's denial of marriage licenses to in-state same-sex couples. This portion of the case would remain in district court, retitled as Love v. Beshear. A briefing schedule on the in-state issue was completed by May 28. On February 28, 2014, Judge Heyburn issued a shorter, 21-day stay in Bourke, instead.
Bourke appeal
On March 4, 2014, the state attorney general announced that he would neither appeal the state's position nor request further stays. Kentucky's governor said he would employ outside counsel to appeal Heyburn's ruling in Bourke to the  U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit and to request a stay pending appeal. On March 19, Judge Heyburn extended his stay pending action by the Sixth Circuit, noting the stay granted by the U.S. Supreme Court in a similar Utah case.
An interlocutory appeal of Bourke was lodged in the Sixth Circuit on March 19 under appellate case number 14-5291. By the time oral arguments were scheduled, the decision in the companion case Love v. Beshear was handed down and appealed; the Sixth Circuit thus consolidated the cases for argument (see below).
Love decision
The addition of intervening plaintiffs the Bourke lawsuit (dealing with the recognition of out-of-state same-sex marriages, see above) on the related issue of denial of marriage licenses to in-state same-sex couples, required the court to bifurcate the case and restyle it. Love v. Beshear continued in district court as to the state marriage license issue, while the out-of-state recognition issue was appealed.
On July 1, 2014, U.S. District Judge John G. Heyburn II found in favor of the intervening same-sex couple plaintiffs and ruled that Kentucky's ban on allowing same-sex marriage in-state violates the Equal Protection Clause.
In doing so, Judge Heyburn departs from the opinions issued by most of the other U.S. district courts that examined the issue; he "does not determine whether Kentucky's laws interfere with a fundamental right." Looking at the trio of marriage cases of Loving v. Virginia, Zablocki v. Redhail, and Turner v. Safley; Judge Heyburn states that:  He is hesitant to answer in the affirmative, reasoning that "holding that the fundamental right to marry encompasses same-sex marriage would be a dramatic step that the Supreme Court has not yet indicated a willingness to take" (emphasis added.)
Judge Heyburn then notes that he can bypass answering this question.  Instead, the judge finds that homosexual persons constitute a suspect class. Although Sixth Circuit precedent suggests that sexual orientation classifications do not receive heightened scrutiny, Heyburn prods the circuit court "to reconsider its view" as this precedent relied on Bowers v. Hardwick, a Supreme Court case subsequently overturned as "not correct when it was decided, and it is not correct today." (citing Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558 at 575) He does the analysis required and finds the heightened scrutiny of a "quasi-suspect" class applies to the case; but even under the lower "rational basis" review, the state does not bear its burden in justifying exclusion of same-sex couples from marriage. Heyburn concludes that the defendants' arguments for exclusion, i.e. encouraging relationships that procreate and stabilize the birthrate, "are not those of serious people," finding no relation between same-sex marriage and heterosexual procreation.Love v. Beshear, 
Judge Heyburn stayed his ruling in Love pending the outcome of any appeal.
Court of Appeals proceedings
Upon motion of appellee same-sex couples, the U.S. Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals consolidated Love v. Beshear, now docketed 14-5818 on appeal, and dealing with in-state licensing of same-sex marriage — with Bourke v. Beshear, already under appeal under docket 14-5291, and dealing with out-of-state same-sex marriage recognition. A July 16, 2014, order by the Sixth Circuit set an expedited briefing schedule: state appellants' opening brief due July 17, appellee same-sex couples' principal brief due July 24, and appellants' reply due July 31.
Oral arguments for the consolidated Love and Bourke cases were held on August 6, 2014; the Sixth Circuit heard same-sex marriage cases stemming from Michigan, Ohio, Kentucky and Tennessee on that date as well.
Reversal
On November 6, the Sixth Circuit ruled 2–1 that Kentucky's ban on same-sex marriage does not violate the constitution. It said it was bound by the U.S. Supreme Court's 1972 action in a similar case, Baker v. Nelson, which dismissed a same-sex couple's marriage claim "for want of a substantial federal question." Writing for the majority, Judge Jeffrey Sutton also dismissed the arguments made on behalf of same-sex couples in this case: "Not one of the plaintiffs' theories, however, makes the case for constitutionalizing the definition of marriage and for removing the issue from the place it has been since the founding: in the hands of state voters." Dissenting, Judge Martha Craig Daughtrey wrote: "Because the correct result is so obvious, one is tempted to speculate that the majority has purposefully taken the contrary position to create the circuit split regarding the legality of same-sex marriage that could prompt a grant of certiorari by the Supreme Court and an end to the uncertainty of status and the interstate chaos that the current discrepancy in state laws threatens."
Supreme Court proceedings
The same-sex couples filed an application for certiorari with the U.S. Supreme Court on November 17. On January 16, 2015, the United States Supreme Court consolidated this case with three others from Michigan, Ohio, Kentucky, and Tennessee and agreed to review the case, setting a briefing schedule to be completed April 17. The court asked the parties to address two questions: "1) Does the Fourteenth Amendment require a state to license a marriage between two people of the same sex? 2) Does the Fourteenth Amendment require a state to recognize a marriage between two people of the same sex when their marriage was lawfully licensed and performed out-of-state?"
This case was combined with several others and became part of the Obergefell v. Hodges case which was decided June 26, 2015 by the U.S. Supreme Court in a 5–4 decision that: "The Fourteenth Amendment requires a state to license a marriage between two people of the same sex and to recognize a marriage between two people of the same sex when their marriage was lawfully licensed and performed out-of-state."
See also
 LGBT rights in Kentucky
 Same-sex marriage in Kentucky
 Same-sex marriage in the United States
References
External links
 Bourke v. Beshear, No. 14-574: U.S. Supreme Court official Docket entry
 Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals, Bourke v. Beshear, November 6, 2014
 "'They're Just Good People. And That's Kind Of What It's All About, Isn't It?'", Huffington Post, April 20, 2015
Category:Legal history of Kentucky
Category:United States same-sex union case law
Category:LGBT in Kentucky
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:2014 in Kentucky
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2014 in LGBT history
"""

From "Boutilier v. Immigration and Naturalization Service" ==> """
Boutilier v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 387 U.S. 118 (1967), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld Clive Michael Boutilier's deportation from the United States under the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 due to his history of homosexual activities. The Act itself did not specify homosexuality among its exclusion criteria, but the Court held that Congress clearly intended that a homosexual individual be excluded from entry into the United States as one "afflicted with [a] psychopathic personality." The decision was abrogated by the Immigration Act of 1990, which rejected sexual orientation as a basis for excluding an individual from immigration.
 Background 
 Immigration Investigation 
In 1955, at the age of 21, Clive Boutilier immigrated from his native Canada to the United States with his family. In 1963, he attempted to apply for American citizenship, and in his application, he revealed to the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) that he had been arrested on a sodomy charge in New York City in 1959. In a subsequent meeting with an INS investigator, Boutilier revealed additional details about his sexual history, which included consensual same-sex activities both before and after he entered the United States.
The INS sent documentation about Boutilier's testimony to the Public Health Service (PHS) for review. The PHS then issued a certificate indicating that Boutilier "was afflicted with a class A condition, namely, psychopathic personality, sexual deviate, at the time of his admission to the United states for permanent residence on June 22nd, 1955." After receiving this certificate, the INS initiated deportation proceedings against Clive Boutilier based on the exclusion criteria laid out in the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952.
Boutilier declined an opportunity to submit to a personal examination by PHS doctors, but he had instead offered letters from two different psychiatrists that both concluded that he was not a psychopathic personality as was understood by medical professionals. The first psychiatrist that he consulted, Dr. Edward Falsey, concluded that Boutilier had a psychosexual problem for which he was now beginning treatment, but that he showed no signs of psychosis and, in his professional opinion, there was no risk that Boutilier would develop psychosis in the future. The second psychiatrist, Dr. Montague Ullman, concluded that his sexuality was "fluid and immature" and that his homosexual tendencies were due to a dependent personality pattern and a need to be accepted rather than a psychopathic personality.
Ultimately, these examinations were of little use to Boutilier's case because immigration officials, as well as officials for the PHS, determined that Congress had intended for homosexuals to be included as part of the term "psychopathic personality." So as it related to issues of immigration, it did not matter what medical professionals considered this term to mean. Furthermore, the examinations by these two psychiatrists supported the conclusion that he was a "sexual deviate of the homosexual type," so the PHS would still be required to issue a certificate certifying that he had a "psychopathic personality."
On August 5, 1965, the INS concluded their investigation into Boutilier and ordered that he be deported from the United States and returned to Canada. On January 12, 1966, his appeal to the Board of Immigration Appeals was dismissed after they concluded that his deportation order was valid.
 Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit 
On June 2, 1966, Clive Boutilier's case was argued before the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit before judges Leonard P. Moore, John Joseph Smith, and Irving Kaufman. Boutlier's argument in this case did not dispute his diagnosis as a homosexual. Rather, it contended that the term "psychopathic personality" cannot be held to include homosexuals. His case relied upon a recent case from the Ninth Circuit, Fleuti v. Rosenberg, 302 F.2d 652 (9th Cir. 1962), where it was held that the term "psychopathic personality" was not precise enough to adequately warn a prospective immigrant that homosexual activity was proscribed, so it was thus void for vagueness. On July 8, 1966, the Appellate Court returned their decision that the deportation order was valid.
The majority opinion, written by Kaufman, upheld the deportation order. In this opinion, Kaufman discussed the legislative history of the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 to support the government's claim that Congress had intended to consider homosexuals as excludable. In particular, he noted that some of the initial bills in Congress had specifically included language to exclude "aliens who are homosexuals or sex perverts" but that the language was eliminated after the PHS advised lawmakers that the "provision for the exclusion of aliens afflicted with psychopathic personality...is sufficiently broad to provide for the exclusion of homosexuals and sex perverts." He also rejected the applicability of Fleuti v. Rosenberg. In this case, the deportation order was primarily based upon Boutilier's behavior prior to entry into the United States, but in Fleuti, the proceedings were mostly focused on post-entry behavior. In his opinion, Kaufman rejected the idea that the void-for-vagueness doctrine applied as the exclusion criterion was not meant to regulate conduct by prospective immigrants, but rather, it was meant to exclude immigrants with certain characteristics. Therefore, it did not matter whether or not it was reasonable for Boutilier to understand that homosexual activities were grounds for denial of entry into the United States. However, he did concede that this doctrine may have been applicable in Fleuti because of that case's reliance on post-entry behavior.
The dissenting opinion, written by Moore, did not contest the idea that Congress intended homosexuality to be considered as a basis for exclusion under the diagnosis of "psychopathic personality." However, Moore did contest the idea that homosexual behavior would always be sufficient to diagnose "psychopathic personality" as it pertained to the law. In particular, he noted the use of the phrase, "frequently include those suffering from sexual deviation" from the PHS's testimony in Congress as evidence that there are situations where the presence of homosexual behavior is not indicative of psychopathic personality and thus not sufficient for exclusion from entry into the United States. From here, he started a discussion about the prevalence of homosexual behavior in society, citing the Kinsey Report assessment that 37% of Americans have had at least one homosexual experience, indicating that homosexual behavior alone would be too broad a criterion for exclusion. He then moved his focus to the void-by-vagueness doctrine that was used in Fleuti and dismissed by the majority. He contended that it was applicable to this case because, based on the examinations performed by the two private psychiatrists, it is reasonable to believe that Boutilier could have changed his behavior prior to immigration were he aware that homosexual behavior could be used to exclude him from immigration to the United States.
Decision
The majority opinion, penned by Tom C. Clark, concluded that Congress had the power to exclude aliens and that Congress intended to include homosexuals in the category of those possessing a "psychopathic personality". The opinion also determined that the statutory language of "psychopathic personality" was not too vague to pass muster under due process review.
A dissent,  by William O. Douglas with  Abe Fortas concurring, argued that "A label of this kind [psychopathic personality], when freely used, may mean only an unpopular person. It is much too vague by constitutional standards for the imposition of penalties or punishment." According to the dissent, Congress had indeed intended "psychopathic personality" as a medical term, and that medical professionals did not agree that homosexuality was a form of psychopathic personality.
 See also 
List of LGBT-related cases in the United States Supreme Court
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1967 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States LGBT rights case law
Category:1967 in LGBT history
Category:Discrimination against LGBT people in the United States
"""

From "Bowen v. Georgetown University Hospital" ==> """
Bowen v. Georgetown University Hospital, 488 U.S. 204 (1988), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that agencies should not be presumed to have the power to promulgate retroactive rules unless that power is expressly authorized by Congress. Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote for a unanimous court that the Secretary of Health and Human Services had exceeded his rulemaking authority under the Medicare Act in promulgating a wage index rule in 1984 under which he would recoup Medicare reimbursements paid to hospitals, including Georgetown University Hospital, that had been disbursed since 1981 according to the pre-1984 rule. Justice Antonin Scalia concurred in the judgment, writing separately that, in addition to the particular language of the Medicare Act, the Administrative Procedure Act more broadly prohibits retroactive rulemaking because it defines rules as having exclusively future effect, as opposed to adjudicative orders.
 Background 
 Wage index rule 
Title XVIII of the Social Security Act, as amended in 1965 by the "Medicare Act," established Medicare,, codified at  et seq. in which the federal government reimburses medical providers for services rendered to Medicare beneficiaries. Section 223(b) of the 1972 amendment to the Social Security Act  authorized the Secretary of Health and Human Services to create "cost-limit" rules, and the first such rules were promulgated in 1974, in the form of a schedule for hospital services; thereafter, an updated schedule was issued annually. On June 30, 1981, the cost-limit schedule was modified to exclude wages paid by federally-owned hospitals when calculating the "wage index."-39 The wage index was used to reflect the varying hospital employee salaries in different parts of the country. Prior to the 1981 modification, all hospitals' employee salaries, including federal government hospitals, were included in calculating the wage index.
Several Washington hospitals challenged the new rule in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia on the grounds that the Secretary had violated the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) in promulgating the rule by not first providing notice of proposed rulemaking and allowing an opportunity for public comment. The district court held in favor of the plaintiff hospitals on April 29, 1983.District of Columbia Hospital Ass'n. v. Heckler, No. 82-2520 (D.D.C. 1987) The court found that it did not have the power to enjoin the rule because the plaintiffs had not exhausted their administrative remedies. Rather than appeal, the Secretary reimbursed the hospitals according to the pre-1981 schedule.
 Retroactive reinstatement of the rule 
In February 1984, the Secretary issued a notice seeking public comment on a proposal to re-institute the 1981 rule, which would apply retroactively to July 1, 1981. Following the comment period, the Secretary issued the rule on November 26, 1984, and began recouping monies it disbursed to hospitals in accordance with the District Court's ruling during the period of July 1, 1981 to November 26, 1984, including $2 million from seven particular hospitals.
These seven hospitals, one of which was Georgetown University Hospital, exhausted their available administrative remedies and commenced a challenge to the retroactive rule in the District Court for the District of Columbia on the grounds that it violated the Administrative Procedure Act and the Medicare Act. The District Court granted summary judgment for the plaintiffs, finding that the circumstances did not justify a retroactively effective rule. The 1984 rule being invalidated, the Secretary—by then Otis Bowen—was ordered to recompute the reimbursements due to the hospitals under the pre-1981 rule. The Secretary appealed, and the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit affirmed the lower court, but instead reasoned that the APA generally prohibits retroactive rulemaking and that the Medicare Act specifically prohibits retroactive cost-limit rules. The United States Supreme Court granted certiorari on February 29, 1988..
 Opinion of the Court 
On October 11, 1988, the case was argued before the court, and a decision was issued on December 12. Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote for a unanimous court, holding that unless Congress expressly authorizes an agency to promulgate retroactive rules, its rulemaking power will not be understood to encompass retroactivity. Even if there is a sound justification for the retroactive rule, courts should be reluctant to find a permissible basis.  The court affirmed the judgment of the D.C. Circuit.
The Court rejected the Secretary's argument that clause (ii) of  (§ 223(b) of the Medicare Act), which allows for "retroactive corrective adjustments," authorizes the retroactive cost-limit rule. Rather than allowing the Secretary to promulgate cost-limit rules, the statutory provision allows for "case-by-case adjustments" when the normal formula for calculating reimbursements does not reach the correct result "in individual cases". Retroactivity is statutorily permitted in individual adjudications, rather than in rulemaking. The court reached this determination by finding that past agency practice, the Medicare statute, and its legislative history do not indicate that Congress intended to grant the Secretary of Health and Human Services retroactive rulemaking power.
 Concurrence 
Justice Antonin Scalia concurred in the court's judgment, writing separately that the Court must consider not only whether the Medicare Act permits the Secretary to promulgate retroactive rules, but also whether the Administrative Procedure Act permits it. Agreeing with the circuit court, he wrote that "general principles of administrative law" prohibit the retroactivity, as well as both specific statutes. The APA's definition of a "rule" is an agency statement with "future effect." Therefore, rules must have legal consequences of only future effect. On the other hand, "orders" under the APA can have legal consequences for the past. Further, the Attorney General's Manual on the Administrative Procedure Act, which is the "Government's own most authoritative interpretation of the APA", instructs that rules under the APA have only future effect. Nonetheless, a rule that has only future effect can be secondarily retroactive by "affect[ing] past transactions" by, e.g. causing previously established trusts to be less desirable in the future; yet, it continues to be a rule under the APA because it does not alter past legal consequences. However, rules with unreasonable secondary retroactivity can be invalid under  for being arbitrary or capricious.
 See also 
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 488
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
List of United States administrative law cases
SEC v. Chenery Corp. (1943)
SEC v. Chenery Corp. (1947)
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1988 in United States case law
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:Georgetown University Medical Center
"""

From "Bowen v. Kendrick" ==> """
Bowen v. Kendrick, 487 U.S. 589 (1988), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld the constitutionality of the Adolescent Family Life Act..
 Background 
The Adolescent Family Life Act was implemented by the United States Congress in 1981 as an amendment to the Public Health Service Act. The purpose behind this statute was to combat the social and economic consequences associated with pregnancy and childbirth among unmarried youths.  The statute sought to achieve this goal by promoting “… adolescent premarital sexual abstinence, adoption as an alternative to early parenting, parenting and child development education, and comprehensive health, education, and social services…”  In order to effectively promote these behaviors and services, the statute permitted federal funds to go toward public and private organizations that offer services and research toward premarital adolescent sexual relations and pregnancy.  One of the statute's provisions required that AFLA grants may not be given to programs that provide abortion counseling, nor to programs that promote abortion as a valid means of birth control.
In 1983, a group of federal taxpayers, clergymen, and the American Jewish Congress filed suit against Otis R. Bowen, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, arguing that the Adolescent Family Life Act violated the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment. The Establishment Clause forbids Congress from passing laws “… respecting an establishment of religion…” As a result of the AFLA, federal grants were distributed to religious organizations that encourage adolescents to refrain from involvement in sexual relationships.  The plaintiffs argued that federal funds directed towards religiously affiliated organizations have the effect of advancing religion and thus are unconstitutional.
Supreme Court Decision
When deciding this case, the United States Supreme Court applied the three-part test set forth by Lemon v. Kurtzman. According to this test, a statute will be upheld if it can satisfy each of the following three parts: 1) the statute has a secular legislative purpose, 2) its primary effect neither advances nor inhibits religion, and 3) it does not excessively entangle government with religion.Gillman, Howard, Mark A. Graber, and Keith E. Whittington. "Chapter 10: The Reagan Era." American Constitutionalism: Rights and Liberties. Vol 2. New York: Oxford UP, 2013. 760-64. Print. The Court first held that the Adolescent Family Life Act had a secular purpose, as it was enacted to combat the social and economic problems associated with teenage sexuality, pregnancy, and parenthood, with no reference to religious matters.  Second, the Court found that the extent to which this statute advances religion is “incidental and remote” at most.  The statute does not require that any grant recipients be affiliated with a religious organization and the services that the act provides are not themselves religiously motivated.  Lastly, the Court found that the statute does not excessively entangle government with religion because it requires that the grants be monitored to ensure that the federal funds are being spent in the manner intended by Congress.  Therefore, since the Court found that the Adolescent Family Life Act satisfies all three parts of the Lemon test, the statute's constitutionality was upheld.
On January 19, 1993 the parties agreed to a settlement regarding the federal funds distributed by the Adolescent Family Life Act.  The settlement required that sexuality education funded by the Act “… may not include religious references, may not be offered in a site used for religious worship services, or offered in sites with religious iconography.”
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 487
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:1988 in United States case law
Category:1988 in education
"""

From "Bowen v. Roy" ==> """
Bowen v. Roy, 476 U.S. 693 (1986), was a United States Supreme Court case which established limits on freedom of religion in the United States.. 
Background
The plaintiffs were Native American parents who had applied for financial assistance under a U.S. government welfare program. One of the requirements to receive Aid to Families with Dependent Children and food stamps under these programs was that the applicants supply Social Security numbers for their children and themselves. The plaintiffs refused to do so for their daughter, named Little Bird of the Snow, as they claimed use of this number outside her choosing to do so when she came of age, a form of spiritual self-actualization, would violate their religious beliefs. Their belief was that using a social security number to identify her would diminish her spiritual uniqueness and "rob her spirit".Bowen, 476 U.S. at 697. At trial Roy testified "...It serves unique purposes. It's applied to her and only her; and being applied to her, that's what offends us, and we try to keep her person unique, and we try to keep her spirit unique, and we're scared that if we were to use this number, she would lose control of that and she would have no ability to protect herself from any evil that that number might be used against her."App. 85 Other religious faiths had expressed closely similar objections — biblical Christians quoting Revelation, asserting that the SSN is one of a system of numbers the Antichrist will cause all people in American society to accept and use in order to function, to buy or sell goods, or social security numbers are the "mark of the beast", of the Antichrist who threatens to control the world and to accept a number is to "serve the beast".Stevens v. Burger, 428 F. Supp. 896, 897, 901-05 (E.D.N.Y. 1977); 
When the Roys refused to provide a social security number for their daughter, the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare cut benefits for Little Bird of the Snow to comply with federal guidelines.Bowen v. Roy. Supreme Court Case Files Collection. Box 123. Powell Papers. Lewis F. Powell Jr. Archives, Washington & Lee University School of Law, Virginia. The Roys then filed suit, claiming infringement of their right to practice their religion. In the Middle District Court for Pennsylvania, both sides stipulated before and during trial that Little Bird of the Snow did not have a Social Security number. During the last day of the trial, the Social Security Administration disclosed it did, after a search, already possess a social security number issued shortly after Little Bird of the Snow's birth.Bowen, 476 U.S. at 719.
In its brief before the Court, the government's brief informed the Social Security Administration "...itself assigns [Social Security numbers] to persons who are required by federal law to have one but decline to complete an application. If, for religious reasons, the individual requiring [a Social Security number] does not wish to receive a social security card, the agency will accommodate that request. Similarly, when an applicant refuses to sign an application for [a Social Security number] on religious grounds, [Social Security Administration personnel] may sign in lieu of the applicant."Bowen, 476 U.S. at 718, n. 7.
Decision
The Supreme Court ruled that the government's use of a Social Security number for the child did not impair her family's freedom to "believe, express and exercise" their religion, and that the plaintiffs' claim was without merit. In the majority opinion, Chief Justice Warren Burger noted that "never to our knowledge has the Court interpreted the First Amendment to require the Government itself to behave in ways that the individual believes will further his or her spiritual development or that of his or her family", vacating an injunction entered by the District Court enjoining use of a Social Security number by the government.
Concurring in part and dissenting in part, Justice O'Connor noted, "The Government still refuses to concede that it should now provide welfare benefits to Little Bird of the Snow, even though it now claims to possess Little Bird of the Snow's Social Security number."Bowen, 476 U.S. at 725 (O'Connor, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).
By a plurality decision, it was remanded back to the Federal District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania, for a hearing on whether the government complied with the Privacy Act in issuing and using a Social Security number. The case was eventually settled with the plaintiffs and government agreeing that all records and data in all its computers containing a social security number for Little Bird of the Snow Roy were to be eradicated or erased.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 476
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Bowen v. Roy at the University of Virginia
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:1986 in religion
Category:Legal history of Pennsylvania
Category:Federal assistance in the United States
Category:Social Security lawsuits
Category:Native American history of Pennsylvania
"""

From "Bowers v. Hardwick" ==> """
Bowers v. Hardwick, 478 U.S. 186 (1986), was a landmark decision of the U.S. Supreme Court that upheld, in a 5–4 ruling, the constitutionality of a Georgia sodomy law criminalizing oral and anal sex in private between consenting adults, in this case with respect to homosexual sodomy, though the law did not differentiate between homosexual and heterosexual sodomy.. It was overturned in Lawrence v. Texas (2003), though the statute had already been struck down by the Georgia Supreme Court in 1998.  
The majority opinion, by Justice Byron White, reasoned that the U.S. Constitution did not confer "a fundamental right to engage in homosexual sodomy". A concurring opinion by Chief Justice Warren E. Burger cited the "ancient roots" of prohibitions against homosexual sex, quoting William Blackstone's description of homosexual sex as an "infamous crime against nature", worse than rape, and "a crime not fit to be named". Burger concluded: "To hold that the act of homosexual sodomy is somehow protected as a fundamental right would be to cast aside millennia of moral teaching." 
The senior dissent, by Justice Harry Blackmun, framed the issue as revolving around the right to privacy. Blackmun's dissent accused the Court of an "almost obsessive focus on homosexual activity" and an "overall refusal to consider the broad principles that have informed our treatment of privacy in specific cases." In response to invocations of religious taboos against homosexuality, Blackmun wrote: "That certain, but by no means all, religious groups condemn the behavior at issue gives the State no license to impose their judgments on the entire citizenry. The legitimacy of secular legislation depends, instead, on whether the State can advance some justification for its law beyond its conformity to religious doctrine."Bowers, 478 U.S. at 211 (Blackmun, J., dissenting).
Scholarly examinations of the case overwhelmingly sided with the dissenting minority. Several justices, including Lewis F. Powell, later regretted joining the majority but stated that they considered the decision of little importance at the time. Seventeen years after Bowers, the Supreme Court directly overruled its decision in Lawrence v. Texas, holding that anti-sodomy laws are unconstitutional. In Lawrence, the Supreme Court subsequently based its decision on the American tradition of non-interference with private sexual decisions between consenting adults and on the notions of personal autonomy to define one's own relationships..
Background
In early July 1982, Atlanta Police Department officer Keith Torick issued Michael Hardwick a citation for public drinking after witnessing Hardwick throw a beer bottle into a trash can outside the gay bar where he worked, allegedly observing him violating the city's ordinance that prohibits drinking in public. Due to a clerical error on the citation issued by Torick, Hardwick missed his court date and Torick obtained a warrant for Hardwick's arrest. Hardwick then settled the matter by paying a $50 fine at a court office, but Torick showed up at Hardwick's house three weeks later, on August 3, to serve the now-invalid warrant. At the time, an unrelated guest of Hardwick was sleeping on the couch in Hardwick's living room; at around 8:30 am, Officer Torick entered the house (the front door may have been ajar) and awoke the guest, then proceeded down a hallway towards Hardwick's bedroom. The officer opened the bedroom door, and Torick observed Hardwick and a companion engaged in mutual, consensual oral sex.
Hardwick was angry at the intrusion and threatened to have Torick fired for entering his home. Torick later stated that he "would never have made the case if [Hardwick] hadn't had an attitude problem." Torick then arrested both men for sodomy, a felony under Georgia law that carried a sentence of one to twenty years' imprisonment.Georgia Code Ann. § 16-6-2 (1984) District Attorney Lewis Slaton chose not to prosecute the sodomy charge, considering that the warrant had expired, and his own belief that the sodomy law should not be used to prosecute consensual sexual activity.
Hardwick then sued Michael Bowers, the attorney general of Georgia, in federal court for a declaratory judgment that the state's sodomy law was invalid. He charged that as a non-celibate gay man, he was liable to eventually be prosecuted for his activities. The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) had been searching for a "perfect test case" to challenge anti-sodomy laws, and Hardwick's cause presented the one they were looking for. They approached Hardwick, who agreed to be represented by ACLU attorneys.
In the lower federal courts, Hardwick was represented by attorney Kathleen Wilde. The case was filed in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, where it was dismissed, with the Court ruling in favor of Bowers. Hardwick appealed, and the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit reversed the lower court, finding that the Georgia sodomy statute was an infringement upon Hardwick's constitutional rights. The State of Georgia then appealed, and the Supreme Court of the United States granted certiorari on November 4, 1985, to review the case.
Hardwick was represented before the Supreme Court by Harvard Law School Professor Laurence Tribe. Michael Hobbs, assistant attorney general, argued the case for the state. The legality of the officer's entry into Hardwick's home was not contested; only the constitutionality of the sodomy statute was challenged.
A heterosexual married couple was initially named in the suit as plaintiffs John and Mary Doe, alleging that they wished to engage in sodomy but were prevented from doing so by the Georgia anti-sodomy law. They failed to obtain standing and were dropped from the suit.
Opinion of the Court
The Court issued a 5–4 ruling upholding the sodomy laws. Justice Byron White wrote the majority opinion and was joined by Justices William Rehnquist, Sandra Day O'Connor, Warren E. Burger, and Lewis F. Powell. Justice Harry Blackmun wrote a dissent joined by William J. Brennan, Jr., Thurgood Marshall, and John Paul Stevens. Stevens also wrote a dissent joined by Brennan and Marshall.
Majority opinion
The issue in Bowers involved the right of privacy. Since 1965's Griswold v. Connecticut,. the Court had held that a right to privacy was implicit in the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. In Bowers, the Court held that this right did not extend to private, consensual sexual conduct, at least insofar as it involved homosexual sex. The majority opinion in Bowers, written by Justice Byron White, framed the legal question as to whether the Constitution confers "a fundamental right upon homosexuals to engage in sodomy." The opinion answered this question in the negative, stating that "to claim that a right to engage in such conduct is 'deeply rooted in this Nation's history and tradition' or 'implicit in the concept of ordered liberty is, at best, facetious."
Justice White added a slippery slope warning about undesirable potential implications for other sex laws:
Chief Justice Burger's concurrence
The short concurring opinion by Chief Justice Warren E. Burger emphasized historical negative attitudes toward homosexual sex, quoting Sir William Blackstone's characterization of sodomy as "a crime not fit to be named" and an offense of "deeper malignity" than rape.Bowers, 478 U.S. at 197 (Burger, C.J., concurring). Burger concluded, "To hold that the act of homosexual sodomy is somehow protected as a fundamental right would be to cast aside millennia of moral teaching."
Justice Powell's concurrence
In a concurring opinion, Justice Lewis F. Powell, Jr. joined the majority opinion in upholding the law against a substantive due process attack. He voiced doubts about the compatibility of Georgia's law with the Eighth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, noting that even consensual sodomy could be punished with up to twenty years in prison, the same sentence as an aggravated battery or first-degree arson. Since Hardwick had not been tried or sentenced, the question of the statute's constitutionality under the Eighth Amendment did not come up in the case.
Powell was considered the deciding vote during the case. He had initially voted to strike down the law but changed his mind after conservative clerk Michael W. Mosman advised him to uphold the ban.Domestic Partner Decision: Revisiting Old Wounds?, Willamette Week It has been claimed that Powell's decision to uphold the law was influenced by his belief that he had never known any homosexuals, even though one of his own law clerks was gay.Lazarus, Edward. Closed Chambers: The Rise, Fall, and Future of the Modern Supreme Court, p. 386. "At the Bowers conference, Powell told his colleagues that he had 'never met a homosexual'." That clerk said Powell had met his boyfriend and asked him about the mechanisms of homosexual sex when deciding the case. He felt that Powell had made the remark in order to avoid revealing that one of his clerks was gay at a time when such a revelation could have destroyed that clerk's future legal career. Journalists have since found that Powell hired more gay law clerks than any of the other justices.
Dissents
Justice Blackmun's dissent
A sharply worded dissenting opinion by Justice Harry Blackmun attacked the majority opinion as having an "almost obsessive focus on homosexual activity". Blackmun wrote, "Only the most willful blindness could obscure the fact that sexual intimacy is 'a sensitive, key relationship of human existence, central to family life, community welfare, and the development of human personality, quoting from Burger's opinion in Paris Adult Theatre I v. Slaton, which held that obscene films are not constitutionally protected. The dissent compared the majority opinion to that in Minersville School District v. Gobitis,. which was reversed by the Court after only three years.. At the conclusion of his opinion, Blackmun wrote simply "I dissent", rather than the customary "I respectfully dissent."
Blackmun revealed in a 1995 oral history with Harold Koh that his dissent in Bowers v. Hardwick was written primarily by Blackmun's openly gay clerk Pamela S. Karlan. Blackmun said of the dissent, "Karlan did a lot of very effective writing, and I owe a lot to her and her ability in getting that dissent out. She felt very strongly about it, and I think is correct in her approach to it. I think the dissent is correct."
Justice Stevens's dissent
Justice John Paul Stevens wrote a separate dissent that focused on the selective enforcement of the law against homosexuals. The Georgia statute could not be applied to married heterosexuals, as consensual sexual activity within the bounds of marriage was protected under Griswold v. Connecticut, the law could not be applied to unmarried heterosexuals, as Eisenstadt v. Baird. had extended Griswold to unmarried people. Since heterosexuals could never be prosecuted for sodomy, Georgia should have the burden of proving that selective enforcement against homosexuals was constitutional.
Subsequent findings
According to Daniel Richman, former law clerk for Justice Thurgood Marshall, Marshall's friendship with civil rights leader Bayard Rustin and Rustin's openness about his homosexuality played a significant role in Marshall's decision to join both dissents. Richman also recalled that Marshall thought that the case was a "no-brainer", and told Richman, who wrote a bench memo for Marshall on the case, that "this [case] is controlled by Stanley". 
Warren Burger's views on homosexuality have come under scrutiny. He attempted to convince Byron White to include overtly homophobic language in the majority, which White refused to do. Burger lobbied Powell to change his mind, and sent him a note comparing homosexuals to Jack the Ripper.
Subsequent events
Michael Hardwick
Hardwick died in 1991 of complications from AIDS. According to his lawyer Kathleen Wilde, he died very bitter about the outcome of the case.
Jurisprudence
Bowers was decided at a time when the court's privacy jurisprudence, and in particular the right to abortion recognized in Roe v. Wade. had come under heavy criticism. Bowers signaled a reluctance by the Court to recognize a general constitutional right to privacy or to extend such a right further than they already had.
The Georgia law upheld in Bowers criminalized oral sex and anal sex whether engaged in by people of the same sex or different sexes, but White's decision was restricted to homosexual sex. "The only claim properly before the Court, therefore, is Hardwick's challenge to the Georgia statute as applied to consensual homosexual sodomy. We express no opinion on the constitutionality of the Georgia statute as applied to other acts of sodomy." State sodomy laws were seldom enforced against private, consensual conduct in the decades following the decision, though many courts and state governments interpreted it to justify a wide variety of bans and limitations on the lives of gay people.
Bowers was used to deny suspect class qualification to gays and lesbians, thus restricting the standard of review to rational basis. Although Bowers was later overruled, decisions based on it, such as High Tech Gays v. Defense Industrial Security Clearance Office, are sometimes still cited as precedent in gay rights cases.
Justice Powell's later comments
In 1990, three years after retiring from the Court, Powell told a group of New York University law students that he considered his opinion in Bowers an error, saying, "I do think it was inconsistent in a general way with Roe. When I had the opportunity to reread the opinions a few months later I thought the dissent had the better of the arguments." Powell believed the case was one of little importance, and in 1990 said he had not devoted thirty minutes to think about it since the ruling.
Repeal of state sodomy laws
In the years after Bowers was decided, several state legislatures repealed their sodomy laws. In addition, a number of state courts invalidated sodomy laws under privacy or other provisions of their state constitutions. In 1998, the same sodomy law that was upheld in Bowers was struck down by the Georgia Supreme Court in the case of Powell v. State.
Lawrence v. Texas
In 2003, the remaining sodomy laws in 13 states were invalidated, insofar as they applied to private consensual conduct among adults, by the Supreme Court decision in Lawrence v. Texas, which explicitly overturned Bowers. In Lawrence, the Supreme Court subsequently based its decision on the American tradition of non-interference with private sexual decisions between consenting adults and on the notions of personal autonomy to define one's own relationships. Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote the majority opinion in Lawrence, ruling that Texas's state sodomy law was unconstitutional under the Fourteenth Amendment's due process clause (adult consensual sexual intimacy in one's home is a vital interest in liberty and privacy protected by the Due Process Clause). Kennedy wrote: "Bowers was not correct when it was decided, and it is not correct today. It ought not to remain binding precedent. Bowers v. Hardwick should be and now is overruled."Lawrence, 539 U.S. at 578. 
Media portrayal
Bill Moyers discussed the decision at length in an interview with Blackmun on the episode "Mr. Justice Blackmun" of the 1987 Constitutional bicentennial documentary miniseries In Search of the Constitution.Mr. Justice Blackmun (April 16, 1987)
In 2009 a play based on the life of Michael Hardwick and the judicial proceedings, Sodomy Rules: The Bowers v. Hardwick Trial, was written and performed by Bill Crouch in New York City.
In 2019, an updated revision of Sodomy Rules! (The Bowers v. Hardwick Trial), a solo documentary play based on the life of Michael Hardwick, was written and performed by Bill Crouch in New York City at The New Work Series presented by Emerging Artists on October 7, 2019.
In popular culture
The last name of the satirical character Betty Bowers, played by Deven Green, is taken from this case.
In the movie The Pelican Brief, there is a scene of a classroom in Tulane University in which the instructor and students discuss this case, with Julia Roberts' character, Darby Shaw, saying that the Court's decision was wrong.
See also
 Dudgeon v. the United Kingdom
 Judicial review
 Baker v. Nelson
 List of court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 478
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 List of LGBT-related cases in the United States Supreme Court
 Sex-related court cases
 Sodomy laws in the United States
References
Bibliography
External links
 The Invasion of Sexual Privacy
 Text of the Georgia Anti-Sodomy Statute at Onecle.com
Category:1986 in LGBT history
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:Anal eroticism
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause case law
Category:Discrimination against LGBT people in the United States
Category:LGBT in Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States LGBT rights case law
Category:Oral eroticism
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:Right to privacy under the United States Constitution
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Bowers v. Kerbaugh-Empire Co." ==> """
Bowers v. Kerbaugh-Empire Co., 271 U.S. 170 (1926), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that no taxable income arose from the repayment in German marks of loans that had originally been made in U.S. dollars, despite the fact that the marks had gone down in value relative to the dollar since the loan had been made.
This decision was narrowed by the court six years later in United States v. Kirby Lumber Co..
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 271
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:United States Sixteenth Amendment case law
Category:1926 in United States case law
Category:Foreign exchange market
Category:Germany–United States relations
"""

From "Bowles v. Russell" ==> """
Bowles v. Russell, 551 U.S. 205 (2007), is a Supreme Court of the United States case in which the Court determined that the federal courts of appeals lack jurisdiction to hear habeas appeals that are filed late, even if the district court said the petitioner had additional time to file.
 Early history of the parties 
In 1999, Keith Bowles was convicted in the murder of Ollie Gipson. Bowles requested to file an appeal under Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure 4(a)(6), which allows a district court to grant a 14-day extension under certain conditions. The District Court granted Bowles' motion but inexplicably gave him 17 days to file his notice of appeal. He filed within the 17 days allowed by the District Court, but after the 14-day period allowed by Rule 4(a)(6) and §2107(c). In an opinion written by Chief Judge Danny Julian Boggs, the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals held that the notice was untimely and that they therefore lacked jurisdiction to hear the case.
 Supreme Court decision 
In this case, a District Court purported to extend a party's time for filing an appeal beyond the period allowed by statute. We must decide whether the Court of Appeals had jurisdiction to entertain an appeal filed after the statutory period but within the period allowed by the District Court's order. We have long and repeatedly held that the time limits for filing a notice of appeal are jurisdictional in nature. Accordingly, we hold that petitioner's untimely notice—even though filed in reliance upon a District Court's order—deprived the Court of Appeals jurisdiction..
The dissenting opinion stated "It is intolerable for the judicial system to treat people this way, and there is not even a technical justification for condoning this bait and switch."
 Impact of the case 
The Court ruled that an appellate court may sua sponte (on its own motion) dismiss an appeal which has not been filed within the time limitations authorized by statute, even if the district court told the appellant that he had additional time and the appellant relied on the court's guidance.  Rule 4(a)(6) of the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure was interpreted that time is of the essence.  Additional time granted by the district court judge is not permitted if beyond the stated rules.  The ruling may be seen as the Court's attempt to limit the powers of the judicial branch, especially in regard to appeals from criminal convictions.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 551
Caterpillar Inc. v. Lewis (1996)
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
Further reading
External links
Full text of Sixth Circuit Opinion (PDF)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States judiciary case law
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Bowman v. Monsanto Co." ==> """
Bowman v. Monsanto Co., 569 U.S. 278 (2013), was a United States Supreme Court patent decision in which the Court unanimously affirmed the decision of the Federal Circuit that the patent exhaustion doctrine does not permit a farmer to plant and grow saved, patented seeds without the patent owner's permission..  The case arose after Vernon Hugh Bowman, an Indiana farmer, bought transgenic soybean crop seedsThe soybean crop is seeds that are the same as the seeds from which the crop was grown. from a local grain elevator for his second crop of the season. Monsanto originally sold the seed from which these soybeans were grown to farmers under a limited use license that prohibited the farmer-buyer from using the seeds for more than a single season or from saving any seed produced from the crop for replanting. The farmers sold their soybean crops (also seeds) to the local grain elevator, from which Bowman then bought them. After Bowman replanted the crop seeds for his second harvest, Monsanto filed a lawsuit claiming that he infringed on their patents by replanting soybeans without a license. In response, Bowman argued that Monsanto's claims were barred under the doctrine of patent exhaustion, because all future generations of soybeans were embodied in the first generation that was originally sold.
In a unanimous opinion written by Justice Elena Kagan, the Supreme Court ruled that Bowman's conduct infringed Monsanto's patents and that the doctrine of patent exhaustion does not permit a farmer to reproduce patented seeds by planting and harvesting saved crop seeds without the patent holder's permission. The Court held that, when a farmer plants a harvested and saved seed, thereby growing another soybean crop, that action constitutes an unauthorized "making" of the patented product.
The case garnered attention in part due to its potential impact on policy about genetically modified crops and self-replicating technologies, and due to the involvement of Justice Clarence Thomas, who previously served as a lawyer for Monsanto.John Danforth, then the attorney general of Missouri, hired Thomas out of Yale as a lawyer on his staff, and after a few years Thomas moved on to the legal department at Monsanto. Jeffrey Toobin, Unforgiven,  (Nov. 12, 2007); see also  147-49 (2004). 
Commentators noted, however, that the Court's ruling was narrow in scope, and did not set a broad legal precedent with respect to the applicability of the doctrine of patent exhaustion to self-replicating technologies.
Background
Factual setting
Monsanto developed patents for genetically modified soybeans that were resistant to glyphosate-based herbicides. When farmers sprayed the modified soybeans with the glyphosate herbicide Roundup, the modified soybeans would survive while competing plants (weeds) would be killed.. Monsanto sold these soybeans under a limited-use license that prohibited the farmer-buyer from using the seeds for more than a single season or from saving any seed produced from the crop for replanting.
thumb|250px|left|alt=rows of soybeans|Different types of genetically modified soybeans being grown side by side
In 1999, Indiana farmer Vernon Hugh Bowman bought soybean crop seeds from a local grain elevator for his second crop of the season. He then saved seeds from his second crop to replant additional crops in later years. Bowman purchased these soybean seeds from the same elevator to which he and neighbors sold their soybean crops, many of which were transgenic, and the elevator sold these soybeans as commodities, not as seeds for planting. He tested the new seeds, and found that, as he had expected, some were transgenic and thus were resistant to glyphosate. He replanted seeds from the original second harvest in subsequent years for his second seasonal planting, supplementing them with more soybeans he bought at the elevator. He informed Monsanto of his activities.
Monsanto stated that he was infringing its patents because the soybeans he bought from the elevator were products that he purchased for use as seeds without a license from Monsanto; Bowman stated that he had not infringed due to patent exhaustion on the first sale of seed to whatever farmers had produced the crops that he bought from the elevator, on the grounds that for seed, all future generations are embodied in the first generation that was originally sold. Bowman had previously purchased and planted Monsanto seeds under a license agreement promising not to save seeds from the resulting crop, but that agreement was not relevant to his purchase of soybean seed from the grain elevator nor to the litigation. In 2007, Monsanto sued Bowman for patent infringement in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Indiana.
Lower court rulings
After filing suit, Monsanto moved for summary judgment. In response, Bowman argued that if Monsanto was allowed to continue its license past exhaustion, it would be able to dominate the market. Although the district court found Bowman's arguments compelling, it found that it was bound by previous appellate court decisions in Monsanto Co. v. Scruggs and Monsanto Co. v. McFarling to control, and in 2009, the district court ruled in favor of Monsanto. The court held that since the original farmers could not use the later generation seeds without a license, they could not make an unrestricted sale and therefore the patent rights were not exhausted. The court entered judgment for Monsanto in the amount of $84,456.30 and enjoined Bowman from making, using, selling or offering to sell any of the seeds from Monsanto's patent.
Bowman then appealed the decision to the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit. Bowman argued that the Monsanto license agreement allowed the sale of second-generation soybeans to both grain elevators and subsequent buyers and that this caused the patent rights to be exhausted per the United States Supreme Court's ruling in Quanta Computer, Inc. v. LG Electronics, Inc.. Monsanto argued that the license agreement specifically prohibited the use of second-generation seeds for planting. The Federal Circuit upheld the lower court's decision in favor of Monsanto.
Petition to the Supreme Court
Bowman sought review in the United States Supreme Court. Bowman argued that the Federal Circuit's decision conflicted with existing Supreme Court precedent on patent exhaustion. Bowman said that United States v. Univis Lens Co.United States v. Univis Lens Co., . showed that patent exhaustion applied even when the patent holder created post-sale restrictions. He claimed that the Federal Circuit had created a judicial exception to patent exhaustion for Monsanto, allowing it to dominate the soybean seed market. Finally, Bowman argued that he was not "making" infringing new seeds merely by planting and reaping crops.
Monsanto argued that the Federal Circuit's decision was correct because Bowman had created a new product that infringed on their patent. They further argued that this was not an appropriate case to hear, as the decision was not decided on patent exhaustion via a conditional sale. The Supreme Court requested the United States to brief the Court, and the Solicitor General filed a brief generally in support of the Monsanto position. The United States asked the Court to deny certiorari. The Supreme Court granted certiorari on October 5, 2012..
Supreme Court
thumb|upright|alt=photo of Elena Kagan wearing judicial robes|Justice Elena Kagan delivered the opinion of the Court
Arguments
Bowman argued that the authorized sale of the seeds extinguished the patent, and that Bowman merely used seeds legitimately purchased from the silo. He claimed that the Federal Circuit had created an exception to the exhaustion doctrine, and that this decision was properly for Congress to decide. Monsanto argued that the second-generation seeds were not subject to exhaustion because they had not existed until Bowman created them and had not been sold at the time of infringement. He noted that even when exhaustion applied, it did not allow one to create new copies of the patented product, which the second-generation seeds were.
A number of Amici Curiae also filed briefs on behalf of the parties.. For example, the American Intellectual Property Law Association, arguing on behalf of Monsanto, wrote that "[e]xhaustion of the right to control propagation of patented seed would disrupt the balance created by Congress between the Patent Act and the Plant Variety Protection Act." The American Seed Trade Association, also arguing on behalf of Monsanto, wrote that "[p]atented seed technology benefits farmers, consumers and the environment". The National Farmers Union, arguing on behalf of Bowman, wrote that "[a] patent exhaustion exception for self-replicating technologies is inconsistent with this Court’s precedent and the competition policies reflected in the first-sale doctrine", and the Center for Food Safety wrote that "[f]arming is not genetic engineering".
Commentary prior to the Supreme Court's ruling
In the months leading up to the decision, commentators weighed in on several issues relating to the case. Because Justice Clarence Thomas had served as a lawyer for the Monsanto Company 34 years earlier, some critics questioned whether he would remain impartial. Other commentators noted that the case raised the "important question" of whether the exhaustion doctrine should include an exception for self-replicating technologies, which may one day include self-replicating robots. In SCOTUSblog, Ronald Mann wrote the case's "practical ramifications are substantial", and that the case was "one of the highest-stakes cases of the Term". However, Mann also predicted that "it seems most unlikely the Court will rule against Monsanto", and in his coverage of the case's oral arguments, he observed that "none of the Justices expressed any sympathy for [Bowman’s] position".
Opinion of the Court
On May 13, 2013, Justice Elena Kagan delivered the Court's unanimous opinion, which affirmed the judgment of the Federal Circuit. Justice Kagan stated that while an authorized sale of a patented item terminates all patent rights to that item, that exhaustion does not permit a farmer to reproduce patented seeds through planting and harvesting without the patent holder's permission. Justice Kagan stated that when a farmer plants a harvested and saved seed, thereby growing a further soybean crop, that action constitutes an unauthorized "making" of the patented product, in violation of section 271(a) of the patent code.. Section 271(a) gives the owner of a patent the exclusive right to make products that the patent covers. Justice Kagan concluded that Bowman could resell the patented seeds he obtained from the elevator, or use them as feed, but that he could not produce additional seeds (that is, crops).
Commentary and analysis
After the Court published its decision, analysts offered a range of opinions about the impact of the Court's ruling. An academic co-author of an amicus brief on behalf of Bowman filed by the American Antitrust Institute expressed relief that the loss was on a narrow basis rather than providing a broad affirmation of the lack of patent exhaustion for self-replicating technologies. Kevin Rodkey argued that an analysis under Quanta Computer leads to the conclusion that patent rights covering self-replicating seeds are exhausted on the first authorized sale, including subsequent generations, and that seed companies can only exclude subsequent replantings with carefully written license restrictions. Ronald Mann writing in SCOTUSblog noted: "The tenor of the Court came through most clearly when the Court ridiculed what it called Bowman’s 'blame-the-bean defense' – the argument that Bowman did not make new seeds, because it was the seeds themselves that replicated."
Another academic, Richard H. Stern, did not take issue with the Court's refusal to shelter Bowman's conduct under the exhaustion doctrine, but criticized the Court's classification of the act of planting seeds and growing crops from them as an act of "making" a new patented article.Stern, Richard H., Bowman v Monsanto: Exhaustion versus Making , [2014]  255, 260–61. He argued that, because Congress has not addressed the issue whether the millennia-old practice of planting and growing a crop from harvested seeds constituted a "making" of a patented product, the Court should have left it to Congress to make the decision as to whether replanting patented seed should constitute infringement. Rochelle C. Dreyfus is also reported to have criticized the decision, noting that Bowman was attempting to obtain the benefit of the genetic modifications, while others, such as organic growers, fear being sued for inadvertent cross-contamination. Additionally, the Harvard Law Review wrote that "[t]he Court reached the correct outcome but via the wrong route" because its ruling "obfuscates the role of the licensing agreement" and because the "exhaustion doctrine is ill suited to address the challenges posed by self-replicating technologies"..
Other commentators suggested the case will have broad-ranging impacts for other self-replicating technologies. Tabetha Marie Peavey suggested that the Court "appeared to be alert to the consequences of its ruling, not just for the value of Monsanto’s soybean patents, but also for technologies like cell lines, software, and vaccines".. Likewise, Christopher M. Holman wrote that the case "should be viewed as a bellwether for an oncoming wave of controversy around the patenting of self-replicating technologies that will challenge the ability of the patent system to respond effectively".. William J. Simmons also wrote that "more cases like this will probably be appealed to [the Supreme Court] as these technologies become more prevalent in society".
Subsequent developments
In a similar case, Organic Seed Growers & Trade Ass'n v. Monsanto Co., a coalition of farmers filed suit to challenge twenty-three of Monsanto's patents for glyphosate-resistant crops.718 F.3d at 1352. The plaintiffs argued that if their crops became "contaminated by transgenic seed, which may very well be inevitable given the proliferation of transgenic seed today, they could quite perversely also be accused of patent infringement".718 F.3d at 1353 (internal quotations omitted). The plaintiffs sued to declare Monsanto's patents invalid and asked Monsanto to "expressly waive any claim for patent infringement [Monsanto] may ever have" against the farmers and to "memorialize that waiver by providing a written covenant not to sue".718 F.3d at 1353 (internal quotations omitted) (alteration in Federal Circuit opinion). However, the case was dismissed for lack of a controversy. The suit did not demonstrate instances of current harm or future risk. Monsanto also gave assurances that it did not plan to sue in cases of inadvertent infringement when a grower was not also using glyphosate on their crop.The Federal Circuit said: "Monsanto has made binding assurances that it will not 'take legal action against growers whose crops might inadvertently contain traces of Monsanto biotech genes (because, for example, some transgenic seed or pollen blew onto the grower's land).'" See also Organic Seed Growers & Trade Ass'n v. Monsanto Co. (Fed. Cir. 2013),  (July 4, 2011); Dennis Crouch, Monsanto Wins Again in Federal Circuit: Organic Farmers Have No Standing to Challenge Patent,  (June 10, 2013). Monsanto's patent for the soybeans at issue in this case expired in 2014, prior to which Monsanto announced that it will no longer enforce the licenses associated with the soybeans.
References
External links
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Monsanto litigation
Category:Regulation of genetically modified organisms
Category:2013 in United States case law
"""

From "Bowsher v. Synar" ==> """
Bowsher v. Synar, 478 U.S. 714 (1986), was a United States Supreme Court case that struck down the Gramm–Rudman–Hollings Act as an unconstitutional usurpation of executive power by Congress because the law empowered Congress to terminate the United States Comptroller General for certain specified reasons, including "inefficiency, 'neglect of duty,' or 'malfeasance.'" The named defendant in the original case was Comptroller General Charles Arthur Bowsher and the constitutional challenge was brought forth by Oklahoma Congressman Mike Synar.
Facts
Under the Gramm–Rudman–Hollings Act, allowable deficit levels were calculated in consideration of the eventual elimination of the federal deficit. If the budget exceeded the allowable deficit, across-the-board cuts were required. Directors of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) were required to report to the Comptroller General regarding their recommendations for how much must be cut. The Comptroller General then evaluated these reports, made his own conclusion, and gave a recommendation to the President, who was then required to issue an order effecting the reductions recommended by the Comptroller General unless Congress made the cuts in other ways within a specified amount of time.
The Comptroller General is nominated by the President from a list of three people recommended by the presiding officers of the House and Senate. He is removable only by impeachment or a joint resolution of Congress, which requires majority votes in both houses and is subject to a Presidential veto. Congress can give a number of reasons for this removal, including "inefficiency," "neglect of duty," or "malfeasance".
Holding
The Supreme Court ruled that Congress cannot control how its laws are executed. Since it does not possess this power, it cannot delegate it to its agents. The Comptroller General is an agent of Congress because he can be removed by Congress via a process other than impeachment. The Comptroller General exercises executive power and so the Act is unconstitutional.
The Comptroller General's function under the Act is the "very essence" of the execution of the laws since (1) it entails interpreting the Act to determine precisely what kind of budgetary calculations are required and (2) the Comptroller General commands the President to carry out, without variation, his directive regarding the budget resolutions. Once Congress passes legislation, it can influence only its execution by passing new laws or through impeachment.
The Constitution provides Congress the power to remove executive officers only by impeachment. Also, the Constitutional Convention explicitly rejected language that would have permitted impeachment for "maladministration," with Madison arguing that "so vague a term will be equivalent to a tenure during pleasure of the Senate". Thus, Congress can remove a member of the executive branch only through impeachment.
Dissent
Justice White's dissent argued that the act should have been upheld. He argued that determining the level of spending by the federal government is a legislative function, not an executive one. Even if the power were executive, White did not see anything wrong with delegating that power to an agent as long as Congress could influence him only by a means that is subject to Presentment Clause and Bicameralism Clause requirements, which the act satisfied, since the Comptroller General could be influenced by Congress only through a joint resolution.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 478
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Chadha (1983)
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
"""

From "Box v. Planned Parenthood of Indiana and Kentucky, Inc." ==> """
Box v. Planned Parenthood of Indiana and Kentucky, Inc., No. 18-483, 587 U.S. ___, 139 S.Ct. 1780 (2019), was a United States Supreme Court case dealing with the constitutionality of a 2016 anti-abortion law passed in the state of Indiana. Indiana's law sought to ban abortions performed solely on the basis of the fetus' gender, race, ethnicity, or disabilities. Lower courts had blocked enforcement of the law for violating a woman's right to abortion under privacy concerns within the Fourteenth Amendment, as previously found in the landmark cases Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood v. Casey. The lower courts also blocked enforcement of another portion of the law that required the disposal of aborted fetuses through burial or cremation. The per curiam decision by the Supreme Court overturned the injunction on the fetal disposal portion of the law, but otherwise did not challenge or confirm the lower courts' ruling on the non-discrimination clauses, leaving these in place.Box v. Planned Parenthood of Ind. & Ky., Inc., , 139 S. Ct. 1780 (2019).
The case gained national interest as the first major abortion-related case to be heard by the Supreme Court since the retirement of Justice Anthony Kennedy (who tended to favor abortion rights) with his replacement Justice Brett Kavanaugh (who has appeared to rule against such rights in his previous limited judicial history). Court observers expressed concern that in opposing comments raised between Justices Clarence Thomas and Ruth Bader Ginsburg could result in later abortion-related challenges reaching the Supreme Court and potentially overturn parts of Roe v. Wade.
Background
Since around 2010, several states with Republican leadership and conservative populations started to pass laws restricting abortion rights to some degree. In more recent years, with the onset of the presidency of Donald Trump and his nominations of Justices Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh to the Supreme Court to replace Antonin Scalia and Anthony Kennedy, these laws have appeared designed to create a necessary legal vehicle to be heard by the Supreme Court as to challenge the long-standing provision of the 1973 landmark case Roe v. Wade. That case decided that women have constitutional rights to an abortion, but this is not an absolute right, and states can enact abortion-restricting laws to protect women and their unborn children during the latter trimesters of pregnancy. One type of law passed placed limits on the locations of abortion clinics, requiring them to be near hospitals and requiring doctors performing abortions to have admitting privileges at that hospital, purportedly to ensure that if something goes wrong during the abortion process, the female patient can receive immediate care. This type of restriction was determined to be unconstitutional in the Supreme Court case Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt that struck down a Texas law with these limits.
In the present case, the Republican-controlled legislation of Indiana passed House Bill 1337, a "Sex Selective and Disability Abortion Ban", and which was signed into law by Mike Pence in March 2016. Among other requirements, the bill added three key clauses related to those seeking abortions and their practice. The non-discrimination clause banned abortions which were being performed for reasons solely related to gender, race, ethnicity, or detectable disabilities, such as Down syndrome, and put liabilities on doctors that proceeded to perform such abortions. The informed consent clause required that women undergoing abortions be notified at least 18 hours before their operation regarding the non-discrimination clause and the legal ramifications. Finally, the fetal disposition clause required that abortion clinics bury or incinerate fetal material if the female patient did not take control of it, treating the fetal remains the same as a deceased person. On passage, the law was met with sharp criticism from pro-abortion groups, including Planned Parenthood since the law strictly limited abortion rights.
Within weeks of passage, Planned Parenthood of Indiana and Kentucky, Inc. (PPINK) sought a stay of the law from going into effect that July while they challenged it in court. The United States District Court for the Southern District of Indiana agreed that PPINK's case has merit, and issued an injunction on June 30, 2016 to block enforcement of the new law. Both PPINK and the state of Indiana sought to get a summary judgement on the case in district court; the court granted summary judgement to PPINK stating that all three provisions of the law were unconstitutional, and permanently barred the state from enforcing the law.
The state appealed to the Seventh Circuit, which upheld the lower court's ruling in an April 2018 decision. The Seventh Circuit agreed with the lower court, asserting that the non-discrimination clause violated the Fourteenth Amendment for a women's right to privacy as determined in both Roe v. Wade and in Planned Parenthood v. Casey, and by extension, the informed consent clause was also unconstitutional. The Seventh Circuit ruled the fetal disposition clause as failing due process as Roe and additional case law did not recognize the fetus as a person and thus requiring the same process for disposal as for a person violated due process.
Supreme Court
Indiana petitioned to the Supreme Court by September 2018; this was after Justice Neil Gorsuch had assumed his role on the Supreme Court, while Brett Kavanaugh's nomination was being heard by the United States Senate. The state presented two questions to the Court, the first regarding the fetal disposal clause of the law and the second on the non-discrimination clause. The Court issued a per curiam decision on May 28, 2019, in which it granted certiorari on the first question and overturned the stay on the fetal disposition clause, arguing that how the fetus is disposed has no impact on a woman's rights to an abortion. The Court denied certiorari with regard to the second question on non-discrimination, leaving the lower court's injunction on the non-discrimination and informed consent clauses in place, opting not to consider the merits until at least one other Circuit Court had ruled on such an issue, following its ordinary practice.
Both Justices Clarence Thomas and Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote additional opinions on the per curiam decision.  Justice Thomas' opinion compared abortion practices and birth control to eugenics, cautioning that abortion and birth control could become a "tool of eugenic manipulation", and emphasized the need for the Supreme Court to address the scope of what their Roe v. Wade decision has allowed. Ginsburg, a strong supporter of abortion rights, dissented from the reversal of the fetal disposal clause injunction, writing, "This case implicates the right of a woman to choose to have an abortion before viability and to obtain it without undue interference from the state". Both Thomas' and Ginsburg's opinions included biting footnotes to the other's opinion. Justice Sonia Sotomayor stated separately that she would have denied certiorari on both questions posed by the petition as part of the per curiam decision.
Observers of the court believed this decision, while unsigned, firmly asserted the current 5–4 split between conservative and liberal justices and signalled that abortion rights would become a critical issue for the current court, particularly ahead of the 2020 United States elections.
References
External links
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:Right to abortion under the United States Constitution
Category:History of women's rights in the United States
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:Planned Parenthood litigation
Category:Legal history of Indiana
Category:History of women in Indiana
"""

From "Boy Scouts of America v. Dale" ==> """
Boy Scouts of America et al. v. Dale, 530 U.S. 640 (2000), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court, decided on June 28, 2000, that held that the constitutional right to freedom of association allowed the Boy Scouts of America (BSA) to exclude a homosexual person from membership in spite of a state law requiring equal treatment of homosexuals in public accommodations.  More generally, the court ruled that a private organization such as the BSA may exclude a person from membership when "the presence of that person affects in a significant way the group's ability to advocate public or private viewpoints"..   In a five to four decision, the Supreme Court ruled that opposition to homosexuality is part of BSA's "expressive message" and that allowing homosexuals as adult leaders would interfere with that message.
The ruling reversed a decision of the New Jersey Supreme Court that had determined that New Jersey's public accommodations law required the BSA to readmit assistant Scoutmaster James Dale, who had come out and whom the BSA had expelled from the organization for that reason. Subsequently, the BSA lifted their bans on gay scouts and gay leaders in 2013 and 2015, respectively.
Background
left|thumb|Scoutmaster James Dale
The Boy Scouts of America is a private, non-profit organization engaged in instilling its system of values in young people. At the time of the case, it asserted that homosexuality was inconsistent with those values.
When Dale was a student at Rutgers University, he became co-president of the Lesbian/Gay student alliance. In July 1990, he attended a seminar on the health needs of lesbian and gay teenagers, where he was interviewed. An account of the interview was published in a local newspaper in which Dale was quoted as saying he was gay. BSA officials read the interview and expelled Dale from his position as assistant Scoutmaster of a New Jersey troop.Boy Scouts of America v. Dale, 530 U.S. 640, 697 (2000) Dale, an Eagle Scout, filed suit in the New Jersey Superior Court, alleging, among other things, that the Boy Scouts had violated the state statute prohibiting discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in places of public accommodation.N.J. Stat. Ann. 10:5–4, 10:5–5 (2000). The New Jersey Supreme Court ruled against the Boy Scouts, saying that they violated the State's public accommodations law by revoking Dale's membership based on his homosexuality. Among other rulings, the court (1) held that application of that law did not violate the Boy Scouts' First Amendment right of expressive association because Dale's inclusion would not significantly affect members' ability to carry out their purposes; (2) determined that New Jersey has a compelling interest in eliminating the destructive consequences of discrimination from society, and that its public accommodations law abridges no more speech than is necessary to accomplish its purpose; and (3) held that Dale's reinstatement did not compel the Boy Scouts to express any message.
The Boy Scouts appealed to the United States Supreme Court, which granted certiorari to determine whether the application of New Jersey's public accommodations law violated the First Amendment.
Counsel
thumb|Evan Wolfson, attorney for James Dale
Dale was represented by Evan Wolfson, an attorney and noted LGBT rights advocate. Wolfson has also worked on a number of high-profile cases seeking legal recognition of same-sex marriages.Baehr v. Miike Also representing Dale on a pro bono basis was the New York-based law firm Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton.
The Boy Scouts of America were represented by attorney George Davidson, a partner in the New York-based law firm Hughes Hubbard & Reed. Davidson is a former president of the Legal Aid Society and chair of the Federal Defenders of New York.
Decision
The Supreme Court decided 5–4 for the BSA on June 28, 2000.
Majority opinion
left|thumb|Chief Justice William Rehnquist Chief Justice William Rehnquist's majority opinion relied upon Roberts v. United States Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609, 622 (1984), in which the Supreme Court said: "Consequently, we have long understood as implicit in the right to engage in activities protected by the First Amendment a corresponding right to associate with others in pursuit of a wide variety of political, social, economic, educational, religious, and cultural ends." This right, the Roberts decision continues, is crucial in preventing the majority from imposing its views on groups that would rather express other, perhaps unpopular, ideas. Government actions that may unconstitutionally burden this freedom may take many forms, one of which is "intrusion into the internal structure or affairs of an association" like a "regulation that forces the group to accept members it does not desire". Forcing a group to accept certain members may impair the ability of the group to express those views, and only those views, that it intends to express. Thus, "freedom of association ... plainly presupposes a freedom not to associate."
However, to determine whether a group is protected by the First Amendment's expressive associational right, it must first be determined whether the group engages in "expressive association." After reviewing the Scout Oath and Scout Law the court decided that the general mission of the Boy Scouts is clear—it is "to instill values in young people".530 U.S. at 650. The Boy Scouts seek to instill these values by having its adult leaders spend time with the youth members, instructing and engaging them in activities like camping, fishing, etc. During the time spent with the youth members, the Scoutmasters and assistant Scoutmasters inculcate them with the Boy Scouts' values—both expressly and by example. An association that seeks to transmit such a system of values engages in expressive activity.
 First, associations do not have to associate for the "purpose" of disseminating a certain message in order to be entitled to the protections of the First Amendment. An association must merely engage in expressive activity that could be impaired in order to be entitled to protection.
 Second, even if the Boy Scouts discourages Scout leaders from disseminating views on sexual issues, the First Amendment protects the Boy Scouts' method of expression. If the Boy Scouts wishes Scout leaders to avoid questions of sexuality and teach only by example, this fact does not negate the sincerity of its belief discussed above.
 Regarding whether the Boy Scouts as a whole had an expressive policy against homosexuality, the Court gave deference to the organization's own assertions of the nature of its expressions, as well as what would impair them. The Boy Scouts asserts that it "teach[es] that homosexual conduct is not morally straight", and that it does "not want to promote homosexual conduct as a legitimate form of behavior".530 U.S. at 653. While the policy may not represent the views of all Boy Scouts, the First Amendment "does not require that every member of a group agree on every issue in order for the group's policy to be expressive association."530 U.S. at 655. The Court deemed it sufficient that the Boy Scouts had taken an official position with respect to same-sex relationships. The presence of an openly gay activist in an assistant Scoutmaster's uniform sends a distinctly different message from the presence of a heterosexual assistant Scoutmaster who is on record as disagreeing with Boy Scouts policy. The Boy Scouts has a First Amendment right to choose to send one message but not the other. The fact that the organization does not trumpet its views from the housetops, or that it tolerates dissent within its ranks, does not mean that its views receive no First Amendment protection.530 U.S. at 655–56.
The decision concluded:
Dissenting opinion
thumb|Justice John Paul Stevens
Justice Stevens wrote a dissent in which Justices Souter, Ginsburg, and Breyer joined.530 U.S. at 663. He observed that "every state law prohibiting discrimination is designed to replace prejudice with principle."530 U.S. at 664. Justice Brandeis had observed in his dissent from New State Ice Company v. Liebmann (1932) that it "is one of the happy incidents of the federal system that a single courageous State may, if its citizens choose, serve as a laboratory; and try novel social and economic experiments without risk to the rest of the country". In Stevens' opinion, the Court's decision interfered with New Jersey's experiment.
Stevens' first point was that the Boy Scouts' ban on gay members did not follow from its founding principles. The Boy Scouts sought to instill "values" in young people, "to prepare them to make ethical choices over their lifetime in achieving their full potential".530 U.S. at 666. The Scout Oath and the Scout Law, which set forth the Scouts' central tenets, assist in this goal. One of these tenets is that a Scout is "morally straight". Another is that a Scout is "clean". As these terms were defined in the Scout Handbook, Stevens said, "it is plain as the light of day that neither one of these principles—'morally straight' and 'clean'—says the slightest thing about homosexuality. Indeed, neither term in the Boy Scouts' Law and Oath expresses any position whatsoever on sexual matters."530 U.S. at 668–69.
What guidance the Boy Scouts gave to the adult leaders that have direct contact with the Scouts themselves urged those leaders to avoid discussing sexual matters. "Scouts... are directed to receive their sex education at home or in school, but not from the organization." Scoutmasters, in turn, are told to direct "curious adolescents" to their family, religious leaders, doctors, or other professionals. The Boy Scouts had gone so far as to devise specific guidelines for Scoutmasters:
 Do not advise Scouts about sexual matters, because it is outside the expertise and comfort level of most Scoutmasters.
 If a Scout brings specific questions to his Scoutmaster, the Scoutmaster should answer within his comfort level, remembering that a "boy who appears to be asking about sexual intercourse... may really only be worried about pimples".
 Boys with "sexual problems" should be referred to an appropriate professional.530 U.S. at 669–70.
Stevens ended his dissent by noting that serious and "ancient" prejudices facing homosexuals could be aggravated by the "creation of a constitutional shield".530 U.S. at 699–700.
See also
 List of LGBT-related cases in the United States Supreme Court
 References 
External links
Category:2000 in LGBT history
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Boy Scouts of America litigation
Category:Discrimination against LGBT people in the United States
Category:Supreme Court of New Jersey
Category:United States freedom of association case law
Category:United States LGBT rights case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Legal history of New Jersey
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Boyd v. United States" ==> """
Boyd v. United States, 116 U.S. 616 (1886), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court, in which the Court held that “a search and seizure [was] equivalent [to] a compulsory production of a man's private papers” and that the search was “an 'unreasonable search and seizure' within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment.”116 U.S. 616, 634–35.
 Background
Thirty-five cases of plate glass were seized at the Port of New York for not paying import duties. To prove the case, the government compelled E.A. Boyd & Sons to produce their invoice from the Union Plate Glass Company of Liverpool, England. Boyd complied but claimed the order was a form of self-incrimination.
 Decision 
In the published opinion, after citing Lord Camden's judgment in Entick v Carrington, 19 How. St. Tr. 1029, Justice Bradley said (630):
Although not expressly overruled, some aspects of the Supreme Court's opinion in Boyd have been limited or negated by subsequent Supreme Court decisions. For example, in the case of Fisher v. United States in 1976, the Supreme Court stated:
The proposition that the Fifth Amendment prevents compelled production of documents over objection that such production might incriminate stems from Boyd v. United States, 116 U.S. 616 (1886)..... Among its several pronouncements, Boyd was understood to declare that the seizure, under warrant or otherwise, of any purely evidentiary materials violated the Fourth Amendment and that the Fifth Amendment rendered these seized materials inadmissible. .... Several of Boyd's express or implicit declarations have not stood the test of time. The application of the Fourth Amendment to subpoenas was limited by Hale v. Henkel, 201 U.S. 43 (1906), and more recent cases. See, e. g., Oklahoma Press Pub. Co. v. Walling, 327 U.S. 186 (1946). Purely evidentiary (but "nontestimonial") materials, as well as contraband and fruits and instrumentalities of crime, may now be searched for and seized under proper circumstances, .... Also, any notion that "testimonial" evidence may never be seized and used in evidence is inconsistent with Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347 (1967); Osborn v. United States, 385 U.S. 323 (1966); and Berger v. New York, 388 U.S. 41 (1967), approving the seizure under appropriate circumstances of conversations of a person suspected of crime. See also Marron v. United States, 275 U.S. 192 (1927)...... It is also clear that the Fifth Amendment does not independently proscribe the compelled production of every sort of incriminating evidence but applies only when the accused is compelled to make a testimonial communication that is incriminating.....Fisher v. United States, 425 U.S. 391 (1976).
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 116
Mere evidence rule
Exclusionary rule
Griswold v. Connecticut (1965) (also involving "the privacies of life")
Andresen v. Maryland (1976)
Payton v. New York (1980) (citing Boyd)
United States v. Hubbell (2000)
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1886 in United States case law
Category:United States grand jury case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Port of New York and New Jersey
"""

From "Boyer v. Boyer" ==> """
Boyer v. Boyer, 113 U.S. 689 (1885), was a suit in error brought in a state court of Pennsylvania for an injunction restraining the commissioners of Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania from levying a county tax for the year 1883 upon certain shares in the Pennsylvania National Bank, an association organized under the National Banking Act. The suit proceeds upon the ground that such levy violates the act of Congress prescribing conditions upon state taxation of national bank shares in this, that "other moneyed capital in the hands of individual citizens" of that county is exempted by the laws of Pennsylvania from such taxation. A demurrer to the bill was sustained and the suit was dismissed. Upon appeal to the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania, that judgment was affirmed on the ground that the laws of the state under which the defendants sought to justify the taxation were not repugnant to the act of Congress.Boyer v. Boyer, 113 U.S. 689 (1885) Justia.com
Ruling
Construction of the act
The Court has had occasion to examine the provisions of the National Banking Act in several other cases recently determined; and from these cases may be deduced certain rules for the construction of that act:
That the words "at a greater rate than is assessed upon other moneyed capital in the hands of individual citizens" refer to the entire process of assessment, which, in the case of National bank shares, includes both their valuation and the rate of percentage on such valuation; consequently, that the act of Congress is violated if, in connection with a fixed percentage applicable to the valuation alike of national bank shares and of other moneyed investments or capital, the state law establishes or permits a mode of assessment by which such shares are valued higher in proportion to their real value than is other moneyed capital.
That a state law which permits individual citizens to deduct their just debts from the valuation of their personal property of every kind other than national bank shares, or which permits the taxpayer to deduct from the sum of his credits, money at interest or other demands to the extent of his bona fide indebtedness, leaving the remainder to be taxed, while it denies the same right of deduction from the cash value of bank shares operates to tax the latter at a greater rate than other moneyed capital.
These decisions show that in whatever form the question has arisen, this Court has steadily kept in view the intention of Congress not to permit any substantial discrimination in favor of moneyed capital in the hands of individual citizens as against capital invested in the shares of national banks. In People v. Weaver, the Court said:
As Congress was conferring a power on the states which they would not otherwise have had, to tax these shares, it undertook to impose a restriction on the exercise of that power, manifestly designed to prevent taxation which should discriminate against that class of property as compared with other moneyed capital. In permitting the states to tax these shares, it was foreseen that the states might be disposed to tax the capital invested in these banks oppressively. This might have been prevented by fixing limit on the amount. But Congress, with due regard to the dignity of the states and with a desire to interfere only so far as was necessary to protect the banks from anything beyond their equal share of the public burdens, said you may tax the real estate of the banks as other real estate is bank as the personal property of the taxed, and you may tax the shares of the bank as the personal property of the owner, to the same extent you tax other moneyed capital invested in your state. It was conceived that by this qualification of the power of taxation equality would be secured and injustice prevented.
Laws of Pennsylvania
The court then considered whether the laws of Pennsylvania, under which defendants propose to levy a tax for county purposes upon the plaintiff's shares of stock, are open to the objection that they violate the principle of equality which the act of Congress intended to establish between capital invested in such shares and other moneyed capital. By a law of that state passed March 31, 1870—upon which the defense mainly rests—it is provided
That all the shares of national banks, located within this state, and of banks and savings institutions incorporated by this state, shall be taxable for state purposes at the rate of three mills [subsequently four] per annum upon the assessed value thereof, and for county, school, municipal, and local purposes at the same rate as now is or may hereafter be assessed and imposed upon other moneyed capital in the hands of individual citizens of this state.
Act of June 10, 1881
This brought the court to the Act of June 10, 1881, whereby mortgages, moneys owing by solvent debtors, whether by promissory note, penal or single bill, bond or judgment, articles of agreement and accounts bearing interest, except notes or bills for work and labor done, obligations to banks for money loaned, bank notes, shares of stock in banks, banking or saving institutions or companies, then or thereafter incorporated under any law of Pennsylvania, public loans or stocks except those issued by that state or the United States, money loaned or invested in any other state, and all other moneyed capital in the hands of individual citizens of that state are declared "to be, and are hereby, taxable for state purposes at the rate of four mills on the dollar of the value thereof annually, provided that all mortgages, judgments, and recognizances whatsoever, and all moneys due or owing upon articles of agreement for the sale of real estate, shall, after the passage of this act, be exempt from all taxation except for state purposes, provided the provisions of this act shall not apply to building and loan associations," the money loaned by them being subjected to the same tax as money loaned by individuals. By the second section of the same act, all corporations paying interest on a loan or loans, taxable for state purposes, whether secured by bond, mortgage, recognizance, or otherwise, are required to report to the Auditor General annually the amount of such indebtedness owned by residents of Pennsylvania, and to pay into the state treasury four mills upon every dollar of such indebtedness, such tax to be deducted by the corporation paying it from the interest on such indebtedness, whereupon "such indebtedness, whether secured by bond, mortgage, judgment, or otherwise, shall be exempt from other taxation in the hands of the holders thereof." Laws Penn. 1881, p. 99.
According to the high court:
Unless we greatly misapprehend the effect of this legislation, a very large amount of property, made subject by the act of 1844 to taxation for both state and county purposes, has since been relieved from the burdens of county taxation, while the imposition by the act of 1870 upon national bank shares of local taxation at the same rate as was at the latter date, or has been since, imposed upon other moneyed capital in the hands of individual citizens of the state, leaves such shares subject to taxation as provided in the act of 1844. The burden of county taxation imposed by the latter act has at all events been removed from all bonds or certificates of loan issued by any railroad company incorporated by the state, from shares of stock in the hands of stockholders of any institution or company of the state which, in its corporate capacity, is liable to pay a tax into the state treasury under the act of 1859; from mortgages, judgments, and recognizances of every kind; from moneys due or owing upon articles of agreement for the sale of real estate; from all loans, however made, by corporations, which are taxable for state purposes, when such corporations pay into the state treasury the required tax on such indebtedness.
As the present case comes before us upon demurrer to the bill, we have excepting the allegations of the latter, no means of determining the value of the capital thus exempted from the county taxation which is imposed upon capital invested in national bank shares. After referring to the acts of 1870 and 1881, the bill charges:
"That for the year 1881, as is shown by the public report and by the books of the Auditor General of Pennsylvania, the sum of $1,692,938.66 was paid into the state treasury as tax upon the capital stock of such corporations by them in their corporate capacity, which sum of money was paid upon a gross capital stock of the corporations paying the same of the value, approximately stated, of 564 millions of dollars."
"That it appears, as is shown by the books and published report of the Secretary of Internal Affairs for the year 1881, that the total valuation throughout the state for that year of"
"all mortgages, money owing by solvent debtors, whether by promissory note, penal or single bill, bond, or judgment, also all articles of agreement and accounts bearing interest, owned or possessed by any person or persons whatsoever (except notes or bills for work or labor done, and all obligations given to banks for money loaned and bank notes), and all public loans or stocks whatsoever except those issued by this state or the United States, and all moneys loaned or invested on interest in any other state, and all other moneyed capital in the hands of individual citizens of the state," "amounts to $74,931,765." "That for the same year, as is shown by the books and published reports of the Auditor General, a tax was paid into the state treasury upon corporation and municipal loans, not probably included in the foregoing sum, upon an aggregate valuation of $51,404,162.50."
"That by the provisions of section 1 of the Act of June 10, 1881 (P.L. 99), all mortgages, judgments, and recognizances whatsoever, and all moneys due or owing upon articles of agreement for the sale of real estate, were exempt from all taxation except for state purposes."
"That section 2 of said act of 1881 exempts from local taxation in the hands of the holders thereof all loans issued by corporations paying interest thereon where such corporations pay into the state treasury the state tax of four mills on each dollar thereof, and by Act of May 1, 1854 (P.L. 535),"
"all bonds or certificates of indebtedness of any railroad company incorporated by this commonwealth be, and the same shall be, liable to taxation for state purposes only."
"That the total paid-in capital of all the state banks and savings institutions in said commonwealth, other than national banks, as appears by the books and published reports of the Auditor General for the year 1881, is $7,161,740.68, while the total paid-in capital of the national banks located within said state in said year amounted to $57,452,051."
The demurrer, of course, admits these allegations of fact to be true. Their materiality is not affected by the circumstance that they are stated to appear, also, upon the books and published reports of the Auditor General and the Secretary of Internal Affairs of Pennsylvania. Upon such facts and in view of the revenue laws of the state, it seems difficult to avoid the conclusion that in respect of county taxation of national bank shares, there has been and is such a discrimination in favor of other moneyed capital against capital invested in such shares as is not consistent with the legislation of Congress. The exemptions in favor of other moneyed capital appear to be of such a substantial character in amount as to take the present case out of the operation of the rule that it is not absolute equality that is contemplated by the act of Congress; a rule which rests upon the ground that exact uniformity or equality of taxation cannot, in the nature of things, be expected or attained under any system. But as substantial equality is attainable and is required by the supreme law of the land in respect of state taxation of national bank shares when the inequality is so palpable as to show that the discrimination against capital invested in such shares is serious, the courts have no discretion but to interfere.
The Supreme Court of Pennsylvania, after referring to Hepburn v. School Directors as having involved the same question that is now presented and observing that the exemption is here as there only partial, says: "Not only is some other moneyed capital of a miscellaneous character taxable for local purposes, but all such capital of the same character as that which you desire to exempt -- that is to say, the shares of state banks and savings institutions."
Again: "The General Assembly has authorized the taxation of the shares of these banks in no other manner and at no higher rate than other capital of a similar character."
If by this language it is meant that an illegal discrimination against capital invested in national bank shares cannot exist where no higher rate or heavier burden of taxation is imposed upon them than upon capital invested in state bank shares or in state savings institutions, we have to say that such is not a proper construction of the act of Congress. Capital invested in national bank shares was intended to be placed upon the same footing of substantial equality in respect of taxation by state authority as the state establishes for other moneyed capital in the hands of individual citizens, however invested, whether in state bank shares or otherwise. As the act of Congress does not fix a definite limit as to percentage of value beyond which the states may not tax national bank shares, cases will arise in which it will be difficult to determine whether the exemption of a particular part of moneyed capital in individual hands is so serious or material as to infringe the rule of substantial equality. But unless we have failed to comprehend the scope and effect of the taxing laws of Pennsylvania, and unless the allegations of the bill be untrue, the present case is not of that class.
Our attention is called by counsel for the defendants to the fact that Pennsylvania derives probably her principal revenues from railroads, and therefore has good reasons to look to her interests as a commonwealth in respect to such improvements. To this fact he refers the legislation which makes railroad securities liable to taxation for state purposes only, and exempts them from local taxation. Upon like grounds, he defends the exemptions made, in respect of local taxation, in favor of the bonds and shares of other corporations that pay an annual tax into the state treasury. It is quite sufficient in respect of such matters to say that this Court has no function to deal with the considerations of public policy which control that commonwealth in the assessment of property for purposes of revenue. We have no duty beyond that of ascertaining the intention of Congress in its legislation permitting the several states to tax the shares of institutions organized under national authority for the purpose of providing a national currency secured by United States bonds. If the principle of substantial equality of taxation under state authority, as between capital so invested and other moneyed capital in the hands of individual citizens, however invested, operates to disturb the peculiar policy of some of the states in respect of revenue derived from taxation, the remedy therefor is with another department of the government, and does not belong to this Court.
We are of opinion that upon the allegations of the bill, the defendants should have been put to their answer. The facts may then disclose a case quite different from that made by the bill. What we have said relates to the case as now presented.
The judgment was therefore reversed and the cause remanded for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:History of Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania
Category:Legal history of Pennsylvania
Category:1885 in Pennsylvania
"""

From "Boykin v. Alabama" ==> """
Boykin v. Alabama, 395 U.S. 238 (1969), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court determined that when a defendant enters into a plea bargain, they waive their Sixth Amendment right to a trial by jury. A defendant may not waive this Constitutional right unless he does so knowingly, voluntarily and intelligently. The defendant was an African-American charged with robbery, which carried a death sentence in Alabama at the time. He pled guilty.
Holdings
The Court first held that it had jurisdiction to review the voluntary character of the plea, given the ongoing state court review. The case was already before the state court under Alabama's automatic appeal statute. That court was reviewing the trial judge's acceptance of petitioner's guilty plea, absent an affirmative showing that the plea was intelligent and voluntary.
The Court then held that a waiver of the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination and the right to trial by jury cannot be presumed from a silent record. 
The Court then held that acceptance of the petitioner's guilty plea in the case was a reversible error since the record failed to disclose that the petitioner appropriately entered his plea of guilty.
References
External links
Robert L. Farb, Boykin v. Alabama and Use of Invalid Guilty Pleas
 Marlee Adams Snowdon, "The Boykin-Tahl Requirement", 22 Pepp. L. Rev. 273 (1994)
 Text of Boykin v. Alabama (1969) case brief
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1969 in United States case law
"""

From "Boyle v. United States" ==> """
Boyle v. United States, 556 U.S. 938 (2009), is a decision by the United States Supreme Court involving what constitutes an "enterprise" under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO). The Court, in a 7-2 opinion, held that any group convened to carry out a crime meets the definition of an enterprise, even if it was only created for that purpose.
Background
In the 1990s, Edmund Boyle was a member of a crew of bank robbers who were alleged to have ties to New York's Gambino crime family. The group, known as the "Night Drop Crew", exploited poorly secured night deposit boxes and are believed to have conducted more than thirty robberies. One news report estimated that Boyle and his crew eventually stole more than $1 million. Targeting banks mostly in the New York City area, each member of the crew had assigned tasks; Boyle's job was to steal the getaway car. In 2003, Boyle and his associates were indictedBoyle, 556 U.S. 938 (2009), section I A for the 1994 robbery of a branch of the National Westminster Bank in Brooklyn.
Procedural history
Boyle was charged with participation in the conduct of the affairs of an enterprise through a pattern of racketeering activity, conspiracy to commit that offense, conspiracy to commit bank burglary, and nine counts of bank burglary and attempted bank burglary. After a 2005 trial before Judge Sterling Johnson, Jr. of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York, a jury found Boyle guilty of eleven of the twelve counts. He was sentenced to 151 months' imprisonment.
Boyle appealed the conviction on the racketeering charge, arguing that Judge Johnson improperly instructed the jury on the definition of an "enterprise" as defined in the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO). The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit denied the appeal in 2007.283 Fed. Appx. 825 (2007). Boyle appealed to the Supreme Court, which granted certiorari the following year.Boyle, 556 U.S. 938 (2009), section I B
Discussion
Issue
Must an association-in-fact enterprise have an ascertainable structure beyond that inherent in the pattern of racketeering activity in which it engages?
Arguments
The RICO Act makes it illegal to be a part of an enterprise engaged in racketeering, but does not completely define the term "enterprise". In a 1981 case, United States v. Turkette, the Court held that "an enterprise includes any union or group of individuals associated in fact".Boyle, 556 U.S. 938 (2009), section II A Boyle's attorneys argued that to be considered an enterprise, a group needed some form of clear organization or hierarchy, which they claimed the Night Drop Crew lacked.Boyle, 556 U.S. 938 (2009), section II C
Opinion of the Court
In a 7–2 decision, Justice Samuel Alito, writing for the majority, held that the jury instructions were correct, and that "proof of a pattern of racketeering activity may be sufficient in a particular case to permit a jury to infer the existence of an association-in-fact enterprise."Boyle, 556 U.S. 938 (2009), section IV Specifically, they held that the structural components the petitioner proposed were not required by the statute. "We see no basis in the language of RICO for the structural requirements that petitioner asks us to recognize. As we said in Turkette, an association-in-fact enterprise is simply a continuing unit that functions with a common purpose." Because they found the language of the statute to be unambiguous, the Court did not consider arguments about the legislative history.Boyle, 556 U.S. 938 (2009), section III B
Stevens's dissent
Justice John Paul Stevens, joined by Justice Stephen Breyer, dissented. Stevens wrote that, based on prior statutes and on the ordinary usage of the word, Congress intended "enterprise" to be more than a group of people. The term meant, Stevens believed, "to refer only to business-like entities that have an existence apart from the predicate acts committed by their employees or associates." The Court's interpretation, he wrote, "will allow juries to infer the existence of an enterprise in every case involving a pattern of racketeering activity undertaken by two or more associates."Boyle, 556 U.S. 938 (2009), dissent, section II
Aftermath
A year after the Supreme Court rejected his appeals, Boyle was convicted in an unrelated charge of murder, stemming from a 1998 mob killing in Staten Island. The conviction added twenty years to his jail sentence.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 556
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2009 in United States case law
"""

From "Boynton v. Virginia" ==> """
Boynton v. Virginia, 364 U.S. 454 (1960), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court..   The case overturned a judgment convicting an African American law student for trespassing by being in a restaurant in a bus terminal which was "whites only".  It held that racial segregation in public transportation was illegal because such segregation violated the Interstate Commerce Act, which broadly forbade discrimination in interstate passenger transportation. It moreover held that bus transportation was sufficiently related to interstate commerce to allow the United States federal government to regulate it to forbid racial discrimination in the industry.
Thurgood Marshall argued the case for Boynton. The majority opinion was written by Justice Hugo Black.
The significance of Boynton was not located in its holding since it managed to avoid deciding any Constitutional questions in its decision, and its expansive reading of Federal powers regarding interstate commerce was also well established by the time of the decision. Its significance is that its outlawing of racial segregation in public transportation led directly to a movement called the Freedom Rides, in which African Americans and whites together rode various forms of public transportation in the South to challenge local laws or customs that enforced segregation.  The Freedom Rides, and the violent reactions they provoked, prompted Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy to confront the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) with its failure to enforce a bus desegregation ruling it had handed down in 1955, Sarah Keys v. Carolina Coach Company, 64 MCC 769 (1955) as well as the companion train desegregation case, NAACP v. St. Louis-Santa Fe Railway Company, 297 ICC 335 (1955). By presenting the Commission with its own rulings in a May 29, 1961 petition, Kennedy was able to prompt it to do what it had promised in 1955, five years before the Boynton ruling was handed down, and six years before the Freedom Riders set out to test Boynton across the Deep South. On September 22, 1961, the ICC issued regulations which implemented its 1955 Keys and NAACP rulings, as well as the Supreme Court's ruling in Boynton, and on November 1 those regulations went into effect, effectively ending Jim Crow in public transportation.
Boynton's trip and arrest
thumb|left|Bruce Boynton was arrested at the Trailways Station, 822 E. Broad St., Richmond, Virginia in late 1958 (Library of Virginia photo, 1960)
In the winter of 1958, Bruce Boynton was a student at Howard University School of Law in Washington, D.C. While travelling on a Trailways bus for a holiday trip to his home in Selma, Alabama, his bus arrived at the Trailways station on East Broad Street in Richmond, Virginia. Passengers disembarked for a 40-minute layover. Unlike other black passengers, Boynton went into a "whites only" restaurant, where he ordered a cheeseburger and a cup of hot tea. He never had problems in Northern states, but he grew up in Selma and was familiar with segregation of restaurants and movie theaters. It was not his intent to test any laws in the South that night.
thumb|left|Future justice Thurgood Marshall argued the case for Boynton in front of the U.S. Supreme Court (1957 photo)
Ordered to move to the "black" section and knowing that his arrest was likely, Boynton pointed out to authorities that he was an American citizen with federal rights and, thus, was entitled to his burger and tea. Handcuffed and arrested on a misdemeanor trespass charge, he spent the night in jail and was fined $10 in a Richmond municipal court.
 Boynton in the Virginia courts 
In the Richmond Police Court, Boynton was convicted of violating a state statute making it a misdemeanor for any person "without authority of law" to remain upon the premises of another after having been forbidden to do so. His conviction was sustained in Richmond's Hustings Court.
On appeal, he contended that his conviction violated the Interstate Commerce Act and the Equal Protection, Due Process and Commerce Clauses of the Federal Constitution; but his conviction was sustained by the Supreme Court of Virginia. 
 Boynton's Federal appeal 
Future U.S. Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall argued Boynton's case on appeal in the Federal Courts. On petition for certiorari to the Supreme Court, he raised only the constitutional questions.
Supreme Court Ruling
1. Notwithstanding the fact that the petition for certiorari presented only the constitutional questions this Court will consider the statutory issue, which involves essentially the same problem—racial discrimination in interstate commerce. P. 364 U. S. 457.
2. Under § 216(d) of the Interstate Commerce Act, which forbids any interstate common carrier by motor vehicle to subject any person to unjust discrimination, petitioner had a federal right to remain in the white portion of the restaurant, he was there "under authority of law", and it was error to affirm his conviction. Pp. 364 U. S. 457–463.
(a) When a bus carrier has volunteered to make terminal and restaurant facilities and services available to its interstate passengers as a regular part of their transportation, and the terminal and restaurant have acquiesced and cooperated in this undertaking, the terminal and restaurant must perform these services without discriminations prohibited by the Act. Pp. 364 U. S. 457–461.
(b) Although the courts below made no findings of fact, the evidence in this case shows such a situation here. Pp. 364 U. S. 461–463.
Reversed.
Page 364 U. S. 455
MR. JUSTICE BLACK delivered the opinion of the Court.
The basic question presented in this case is whether an interstate bus passenger is denied a federal statutory or constitutional right when a restaurant in a bus terminal used by the carrier along its route discriminates in serving food to the passenger solely because of his color.
Petitioner, a Negro law student, bought a Trailways bus ticket from Washington, D.C., to Montgomery, Alabama. He boarded a bus at 8 p.m. which arrived at Richmond, Virginia, about 10:40 p.m. When the bus pulled up at the Richmond "Trailways Bus Terminal", the bus driver announced a forty-minute stopover there. Petitioner got off the bus and went into the bus terminal to get something to eat. In the station, he found a restaurant in which one part was used to serve white people and one to serve Negroes. Disregarding this division, petitioner sat down on a stool in the white section. A waitress asked him to move over to the other section where there were "facilities" to serve colored people. Petitioner told her he was an interstate bus passenger, refused to move, and ordered a sandwich and tea. The waitress then brought the Assistant Manager, who "instructed" petitioner to "leave the white portion of the restaurant and advised him he could be served in the colored portion." Upon petitioner's refusal to leave, an officer was called and petitioner was arrested and later tried, convicted and fined ten dollars in the Police Justice's Court of Richmond on a charge that he "[u]nlawfully did remain on the premises of the Bus Terminal Restaurant of Richmond, Inc. after having been forbidden to do so" by the Assistant Manager. (Emphasis supplied.) The charge was based on § 18-225 of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended (1958), which provides in part:
"If any person shall without authority of law go upon or remain upon the lands or premises of another, after having been forbidden to do so by the owner, lessee, custodian or other person lawfully in charge of such land, . . . he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars or by confinement in jail not exceeding thirty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 364
References
Further reading
 Barnes, Catherine A. Journey from Jim Crow: The Desegregation of Southern Transit, Columbia University Press, 1983.
 Arsenault, Raymond. Freedom Riders: 1961 and the Struggle for Racial Justice, Oxford University Press, 2006.
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States racial desegregation case law
Category:1960 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:African-American history of Virginia
Category:Legal history of Virginia
Category:History of Richmond, Virginia
Category:Trailways Transportation System
"""

From "BP America Production Co. v. Burton" ==> """
BP America Production Co. v. Burton, 549 U.S. 84 (2006), was a United States Supreme Court case about whether a statute of limitations on government actions for contract claims applies to actions by a federal administrative agency to recover royalties on federal oil and gas leases.  After two members recused themselves, the court ruled unanimously that it does not apply, in an opinion by Justice Samuel Alito.
Legal background
The Mineral Leasing Act of 1920 (MLA) authorizes the Department of the Interior to lease public lands to private parties for the production of oil and gas.  In 1982, Congress enacted the Federal Oil and Gas Royalty Management Act (FOGRMA) to address inadequacies with the system of accounting for royalties due on oil and gas produced from lease sites. FOGRMA ordered the Secretary of the Interior to audit those leases and collect what was owed the government. The Secretary, in turn, has assigned these duties to the Department of the Interior's Minerals Management Service (MMS).The named party, Rejane Burton, was the Acting Assistant Secretary, Land and Minerals Management.
If MMS concludes that the lessee owes royalties greater than what it has paid, MMS issues an order requiring payment of the amount due.  There is no dispute that a lawsuit in court to recover royalties owed is covered by a general six-year statute of limitations for Government contract actions.
Facts
The petitioner, BP America Production Co., holds gas leases for lands in New Mexico’s and Colorado's San Juan Basin.  BP’s predecessor, Amoco Production Co., first entered into these leases nearly fifty years ago, and these leases require the payment of a royalty.  For years, Amoco calculated the royalty as a percentage of the value of the gas as of the moment it was produced at the well.  In 1996, MMS sent lessees a letter directing that royalties should be calculated based not on the value of the gas at the well, but on the value of the gas after it was treated to meet the quality requirements for introduction into the Nation’s mainline pipelines.  Therefore, MMS in 1997 ordered payment of $32,264,570 in additional royalties (and interest) for the period from January 1989 through December 1996 to cover the difference.MMS Press Release , December 7, 2006
Procedural history
Amoco appealed the order, disputing the new interpretation of its royalty obligations and arguing that the payment order was in any event barred in part by the six-year statute of limitations.  The Assistant Secretary of the Interior denied the appeal and ruled that the statute of limitations was inapplicable.
Amoco sought review by the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, which agreed with the Assistant Secretary that the statute of limitations did not apply.  The D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the district court's ruling.  The Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve a circuit split between the D.C. Circuit and the Tenth Circuit.See 
Decision
Issue
Does the six-year statute of limitations for government actions for monetary damages in (a) govern the issuance of administrative payment orders, as opposed to the government's filing of a complaint in court?
Parties' arguments
BP contended that their broader interpretation of the statutory term "action" was supported by the reference to "every action for money damages" founded upon "any contract."  They also argued that an MMS letter or payment order constituted a "complaint".
The respondent relied on the language of the statute to argue that "action" meant an action in court, not an administrative proceeding.
Opinion of the Court
The court unanimously held that the statute of limitations did not apply to administrative actions.  "Nothing in the language of § 2415(a) suggests that Congress intended these terms to apply more broadly to administrative proceedings. On the contrary, § 2415(a) distinguishes between judicial and administrative proceedings. Section 2415(a) provides that an 'action' must commence 'within one year after final decisions have been rendered in applicable administrative proceedings.' Thus, Congress knew how to identify administrative proceedings and manifestly had two separate concepts in mind when it enacted § 2415(a)."
Justice Alito further states that the situation is subject to the traditional rule quod nullum tempus occurrit regi—time does not run against the King.  "A corollary of this rule is that when the sovereign elects to subject itself to a statute of limitations, the sovereign is given the benefit of the doubt if the scope of the statute is ambiguous."
Recusals
Chief Justice Roberts and Justice Breyer did not participate in the decision.  According to the Legal Times, "Roberts had ruled in the case in his former position as judge on the D.C. Circuit, and Breyer reported in his 2005 financial disclosure form that he owned between $15,001 and $50,000 in BP Amoco stock."Recusal Report, Legal Times January 26, 2007.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 549
List of United States Supreme Court cases
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:BP litigation
"""

From "BP P.L.C. v. Mayor and City Council of Baltimore" ==> """
BP P.L.C. v. Mayor and City Council of Baltimore, 593 U.S. ___ (2021), was a case in the United States Supreme Court dealing with matters of jurisdiction of various climate change lawsuits in the United States judicial system.
Background
Around 2017, multiple cities in the United States began filing lawsuits against oil & gas companies, asserting their worldwide activities in mining and production of petroleum products were responsible for climate change effects in their cities and states. The lawsuits broadly sought financial compensation from these companies under their individual state laws to recuperate for costs in fighting changes that arose from climate change, such as offsetting the effects of rising sea levels. Some of the early cases, such as those filed in California and New York City, were first filed in the federal court system; these cases were dismissed early as at the federal level, case law persists that federal laws like the Clear Air Act superseded state laws, and it would be up to the legislative and executive branches to take action against the oil companies under these laws, rather that state and local government.
The city of Baltimore, Maryland, filed its suit against 26 oil companies in July 2018, asserting that these companies contributed to 15 percent of the carbon dioxide emissions between 1965 and 2015 that led to the world's climate change that was threatening its shorelines. Instead of in federal court, the city filed it within the Maryland state courts, which legal experts believed was a viable alternative to the federal court, and would likely be more favorable to the city. This was not the only such climate change lawsuit filed at the state level against the oil companies, and as with these other suits, the defendants requested change of venue to the federal courts under the federal-officer removal statute under the Removal Clarification Act at , since they operated closely with the federal government. The case was moved to United States District Court for the District of Maryland.
The city subsequently challenged the removal by citing the lack of subject-matter jurisdiction that the federal court had over state laws, which Judge Ellen Hollander agreed to, ordering the case back to the state court. As the standard for removal puts the onus on the party seeking removal, Judge Hollander rejected the reasons given by the oil companies for keeping the case at the federal level. The defendants appealed to the Fourth Circuit on Hollander's order, but the Fourth Circuit upheld it, ruling that the federal-officer exemption did not apply to the companies despite their close-workings with the federal government.
Supreme Court
The Fourth Circuit's decision furthered a circuit split with how appellate courts can review challenges to the federal-officer removal statute. The Fourth Circuit's decision was shared by seven other circuits in which the appellate court can only look at the circumstances on the removal jurisdiction, while the Seventh Circuit had recently joined the opinion of the Fourth and Fifth Circuit's view in which appellate courts can review other relevant matters to the case to make their determination. The oil companies had argued that if their case was handled under the Seventh Circuit, they would have been able to maintain the federal jurisdiction based on the argument that federal laws supersede state laws.
The oil companies petitioned to the Supreme Court to resolve the circuit split with regards to the federal-officer removal statute. The Court certified the petition in October 2020. Justice Samuel Alito, who owns stock in several of the oil companies, had recused himself from the case. Justice Amy Coney Barrett, whose father had worked for the Shell Oil Company, one of the defendants in Baltimore's case, was asked to recuse herself from the case by several amicus brief submitters, as she had previously recused herself from similar cases involving Shell during her tenure at the Seventh Circuit, but she did not do so for this case.
Oral arguments were heard on January 19, 2021.
The Court issued its decision on May 17, 2021. In a 7–1 ruling, the Court vacated the Fourth Circuit's decision and remanded the case for further review. The majority opinion was written by Justice Neil Gorsuch and joined by all but Justice Sonia Sotomayor (and the aforementioned recused Justice Alito). The majority agreed with BP and other petitioning companied that the Fourth Circuit erred in considering all factors for review to deny the change of jurisdiction requested by the city, thus vacating their decision but otherwise not ruling on the merits of Baltimore's complaints related to the petitioners. Gorsuch in his option stated that the law in question "provides that ‘[a]n order remanding a case to the State court from which it was removed is not reviewable on appeal or otherwise, except that an order remanding a case to the State court from which it was removed pursuant to section 1442 or 1443 of this title shall be reviewable by appeal or otherwise.'" As the law itself was vague, Gorsuch continued that "In the end, all of the parties’ fencing about language Congress didn’t use persuades us of only one thing — that we are best served by focusing on the language it did employ."
Sotomayor wrote the dissent, stating her concern that the decision "will reward defendants for raising strained theories of removal".
By May 24, 2021, the Court subsequently granted review of three other similar cases in which a city or state had successfully changed jurisdiction in an environmental lawsuit, vacating the Circuit court rulings that allowed these changes to proceed on the basis of the BP opinion, and remanding these cases for further review.
References
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Climate change litigation
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:Government of Baltimore
Category:BP litigation
Category:2021 in the environment
"""

From "Braden v. United States" ==> """
Braden v. United States, 365 U.S. 431 (1961), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the conviction of the petitioner, Carl Braden, based on his refusal to answer questions posed to him by the House Un-American Activities Committee, did not violate his First Amendment rights and was constitutional.
Background
The House Un-American Activities Committee (also called HUAC) was a committee within the United States House of Representatives dedicated to identifying agents of Fascism or Communism, ideologies deemed "un-American". With the end of World War II and the rise of the Cold War, HUAC, now a standing committee, became more narrowly focused on Communist activities. While HUAC was a political asset to some of its members, its activities were highly controversial, to the point where former President Harry S. Truman called it the "most un-American thing in the country today"Stephen J. Whitfield. The Culture of the Cold War. The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996 in 1959. By 1975 it would be disbanded.
Despite the controversy, the HUAC was still very active in 1961, when it was investigating allegations of "Communist infiltration into basic industries in the South and Communist Party propaganda activities in the South".. Among the witnesses called in this investigation was Carl Braden. However, when Braden was questioned by the committee, he refused to answer, based on his assertion that the questions were not relevant to the committee, and that the questions also violated his First Amendment rights. He was then convicted under 2 U.S.C. § 192, which makes it a misdemeanor offence to refuse to answer "pertinent" questions posed by the committee.
Opinion of the Court
Braden's conviction was sustained and held that the conviction was based on his refusal to answer questions posed to him by the HUAC and did not violate his First Amendment rights and was therefore constitutional.
See also
 Wilkinson v. United States, 365 U.S. 399 (1961)
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1961 in United States case law
"""

From "Bradwell v. Illinois" ==> """
Bradwell v. State of Illinois, 83 U.S. (16 Wall.) 130 (1873), was a United States Supreme Court case that solidified the narrow reading of the Privileges or Immunities Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, and determined that the right to practice a profession was not among these privileges.. Brought by Myra Bradwell, the case is also notable for being an early 14th Amendment challenge to sex discrimination in the United States.
Background of the case
In 1869, Myra Bradwell passed the Illinois bar exam and applied for admission to the Illinois bar in accordance with a state statute that permitted any adult of good character and with sufficient training to be admitted to the practice of law. Because she was a woman, however, the Illinois Supreme Court denied her admission, noting that the "strife" of the bar would surely destroy femininity. The legal rationale was based on the common law doctrine of coverture which denied a married woman a legal existence apart from her husband. Bradwell appealed the decision to the United States Supreme Court, arguing that her right to practice law was protected by the Privileges or Immunities clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Decision
Majority opinion
The Supreme Court disagreed with Bradwell in an 8–1 ruling. It upheld the decision of the Illinois court and ruled that the Privileges or Immunities Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment did not include the right to practice a profession. Therefore, it was properly regulable by the states. The majority opinion avoided lengthy discussion of that point by referring to the discussion of privileges and immunities in the Slaughterhouse Cases.
The majority also dismissed any claim under the privileges and immunities clause of the original Constitution in Article IV, Section 2, Clause 1. Bradwell argued that because she had been born in Vermont but later moved to Illinois, the latter state's denial of a law license was interstate discrimination. However, the Court noted that under the recently-enacted Fourteenth Amendment, "All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside." Because Bradwell had been a resident of Illinois for several years, she was now a citizen of that state and the interstate provision of Article IV therefore did not apply. 
The court's reasoning also partly hinged on the determination that an attorney was an "officer of the court." The court — fearing that if they allowed women to become lawyers, they would thereby allow women to hold any civil office — was not prepared to hold that women could be lawyers. 
Other opinions
Although the majority opinion made virtually no reference to Bradwell's sex and did not decide the case on the basis of her being a woman, three justices found that  fact to be critical. Justice Bradley's opinion concurring in the Court's judgment claimed, "The natural and proper timidity and delicacy which belongs to the female sex evidently unfits it for many of the occupations of civil life.... The paramount destiny and mission of women are to fulfill the noble and benign offices of wife and mother. This is the law of the Creator" (83 U.S. 130, 142). That was at odds with Bradley's dissent in the Slaughterhouse Cases in which he had argued, with respect to men, that "the right of any citizen to follow whatever lawful employment he chooses to adopt (submitting himself to all lawful regulations) is one of his most valuable rights, and one which the legislature of a State cannot invade, whether restrained by its own constitution or not" (83 U.S. 36, 114).
The sole dissenter, Chief Justice Chase, was unable to file an opinion because of deteriorating health.
Aftermath
Because the Supreme Court limited the application of the Privileges and Immunities Clause of the Constitution to the privileges of noncitizens in foreign United States states and massively limited the Privileges or Immunities Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment in the Slaughterhouse Cases, parties alleging discrimination later turned to the Equal Protection Clause.
In 1971, the Supreme Court would for the first time use the Equal Protection Clause to overturn a gender-based distinction in Reed v. Reed. It then applied only a rational basis review to strike down a decision giving males preference to females to administer estates. The Court later applied intermediate scrutiny in Craig v. Boren, an approach that is still applied.
The same year that the opinion in this case was handed down, Bradwell was also denied appointment as a notary public by the governor of Illinois. Bradwell's case in part prompted the Illinois Legislature to adopt a statute in 1872 forbidding sex discrimination in professional licensing. Toward the end of her life, the Illinois Supreme Court and the U.S. Supreme Court admitted Bradwell to practice law nunc pro tunc, and the year of her admittance was officially, albeit symbolically, 1869.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 83
Notes
References
Further reading
 Cullen-DuPont, Kathryn. Encyclopedia of Women's History in America (Infobase Publishing, 2009) pp 32–34
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:Privileges or Immunities case law
Category:1873 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Illinois
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
"""

From "Brady v. Daly" ==> """
Brady v. Daly, 175 U.S. 148 (1899), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held the common law circuit court did have jurisdiction over the copyright infringement case because the statutory damages were not a penalty or forfeiture.
This case is related to Webster v. Daly.. They arose from the same set of copyright infringement disputes regarding Under the Gaslight by Augustin Daly.
The United States abolished the circuit court system involved in Webster v. Daly in 1912. The modern analog would be the district courts.
 References 
External links
Category:1899 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States copyright case law
"""

From "Brady v. Maryland" ==> """
Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963), was a landmark United States Supreme Court case that established that the prosecution must turn over all evidence that might exonerate the defendant (exculpatory evidence) to the defense. Criminal Law: Cases and Materials, 7th ed., 2012, Wolters Kluwer Law & Business; John Kaplan, Robert Weisberg, Guyora Binder,  The prosecution failed to do so for Brady, and he was convicted. Brady challenged his conviction, arguing it had been contrary to the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Background
On June 27, 1958, a 25-year-old Maryland man named John Leo Brady and his 24-year-old companion Charles Donald Boblit murdered 53-year-old acquaintance William Brooks. Both men were convicted and sentenced to death. Brady admitted to being involved in the murder, but he claimed that Boblit had done the actual killing and that they had stolen Brooks' car ahead of a planned bank robbery but had not planned to kill him. The prosecution had withheld a written statement by Boblit (the men were tried separately), confessing that he had committed the act of killing by himself. The Maryland Court of Appeals had affirmed the conviction and remanded the case for a retrial only on the question of punishment. Brady's lawyer, E. Clinton Bamberger Jr., appealed the case to the Supreme Court, hoping for a new trial.
Decision
The Supreme Court held that withholding exculpatory evidence violates due process "where the evidence is material either to guilt or to punishment." The Court determined that under Maryland law, the withheld evidence could not have exculpated the defendant but was material to his level of punishment. Thus, the Maryland Court of Appeals' ruling was affirmed – Brady would receive a new sentencing hearing but not a new trial.
William O. Douglas wrote: "We now hold that the suppression by the prosecution of evidence favorable to an accused upon request violates due process where the evidence is material either to guilt or to punishment... Society wins not only when the guilty are convicted, but when criminal trials are fair."
A defendant's request for "Brady disclosure" refers to the holding of the Brady case, and the numerous state and federal cases that interpret its requirement that the prosecution disclose material exculpatory evidence to the defense. Exculpatory evidence is "material" if "there is a reasonable probability that his conviction or sentence would have been different had these materials been disclosed."Strickler v. Greene, . Brady evidence includes statements of witnesses or physical evidence that conflicts with the prosecution's witnessesPeople v. Johnson, 38 Cal.App.3d 228, 113 Cal.Rptr. 303 (1974). and evidence that could allow the defense to impeach the credibility of a prosecution witness.Banks v. Dretke, .
Aftermath
Brady was given a new hearing, where his sentence was commuted to life imprisonment. Brady was ultimately paroled. He moved to Florida, where he worked as a truck driver, started a family and did not re-offend.
Police officers who have been dishonest are sometimes referred to as "Brady cops". Because of the Brady ruling, prosecutors are required to notify defendants and their attorneys whenever a law enforcement official involved in their case has a confirmed record of knowingly lying in an official capacity. This requirement has been understood by lawyers and jurists as requiring prosecutors to maintain lists, known as Brady lists, of police officers who are not credible witnesses and whose involvement in a case undermines a prosecution's integrity.
Brady has become not only a matter of defendants' due process trial rights, but also of police officers’ due process employment rights. Officers and their unions have used litigation, legislation, and informal political pressure to push back on Bradys application to their personnel files. This conflict over Bradys application creates a divide between prosecutors and police officers, and between police management and police labor. Brady evidence also includes evidence material to credibility of a non-police witness, such as evidence of false statements by the witness or evidence that a witness was paid to act as an informant.Banks, 540 U.S., at 694, 698.
In United States v. Bagley (1985), the Court narrowed the reach of Brady by stating the suppressed evidence had to be "exculpatory" and "material" for a violation to result in the reversal of a conviction. Harry Blackmun wrote in Bagley that "only if there is a reasonable probability that, had the evidence been disclosed to the defense, the result of the proceeding would have been different. A 'reasonable probability' is a probability sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome."
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 373
 Brady material
 Connick v. Thompson
 Giglio v. United States
 Jencks Act
 Jencks v. United States
 Pitchess motion
 Testilying
 R v Stinchcombe, Canadian Supreme Court judgment on a similar subject
 References 
 Sources 
 Hooper, Laural L.; Marsh, Jennifer E.; and Yeh, Brian. Treatment of Brady v. Maryland Material in United States District and State Courts’ Rules, Orders, and Policies: Report to the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules of the Judicial Conference of the United States, Federal Judicial Center, October 2004.
 External links 
 The Brady List, a public-facing database of information including police misconduct, public complaints and use-of-force reports
Category:Brady material case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1963 in United States case law
"""

From "Brady v. United States" ==> """
Brady v. United States, 397 U.S. 742 (1970), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court refused to hold that large sentencing discounts and threats of the death penalty are sufficient evidence of coercion..
 Background 
 Trial 
Robert Brady was indicted in 1959 for kidnapping and failing to release the hostage without harm, which under 18 U.S.C. § 1201(a). imposed a maximum penalty of death if the jury recommended it. When he learned that his co-defendant had confessed to the crime and agreed to testify against him Brady changed his plea from not guilty to guilty. The trial judge twice questioned him on whether the plea was made voluntarily. 
The Court: …Having read the presentence report and the statement you made to the probation office, I want to be certain that you know what you are doing and you did know that when you entered a plea of guilty the other day. Do you want to let that plea of guilty stand, or do you want to withdraw it and plead not guilty?
Defendant Brady: I want to let that plea stand, sir
The Court: You understand that, in doing that, you are admitting and confessing the truth of the charge contained in the indictment and that you enter a plea of guilty voluntarily, without persuasion, coercion of any kind? Is that right?
Defendant Brady: Yes, your Honor.
The Court: And you do do that?
Defendant Brady: Yes, I do.
The Court: You plead guilty to the charge?
Defendant Brady: Yes, I do.
Upon his acceptance of his plea the trial judge imposed sentence of fifty years imprisonment, later reduced to thirty.
 Appeal 
In 1967 Brady sought post-conviction relief arguing that 18 U.S.C. § 1201(a) was coercive in nature and impermissible under United States v. Jackson which was decided after his conviction. In United States v. Jackson, the court ruled that 18 U.S.C. § 1201(a) was unconstitutional because the death sentence could only be imposed by a jury. The court concluded that the statute made death the risk of a jury trial and that this was impermissible. Brady argued that every guilty plea entered under § 1201 was invalid when the fear of death is shown to have been a factor.  The District Court for the District of New Mexico denied relief. The District Court concluded that Brady changed his plea to guilty after learning that his codefendant would plead guilty, not due to the threat of death under § 1201. The Appeals Court for the Tenth Circuit agreed with the District Court and denied relief.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice White delivered the unanimous opinion of the court. He quotes from United States v. Jackson "the fact that the Federal Kidnapping Act tends to discourage defendants from insisting upon their innocence and demanding a jury trial by jury hardly implies that every defendant who enters a guilty plea to a charge under the Act does so involuntarily.” By ruling that all guilty pleas entered under § 1201 “would rob the criminal process of much of its flexibility." The court ruled that Brady was not coerced by § 1201. He entered his guilty plea with full knowledge and willingness; it was not the court's fault that the defendant did not anticipate United States v. Jackson.
 See also 
 Federal Kidnapping Act
 United States v. Jackson
References
External links
Case summary at Quimbee
Category:United States plea bargaining case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1970 in United States case law
"""

From "Bragdon v. Abbott" ==> """
Bragdon v. Abbott, 524 U.S. 624 (1998), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that reproduction does qualify as a major life activity according to the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA)..
 Background 
Sidney Abbott, after disclosing on a form that she was 'asymptomatic' HIV positive, was refused service from her dentist, Randon Bragdon, to fill a cavity.  Bragdon submitted that he would agree to fill the cavity if he could perform the work in a hospital setting, but that Abbott would have to pay for the expense of being admitted and using the facility.  Abbott sued Bragdon on grounds of discrimination, citing the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.  The case was appealed through the court system and eventually was agreed to be heard by the Supreme Court.  Abbott's case was based on the argument that she was a victim of discrimination based on the ADA.  Abbott argued that HIV created a “substantial limitation” to life activities, specifically, reproductive ability.  Bragdon, the defendant, retorted that HIV posed a “direct threat” to his health and safety, but that he was willing to work on Abbott should he be able to take “extra precautions” in a hospital setting.  Federal trial courts, as well as appellate courts ruled in favor of Abbott.
 Issue 
The major issues that were heard and decided upon by the Supreme Court included:  whether HIV is a disability and reproduction a major life activity under the ADA.  Accordingly, can a physician refuse or alter care of a patient with HIV without violating portions of the ADA?
 Decision  
The United States Supreme Court ruled that reproduction does qualify as a major life activity under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and that even asymptomatic HIV would qualify Abbott to claim protection under the act.  The Court held that the ADA does not force care-givers to treat those who pose a direct threat and that health care professionals may not be granted deference to their views when serving as a defendant in cases of alleged discrimination.  The holding does not effect a blanket protection under the ADA to all persons with HIV.
 Reason 
The Court utilized the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, which aimed to eliminate discrimination towards people with disabilities in the workplace, public areas and by government entities.  That includes discrimination towards people with actual disabilities and persons who are regarded or treated as if they have a disability.  Specific to the case, the ADA stipulates that those with disabilities cannot be discriminated against medical treatment. In order to receive protection from the ADA, Abbott was required to show that she had an impairment, and that it substantially limited a major life activity, on which the Court sided with her claim.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 524
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States disability case law
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:1998 in United States case law
Category:HIV/AIDS in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Brandenburg v. Ohio" ==> """
Brandenburg v. Ohio, 395 U.S. 444 (1969), is a landmark decision of the United States Supreme Court interpreting the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.. The Court held that the government cannot punish inflammatory speech unless that speech is "directed to inciting or producing imminent lawless action and is likely to incite or produce such action".Criminal Law - Cases and Materials, 7th ed. 2012, Wolters Kluwer Law & Business; John Kaplan (law professor), Robert Weisberg, Guyora Binder,  Specifically, the Court struck down Ohio's criminal syndicalism statute, because that statute broadly prohibited the mere advocacy of violence. In the process, Whitney v. California (1927). was explicitly overruled, and Schenck v. United States (1919),. Abrams v. United States (1919),. Gitlow v. New York (1925),. and Dennis v. United States (1951). were overturned.
Background
Clarence Brandenburg, a Ku Klux Klan (KKK) leader in rural Ohio, contacted a reporter at a Cincinnati television station and invited him to cover a KKK rally that would take place in Hamilton County in the summer of 1964.Steve Kissing, "Brandenburg v. Ohio", Cincinnati Magazine, August 2001, pp. 14-15. Portions of the rally were filmed, showing several men in robes and hoods, some carrying firearms, first burning a cross and then making speeches. One of the speeches made reference to the possibility of "revengeance" against "Niggers", "Jews", and those who supported them and also claimed that "our President, our Congress, our Supreme Court, continues to suppress the white, Caucasian race", and announced plans for a march on Congress to take place on the Fourth of July.Quoted in per curiam decision. Brandenburg v. Ohio. Documents of American Constitutional and Legal History, edited by Urofsky and Finkelman, Oxford University Press, 2002, p. 784. Another speech advocated for the forced expulsion of African Americans to Africa and Jewish Americans to Israel.Per curiam decision.  Brandenburg v. Ohio. Documents of American Constitutional and Legal History, p. 784.
Brandenburg was charged with advocating violence under Ohio's criminal syndicalism statute for his participation in the rally and for the speech he made. In relevant part, the statute – enacted in 1919 during the First Red Scare – proscribed "advocat[ing] ... the duty, necessity, or propriety of crime, sabotage, violence, or unlawful methods of terrorism as a means of accomplishing industrial or political reform" and "voluntarily assembl[ing] with any society, group or assemblage of persons formed to teach or advocate the doctrines of criminal syndicalism".
Convicted in the Court of Common Pleas of Hamilton County, Brandenburg was fined $1,000 and sentenced to one to ten years in prison. On appeal, the Ohio First District Court of Appeal affirmed Brandenburg's conviction, rejecting his claim that the statute violated his First Amendment and Fourteenth Amendment right to freedom of speech. The Supreme Court of Ohio dismissed his appeal without opinion.
The rather cursory way in which the Ohio courts dismissed Brandenburg's constitutional arguments is unsurprising in light of the state of First Amendment law in the pre-Brandenburg era. Although Yates v. United States (1957). had overturned the convictions of mid-level Communist Party members in language that seemed suggestive of a broader view of freedom of expression rights than had been accorded them in Dennis v. United States (1951), all Yates purported to do was construe a federal statute, the 1940 Smith Act. Thus, Dennis reading of the First Amendment remained in force: advocacy of law violation, even as an abstract doctrine, could be punished under law consistent with the free speech clause.
Decision
The U.S. Supreme Court reversed Brandenburg's conviction, holding that government cannot constitutionally punish abstract advocacy of force or law violation. The majority opinion was per curiam, issued from the Court as an institution, rather than as authored and signed by an individual justice. The earlier draft had originally been prepared by Justice Abe Fortas before he was forced to resign in the midst of an ethics scandal, and it would have included a modified version of the clear and present danger test. In finalizing the draft, Justice Brennan eliminated all references to it by substituting the "imminent lawless action" language.See  Justices Black and Douglas concurred separately.
Per curiam opinion
The per curiam majority opinion struck down the Ohio Criminal Syndicalism statute, overruled Whitney v. California (1927), and articulated a new test – the "imminent lawless action" test – for judging what was then referred to as "seditious speech" under the First Amendment:
In Schenck v. United States (1919) the Court had adopted a "clear and present danger" test that Whitney v. California (1927) subsequently expanded to a "bad tendency" test: if speech has a "tendency" to cause sedition or lawlessness, it may constitutionally be prohibited. Dennis v. United States (1951), a case dealing with prosecution of alleged Communists under the Smith Act for advocating the overthrow of the government, used the clear and present danger test while still upholding the defendants' convictions for acts that could not possibly have led to a speedy overthrow of the government.
The per curiam opinion cited Dennis v. United States (1951) as though it were good law and amenable to the result reached in Brandenburg. However, Brandenburg completely did away with Dennis central holding and held that "mere advocacy" of any doctrine, including one that assumed the necessity of violence or law violation, was per se protected speech. It may be that principles of stare decisis figured in the Court's decision to avoid overruling the relatively recent Dennis, but the distance between the two cases' approach is obvious and irreconcilable.
The Brandenburg test (also called the "imminent lawless action" test)
The three distinct elements of this test (intent to speak, imminence of lawlessness, and likelihood of lawlessness) have distinct precedential lineages.
Judge Learned Hand was possibly the first judge to advocate the intent standard, in Masses Publishing Co. v. Patten (1917),Masses Publishing Co. v. Patten, 244 F. 535 (S.D.N.Y. 1917) reasoning that "[i]f one stops short of urging upon others that it is their duty or their interest to resist the law, it seems to me one should not be held to have attempted to cause its violation". However, the Brandenburg intent standard is more speech-protective than Hand's formulation, which contained no temporal element of imminence.
The imminence element was a departure from earlier rulings. Brandenburg did not explicitly overrule the bad tendency test, but it appears that after Brandenburg, the test is de facto overruled. The Brandenburg test effectively made the time element of the clear and present danger test more defined and more rigorous. Applying the Brandenburg test in Hess v. Indiana (1973) the Supreme Court held that the prerequisite for speech which is not protected by the First Amendment is that the speech in question must lead to “imminent disorder”.
Concurrences
Justice Hugo Black, renowned civil libertarian and First Amendment absolutist, filed a short concurrence indicating his agreement with Justice William O. Douglas's longer opinion and pointing out that the per curiams reliance on Dennis was more symbolic than actual.
Justice Douglas's concurrence reflected the absolutist position that only he and Black, among Supreme Court justices, ever fully subscribed to, namely that the phrase "no law" in the First Amendment ought to be interpreted very literally, and that all speech is immune from prosecution, regardless of the governmental interests advanced in suppressing some particular instance of speech. He briefly traced the history of the "clear and present danger" test, illustrating how it had been used over the years since its debut in Schenck to dismiss dozens of what Douglas viewed as legitimate First Amendment claims.
A short section of Douglas's opinion indicated that he might be open to allowing the government greater latitude in controlling speech during time of "declared war" (making clear that he was not referring to the then-current Vietnam War), although he only phrased that possibility in terms of doubt (as opposed to his certainty that the clear and present danger test was irreconcilable with the First Amendment during time of peace).
Douglas also argued for the legitimate role of symbolic speech in First Amendment doctrine, using examples of a person ripping up a Bible to celebrate the abandonment of his faith or tearing a copy of the Constitution in order to protest a Supreme Court decision, and assailed the previous term's United States v. O'Brien,. which had allowed for the prosecution of a man for burning his draft card. In all these situations, Douglas argued, an action was a vital way of conveying a certain message, and thus the action itself deserved First Amendment protection.
Finally, Douglas dealt with the classic example of a man "falsely shouting fire in a theater and causing a panic". In order to explain why someone could be legitimately prosecuted for this, Douglas called it "a classic case where speech is brigaded with action". In the view of Douglas and Black, this was probably the only sort of case in which a person could be prosecuted for speech.Clarence BRANDENBURG v. State of OHIO | Supreme Court | US Law | Cornell LII / Legal Information Institute
Subsequent developments
The Brandenburg test was the Supreme Court's last major statement on what government may do about inflammatory speech that seeks to incite others to lawless action. It resolved the debate between those who urged greater government control of speech for reasons of security and those who favored allowing as much speech as possible and relying on the marketplace of ideas to reach a favorable result, leaving the law in a state along the lines of that which Justices Louis Brandeis, and, post-Schenck, Oliver Wendell Holmes advocated in several dissents and concurrences during the late 1910s and early 1920s. 
The Brandenburg test remains the standard used for evaluating attempts by the government to punish inflammatory speech, and it has not been seriously challenged since it was laid down in 1969. Very few cases have actually reached the Court during the past decades that would test the outer limits of Brandenburg. The most significant application of Brandenburg came four years after in Hess v. Indiana. 
Brandenburg has come under criticism in the twenty-first century. Lyrissa Lidsky, a scholar of the law, stated that "Brandenburg's sanguine attitude toward the prospect of violence rests on an assumption about the audiences of radical speech. Brandenburg assumes that most citizens ... simply are not susceptible to impassioned calls to violent action by radical speakers."Lyrissa B. Lidsky, Incendiary Speech and Social Media, 44 TEX. TECH L. REV. 147, 160 (2011). It has also become more common for lower federal courts to apply the test loosely, especially in circumstances related to online terrorist recruitment.
The Washington Post reported the Brandenburg precedent to be "at the center" of the second impeachment trial of Donald Trump.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 395
Shouting fire in a crowded theater
Threatening the president of the United States
Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 
Cohen v. California, 
Feiner v. New York, 
Korematsu v. United States, 
Kunz v. New York, 
National Socialist Party of America v. Village of Skokie, 
 R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul, 
Sacher v. United States,  
Terminiello v. Chicago, 
 Virginia v. Black, 
 Second impeachment trial of Donald Trump § House's brief, Trump's answer, House's replication
References
External links
Brandenburg v. Ohio from C-SPAN's Landmark Cases: Historic Supreme Court Decisions
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1969 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:History of racism in Ohio
Category:Hate speech case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Ku Klux Klan
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Branzburg v. Hayes" ==> """
Branzburg v. Hayes, 408 U.S. 665 (1972), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court invalidating the use of the First Amendment as a defense for reporters summoned to testify before a grand jury.  The case was argued February 23, 1972, and decided June 29 of the same year..  The reporters lost their case by a vote of 5–4. This case is cited for the rule that in federal courts, a reporter may not generally avoid testifying in a criminal grand jury, and is one of a limited number of casesBranzburg v. Hayes. (n.d.). Oyez. Retrieved April 9, 2022, from https://www.oyez.org/cases/1971/70-85United States v. Caldwell. (n.d.). Oyez. Retrieved April 9, 2022, from https://www.oyez.org/cases/1971/70-57 in which the U.S. Supreme Court has considered the use of reporters' privilege.
 Facts 
Paul Branzburg of The (Louisville) Courier-Journal, in the course of his reporting duties, witnessed people manufacturing and using hashish. He wrote two articles concerning drug use in Kentucky. The first featured unidentified hands holding hashish, while the second included marijuana users as sources. These sources requested not to be identified. Both of the articles were brought to attention of law-enforcement personnel. Branzburg was subpoenaed before a grand jury for both of the articles. He was ordered to name his sources.
Earl Caldwell, a reporter for The New York Times, conducted extensive interviews with the leaders of The Black Panthers, and Paul Pappas, a Massachusetts television reporter, who also reported on The Black Panthers, spending several hours in their headquarters were similarly subpoenaed around the same time as was Paul Branzburg.
All three reporters were called to testify before separate grand juries about illegal actions they might have witnessed. They refused, citing a privilege under the Press Clause, and were held in contempt.
 Decision 
In a fiercely-split decision, the Court ruled 5–4 against the existence of reportorial privilege in the Press Clause of the First Amendment. Writing for the majority, Justice Byron White declared that the petitioners were asking the Court "to grant newsmen a testimonial privilege that other citizens do not enjoy. This we decline to do." White acknowledged the argument that refusing to recognize such a privilege would undermine the ability of the press to gather news, but wrote that "from the beginning of the country the press has operated without constitutional protection for press informants, and the press has flourished."
He did not overlook the importance of a free press, however, and he established a test, citing Gibson v. Florida Legislative Investigation Comm., for deciding whether a reporter can be compelled to testify before a grand jury. For such a subpoena to have merit, the government must "convincingly show a substantial relation between the information sought and a subject of overriding and compelling state interest."
Complicating matters was Justice Lewis F. Powell's concurrence. While he sided with the majority, Powell emphasized the "limited nature" of the decision when he stated:
The asserted claim to privilege should be judged on its facts by the striking of a proper balance between freedom of the press and the obligation of all citizens to give relevant testimony with respect to criminal conduct. The balance of these vital constitutional and societal interests on a case-by-case basis accords with the tried and traditional way of adjudicating such questions.
A few days after oral argument, and before writing his concurrence, Powell prepared handwritten notes of the court's private conference to decide the disposition of the appeal. He stated in those notes:I will make clear in an opinion... that there is a privilege analogous to an evidentiary one, which courts should recognize and apply on case by case to protect confidential information.... My vote turned on my conclusion...  that we should not establish a constitutional privilege.  (emphasis in original notes)Branzburg v. Hayes – Journalists – Supreme Court – Confidential Sources – New York Times
Subsequent history
Powell's opinion has been interpreted by several lower courts as an indication that reportorial privilege exists but was simply not warranted in the specific case of Branzburg.
In Zerilli v. Smith the Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit concluded that the reporter's privilege existed and that its application depended on two factors: (1) that the information sought was crucial to a litigant's case and (2) that the information could not be acquired from any other source.
However, in 2003 in McKevitt v. Pallasch, Judge Posner reaffirmed the majority's opinion in Branzburg in a case concerning a refusal to stay an order, in a terrorism case in Ireland, to subpoena recordings of a key witness possessed by a group of journalists. Posner used the case-by-case balancing test envisioned by Justice Powell, writing: The federal interest in cooperating in the criminal proceedings of friendly foreign nations is obvious; and it is likewise obvious that newsgathering and reporting activities of the press are inhibited when a reporter cannot assure a confidential source of confidentiality. Yet that was Branzburg and it is evident from the result in that case that the interest of the press in maintaining the confidentiality of sources is not absolute. There is no conceivable interest in confidentiality in the present case.
In July 2004, Branzburg was cited as precedent by United States District Court Chief Judge Thomas Hogan in a memorandum opinion denying a motion to quash two grand jury subpoenas issued to reporters. NBC Washington Bureau Chief Tim Russert and Time magazine reporter Matthew Cooper challenged the subpoenas issued in connection with the leak of the identity of former CIA operative Valerie Plame, citing their First Amendment rights as reason not to reveal their confidential sources. In the opinion, Hogan wrote:
Because this Court holds that the U.S. Supreme Court unequivocally rejected any reporter’s privilege rooted in the First Amendment or common law in the context of a grand jury acting in good faith, this Court denies the motions to quash.
Civil cases, as opposed to criminal cases, have been held not to come under the Branzburg test.Carey v. Hume, 492 F.2d 631, 636 (D.C. Cir. 1974), cert. dismissed, .
In 2007, the New York Times published Justice Powell's notes of the court's private conference on a form that looks like a scorecard. The Times purports that Justice Powell wrote the following:
I will make clear in an opinion – unless the court's opinion is clear – that there is a privilege analogous to an evidentiary one, which courts should recognize and apply on case by case to protect confidential information. My vote turned on my conclusion – after hearing arguments of counsel and re-reading principal briefs – that we should not establish a constitutional privilege. If we did this, the problems that would flow from it would be difficult to foresee: e.g., applying a privilege of const. dimensions – to grand jurys, petite juries, congressional committees, etc... And who are "newsmen" – how to define?
Quotes
Persuading the Court to grant First Amendment protection to journalists regarding their sources was obviously going to be a hard sell. Notwithstanding the strong policy arguments in favor of establishing this privilege and the serious harm that would be caused by its absence, no such protection had ever been held to exist. Not only was the concept that the judicial system was entitled to 'every man's evidence' itself deeply rooted in the Constitution, but merely determining the scope of the privilege (when would it apply?) and identifying who would receive it (only regularly employed journalists? freelancers? anyone?) were difficult matters at best.--Floyd AbramsFloyd Abrams, Speaking Freely, published by Viking Press (2005), p. 3.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 408
Free Flow of Information Act
Reporter's privilege
Shield laws in the United States
In the film Nothing But the Truth, Branzburg v. Hayes case is quoted and discussed.
In the television series The Newsroom, the case is cited and discussed in relation to the Federal government's subpoena to news anchor Will McAvoy to reveal a source. ("Contempt", Season 3)
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:United States evidentiary privilege case law
Category:United States grand jury case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Courier Journal
"""

From "Braunfeld v. Brown" ==> """
Braunfeld v. Brown, 366 U.S. 599 (1961), was a landmark case on the issue of religious and economic liberty decided by the United States Supreme Court.  In a 6–3 decision, the Court held that a Pennsylvania blue law forbidding the sale of various retail products on Sunday was not an unconstitutional interference with religion as described in the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Prior history
Blue laws in the United States had been passed by State legislatures, including Pennsylvania, prohibiting commerce the first day of the week, colloquially known as Sunday, which legislators referred to as "The Lord's day".
Plaintiffs sought to have a 1959 Pennsylvania statute, 18 Purdon's Pa. Stat. Ann. 4699.10 (1960 Cum. Supp.) overturned as unconstitutional.  A three judge panel rejected their petition.  (See Abraham Braunfeld v. Thomas J. Gibbons and Victor H. Blanc, 184 F. Supp. 352 (E.D.Pa 1959)).
The Court also based its opinion in part on two earlier rulings.
 In Two Guys from Harrison-Allentown, Inc., v. McGinley, 366 U.S. 582 (1961), the Court had previously ruled that the same Pennsylvania statute was not unconstitutional, either as (i) a violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution or (ii) an impermissible establishment of religion under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.  Therefore, the only remaining issue in Braunfeld was whether the Pennsylvania statute was an unconstitutional interference in the appellant's religion.
 In McGowan v. Maryland, 366 U.S. 420 (1961), the Court had previously held that a similar Maryland statute was constitutional.
The case
Background
Abraham Braunfeld and the other appellants were Pennsylvania merchants.  As Orthodox Jews, the appellants were unable to do business on Friday evening or Saturday.  They objected to a Pennsylvania law forbidding them from doing business on Sunday, arguing that the law unfairly discriminated against them by effectively forcing them to remain closed for one more day than competing Christian merchants.
Plurality opinion
Chief Justice Warren wrote the plurality opinion, joined by Justices Black, Clark, and Whittaker.
 Chief Justice Warren first rejected appellants' Establishment Clause and Equal Protection Clause arguments, ruling that the Court's earlier opinion in Two Guys from Harrison-Allentown, Inc., v. McGinley, 366 U.S. 582 (1961) had concluded that the statute at issue did not violate either of those provisions.  Braunfeld, 366 U.S. at 600–01.
 Chief Justice Warren then addressed appellants' remaining argument – that by requiring Orthodox Jewish merchants to remain closed for one day in addition to their religiously required day of rest, the statute unfairly burdened existing Orthodox Jews and made it more difficult for the religion to recruit more members, thereby violating the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.  Braunfeld, 366 U.S. at 601–02.  Chief Justice Warren reasoned as follows:
 While originally enacted for religious purposes, the so-called "Sunday Closing Laws" had a legitimate state purpose in providing for the general welfare by establishing a day of rest.  Braunfeld, 366 U.S. at 602–03, citing McGowan, 366 U.S. at 437–40.
 Although the Court had previously held that the Free Exercise Clause prevented the States from passing laws that forbade the exercise of religion or required citizens to "say or believe anything in conflict with [their] religious tenets," states could in some cases regulate conduct, even if that regulation burdened citizens of a particular religion.  Braunfeld, 366 U.S. at 603–05.
 In order to balance the interests at issue, the Court held that:
 Where the "purpose or effect of a law is to impede the observance of one or all religions or is to discriminate invidiously between religions, that law is constitutionally invalid even though the burden may be characterized as being only indirect."  Braunfeld, 366 U.S. at 607.
 However, where "the State regulates conduct by enacting a general law within its power, the purpose and effect of which is to advance the State's secular goals, the statute is valid despite its indirect burden on religious observance unless the State may accomplish its purpose by means which do not impose such a burden."  Braunfeld, 366 U.S. at 607.
 In the specific case before the Court, the plurality opinion held that the law in question had only an indirect effect, and that the Court could not conclude that there was any less burdensome means of achieving the State's goals.  In particular, although appellants argued that a law exempting citizens who were required to rest on other days from the Sunday rest day would be a wiser choice, the Court concluded that there were valid reasons for which a state might choose a single day of rest.  Braunfeld, 366 U.S. at 607–09.
Concurrence/dissent (Frankfurter)
Justice Frankfurter wrote a concurring opinion with which Justice Harlan joined as to most points.  (Justice Frankfurter published that opinion as part of McGowan v. Maryland, 366 U.S. 420 (1961), but declared his opinion applicable to Braunfeld and several other cases.  McGowan, 366 U.S. at 459, fn).
 First, Justice Frankfurter examined the history of the First Amendment and "Sunday Statutes" in detail, and concluded that the Sunday statutes had a long history and substantial non-religious purpose.  McGowan, 366 U.S. at 460–511.
 On that basis, Justice Frankfurter rejected most of  the appellants' claims.  McGowan, 366 U.S. at 511–42.
 However, Justice Frankfurter, writing solely for himself and not for Justice Harlan, did dissent on one point.  Based on the procedural history of Braunfeld, Justice Frankfurter argued that appellants' claim that the law was irrational and arbitrary should not have been dismissed for failure to state a claim, but should have been permitted to proceed to an evidentiary stage.  McGowan, 366 U.S. at 542–43.
Concurrence/dissent (Brennan)
In his opinion, Justice Brennan concurred in the plurality opinion to the extent that it held that the Pennsylvania statute did not violate the Establishment Clause or the Equal Protection Clause, but dissented from the remainder of the opinion, arguing that the statute should be held unconstitutional under the Free Exercise Clause.
Justice Brennan wrote in part:
[T]he issue in this case – and we do not understand either appellees or the Court to contend otherwise – is whether a State may put an individual to a choice between his business and his religion. The Court today holds that it may. But I dissent, believing that such a law prohibits the free exercise of religion.
Two years later, Justice Brennan wrote a majority opinion, in Sherbert v. Verner, that largely tracked his dissent in this case.  In the Sherbert case, the court struck down a law on Free Exercise grounds that prohibited a worker from collecting unemployment compensation who was terminated from her job because she would not work on Saturdays for religious reasons.   
Dissent (Douglas)
Like Justice Frankfurter, Justice Douglas also published his Braunfeld dissent as part of the earlier McGowan decision, at 366 US 561-82.  In that opinion, Justice Douglas argued that the "Sunday Laws" could not be separated from their religious roots, and that the imposition of those laws on persons of other religions violated both the Establishment Clause and the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution
Dissent (Stewart)
Justice Stewart joined Justice Brennan's dissent, and wrote further:
Pennsylvania has passed a law which compels an Orthodox Jew to choose between his religious faith and his economic survival. That is a cruel choice. It is a choice which I think no State can constitutionally demand. For me this is not something that can be swept under the rug and forgotten in the interest of enforced Sunday togetherness. I think the impact of this law upon these appellants grossly violates their constitutional right to the free exercise of their religion.
Braunfeld, 366 U.S. at 616.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 366
Further reading
External links
Category:1961 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:1961 in religion
"""

From "Bravo-Fernandez v. United States" ==> """
Bravo-Fernandez v. United States, 580 U.S. ___ (2016), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States clarified the application of the Fifth Amendment's Double Jeopardy Clause to cases in which a jury returns irreconcilable verdicts that convict a defendant on one count and acquit a defendant on another count when both counts rely upon the same ultimate fact., slip. op. at 1-2.
In a unanimous opinion written by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, the Court held that the government may re-try criminal defendants after a jury returns irreconcilable verdicts when the conviction is later vacated because of a procedural error that is unrelated to the inconsistency.Bravo-Fernandez, slip. op. at 18-19. Justice Clarence Thomas filed a concurring opinion, stating that although he joins with the majority, the Court should reconsider the two cases that Ginsburg relied on in her argument, Ashe v. Swenson and Yeager v. United States.Bravo-Fernandez, slip. op. at 1-2 (Thomas, J., concurring).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 580
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
"""

From "Bray v. Alexandria Women's Health Clinic" ==> """
Bray v. Alexandria Women's Health Clinic, 506 U.S. 263 (1993) is a United States Supreme Court case in which the court held that Section 1985(3) of The Civil Rights Act of 1871 does not provide a federal cause of action against persons obstructing access to abortion clinics. Alexandria Health Clinic, along with several other abortion clinics, sued to prevent Jayne Bray and other anti-abortion protesters from blocking the entrance to clinics in Washington D.C.
Alexandria Women's Health Clinic claimed that the protesters violated Section 1985 of The Civil Rights Act of 1871, which prohibits two or more people on a highway or other premises from depriving “any person or class of persons of the equal protection of the laws, or of equal privileges and immunities under the laws.”
 Background 
 Facts of the Case 
An action was brought against Operation Rescue, an organization of members who oppose abortion, by clinics that perform abortions and organizations that support abortions and whose members may wish to use an abortion clinic. Operation Rescue organizes anti-abortion demonstrations in which participants trespass on, and obstruct general access to, the premises of abortion clinics. The clinics sued to enjoin Operation Rescue from conducting demonstrations at abortion clinics in the Washington, D. C., metropolitan area.
Operation Rescue asserted that its members had not violated section 1985(3), claiming that the statute requires a class-based, discriminatory animus underlying the action. The clinics countered that the actions of the protesters demonstrated a discriminatory animus against women.
 Lower Court Rulings 
Alexandria Health Clinic argued that the protesters were present to deny women their right to abortion and their right to interstate travel.
Following an expedited trial, the District Court ruled that petitioners had violated section 1985(3) by conspiring to deprive women seeking abortions of their right to interstate travel. The court also ruled for respondents on their pendent state-law claims of trespass and public nuisance. The court ordered the protesters to pay the clinics’ attorney's fees and costs on the 1985(3) claim. 
The Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit affirmed the district court decision in National Organization for Women v. Operation Rescue, 726 F. Supp. 1483 (E.D. Va. 1989) The court found that Bray and others had blocked access to the clinics, therefore depriving women seeking abortions of the right to interstate travel.  
 42 U.S.C. 1985(3) - Conspiracy to interfere with civil rights 
Section 1985's subsection 3 forbids Conspiracy to interfere with civil rights. It establishes that if two or more persons within the United States act for the purpose of directly or indirectly depriving any person or class of persons of equal protections or privileges under the law, the injured party or parties may have a cause of action for damages against one or more of the conspirators.
 Prior Supreme Court decisions 
 Griffin v. Breckenridge 
In Griffin v. Breckenridge, 403 U.S. 88 (1971), the court held that the defendants had violated the petitioners' constitutionally protected right to travel. The case involved black plaintiffs who had been stopped and assaulted and beaten with a deadly weapon while they were riding in a car. It was claimed that the purpose of the attack was to prevent the plaintiffs from enjoying equal protection under the laws of the United States and the state of Mississippi.  
The court found that there is nothing inherent in the wording of Section 1985 that requires state action, noting that an element of companion section 1983 is that the deprivation complained of must have been inflicted under color of state law and that to read any such requirement into 1985 (3) would thus deprive that section of all independent effect. Additionally, based on legislative history, the court concluded that "...the language requiring intent to deprive of equal protection, or equal privileges and immunities, means that there must be some racial, or perhaps otherwise class-based, invidiously discriminatory animus behind the conspirators' action." 
The case is commonly cited for the four essential elements that it identified as being required to support a cause of action under 42 U.S.C. 1985(3):
 Conspiracy
 A purpose of depriving, either directly or indirectly, any person or class of persons of the equal protection of the laws, or of equal privileges and immunities under the laws.
 Action in furtherance of the object of [the] conspiracy,
 An injury to  person or property" or a deprivation of having and exercising any right or privilege of a citizen of the United States. 
 Carpenters v. Scott 
In Carpenters v. Scott, 463 U.S. 825 (1983), A construction company had hired nonunion workers for a project, resulting in the organization of a citizen protest against the company. During the protest at the construction site, company employees were assaulted and beaten, and construction equipment was burned and destroyed, delaying construction and causing the company to default on its contract. 
The court reaffirmed the Griffin finding that section 1983 does not require state action when applied to rights that themselves do not require state action. The court addressed the specific question of whether a section 1985(3) claim can be made against individuals with respect to rights that are prohibitions of certain state actions. rights that in themselves require state action must necessarily present a claim of state involvement. 
The construction company's claim was denied. The court held that a conspiracy to infringe First Amendment rights requires proof that the State is involved in the conspiracy or that the aim of the conspiracy is to influence the activity of the State. It also found that this case did not present the kind of animus that § 1985(3) requires.
 Supreme Court 
 Opinion of the Court 
By a 35 to 3 majority, the Supreme Court held that Section 1945(3) does not provide a cause of action for protesters blocking entrance to an abortion clinic.
In the decision delivered by Justice Anton Scalia, the court rejected the claim that "women who want abortions" is a class that could satisfy the suggestion in Griffin that discrimination as contemplated under Section 1984(s) could extend beyond the issue of race. The rationale was that if "women who want an abortion" is a class requiring protection, then it would necessarily follow that "people who want to engage in any activity that we seek to prevent" would qualify for similar protection under the statute. The court concluded that this definitional ploy would convert the statute into the "general federal tort law" animus requirement seeks to avoid, finding that the conspiracy, "... must aim at a deprivation of the equal enjoyment of rights secured by the law to all."
The court found it unnecessary to decide the merits of the clinics' claim that the alleged class-based discrimination is directed at women in general, concluding that the "animus" requirement could not be met by actions that do not constitute a purpose that focuses upon women by reason of their sex.
The District Court had found that Operation Rescue members share a commitment to stopping the practice of abortion and define their activities, not with references to women, but as a physical intervention between abortionists and innocent victims. Based on this record, Justice Scalia concluded that a class-based animus could be established only if either: 
 opposition to abortion can reasonably be presumed to reflect a sex-based intent, or 
 intent is irrelevant, and a class-based animus can be determined solely by effect. 
With respect to the first possibility, the court rejects the notion that opposition to voluntary abortion might be considered an irrational surrogate for opposition to women. Justice Scalia states that with respect to abortion, "...it cannot be denied that there are common and respectable reasons for opposing it, other than hatred of, or condescension toward, women as a class."
Justice Scalia frames the final determination of necessary animus as a question "...of whether the proposition that intent is legally irrelevant; that since voluntary abortion is an activity engaged in only by women, to disfavor it is ipso facto to discriminate invidiously against women as a class." The opinion answers this question in the negative, stating that prior cases do not support this. The opinion cites two prior cases:
Geduldig v. Aiello, 417 U. S. 484 (1974), that found that a state disability insurance system that denied coverage to certain disabilities resulting from pregnancy had not discriminated on the basis of sex, stating that because "... only women can become pregnant, it does not follow that every legislative classification concerning pregnancy is a sex-based classification." 
Personnel Administrator of Mass. v. Feeney, 442 U. S. 256 (1979), that reached a similar conclusion in denying an Equal Protection Clause challenge to a Massachusetts law giving employment preference to military veterans, a class which in Massachusetts was over 98% male."
Four justices filed separate opinions:
Anthony Kennedy filed a concurring opinion
David H Souter filed an opinion concurring in the judgment in part and dissenting in part
John Paul Stevens filed a dissenting opinion, joined by Harry A. Blackmun
Sandra Day O'Connor filed a dissenting opinion, joined by Harry A. Blackmun
 Concurrences 
Justice Anthony Kennedy filed a concurring opinion noting that there are three separate dissenting opinions in this case offering differing interpretations of the statute in question. He concludes that "Given the difficulty of the question, this is understandable, but the dissenters' inability to agree on a single rationale confirms, in my view, the correctness of the Court's opinion. As all recognize, essential considerations of federalism are at stake here. The federal balance is a fragile one, and a false step in interpreting § 1985(3) risks making a whole catalog of ordinary state crimes a concurrent violation of a single congressional statute passed more than a century ago."
Justice David H Souter filed an opinion concurring in the judgment in part and dissenting in part. The opinion supports the court's decision insofar as it relies on stare decisis, but disagrees with the Griffin and Carpenters "rights guaranteed against private encroachment" and "class-based animus" requirements. In his opinion, Justice Scalia characterizes Souter's approach as "(1) undertaking a full-dress reconsideration of Griffin and Carpenters, (2) concluding that both those cases were wrongly decided, and (3) limiting the damage of those supposed errors by embracing an interpretation of the statute that concededly gives the same language in two successive clauses completely different meanings."
 Dissents 
Justice John Paul Stevens filed a dissenting opinion, joined by Harry A. Blackmun. Justice Stevens concludes that in this case, the court has bypassed the plain language of the law in favor of relying on prior precedent, noting that in those cases the statute had been narrowly construed in order to avoid what were perceived to be serious constitutional issues within the statute itself. In Justice Stevens' view, the protesters "... engaged in a nationwide conspiracy; to achieve their goal they repeatedly occupied public streets and trespassed on the premises of private citizens in order to prevent or hinder the constituted authorities from protecting access to abortion clinics by women, a substantial number of whom traveled in interstate commerce to reach the destinations blockaded by petitioners. The case involves no ordinary trespass, nor anything remotely resembling the peaceful picketing of a local retailer. It presents a striking contemporary example of the kind of zealous, politically motivated, lawless conduct that led to the enactment of the Ku Klux Act in 1871 and gave it its name."  Justice Scalia counters that "Those are certainly evocative assertions, but as far as the point of law we have been asked to decide is concerned, they are irrelevant...." Scalia notes that to the extent that the protesters violated state and local laws, they are subject to criminal prosecution and civil claims within those jurisdictions.
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor filed a dissenting opinion, joined by Harry A. Blackmun. Justice O'Connor characterizes Griffin's requirement of a "class-based animus" as a shorthand description of the types of actions that the statute is meant to address. However, she agreed with the dissent in Carpenters that "... Congress had in mind a functional definition of the scope of [§ 1985(3)]," and intended to "provide a federal remedy for all classes that seek to exercise their legal rights in unprotected circumstances similar to those of the victims of Klan violence." Accordingly, she would have found that § 1985(3) protected "...nonunion employees injured by mob violence in a "self-professed union town" whose residents resented nonunion activities." It is O'Connor's opinion that if a class is protected by the statute, then it must apply to actions where the motivation is directly related to the unique characteristics of that class. She concludes that the action of blocking access to an abortion clinic is class-based within the meaning of Griffin because it is directly related to the unique abilities of women to become pregnant and to terminate their pregnancies. 
 Subsequent Developments 
 Schenck v. Pro-Choice Network, Western N.Y 
In I v. Pro-Choice Network, Western N.Y, 519 U.S. 357 (1997), the Supreme Court held that an injunction provision that required abortion protesters to move away from abortion clinic patients who asked to be left alone did not violate the First Amendment. The District Court had issued its opinion in Bray. In light of Bray, the District Court dismissed the respondents' § 1985(3) claim, and the Supreme Court found adequate basis remaining to support the injunction.
 Christian Legal Soc. Chapter v. Martinez 
Christian Legal Soc. Chapter v. Martinez, 561 U.S. 661 (2010) addressed the question of whether a public university could deny official recognition and the use of school funds and facilities to a student group that refused to open membership and leadership to all students. The CLS chapter had contended that it does not exclude individuals because of sexual orientation, but rather “on the basis of a conjunction of conduct and the belief that the conduct is not wrong.” The court held that the university's policy was a reasonable viewpoint-neutral condition on access to the student-organization forum. Bray was cited as an example of a prior decision that had declined to distinguish between status and conduct in the context of unequal treatment, quoting Justice Scalia's example that "A tax on wearing yarmulkes is a tax on Jews." 
 Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization 
Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization, 597 U.S. ___ (2022) declined to find a right to abortion under the Fourteenth Amendment’s Equal Protection Clause, quoting Bray's finding that the “...goal of preventing abortion” does not constitute “invidiously discriminatory animus” against women that would be subject to heightened scrutiny.
References
External links
Category:Right to abortion under the United States Constitution
Category:Right to privacy under the United States Constitution
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1993 in United States case law
"""

From "Breard v. City of Alexandria" ==> """
Breard v. City of Alexandria, 341 U.S. 622 (1951), was a United States Supreme Court case, which held that door-to-door solicitation could be restricted without violating the First Amendment or the Dormant Commerce Clause.
Background
Jack H. Breard was a regional representative for Keystone Readers Services, Inc. Breard was arrested for going door-to-door in the City of Alexandria, Louisiana soliciting magazine subscriptions. Breard was arrested for violating an ordinance that required him to get permission from the owners of the residences where he was soliciting.
Opinion of the Court
The case went all the way to the Supreme Court, which ruled the Breard's First Amendment Rights were not violated and that door-to-door solicitation could be restricted without unduly interfering with interstate commerce, and without violating Due Process.. The court also held that this ordinance did not violate the Dormant Commerce Clause.
In a dissenting opinion, Justice Black held that the decision went against recent doctrine. Vinson and Douglas wrote another dissenting opinion, calling the ordinance "flat prohibition" and arguing that it discriminated against interstate commerce because it made an exception for local farm products.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1951 in United States case law
Category:Alexandria, Louisiana
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
"""

From "Breard v. Greene" ==> """
Breard v. Greene, 523 U.S. 371 (1998), is a United States Supreme Court decision decided on April 14, 1998 which placed the United States directly in conflict with the International Court of Justice and has since been used as precedent.Justice and Society Program Newsletter Spring 1999  The Aspen InstituteWash Park Prophet: Geneva Convention Myths and Facts
Background
In 1992, Ángel Francisco Breard, a citizen of Paraguay, was convicted of the rape and capital murder of Ruth Dickie. Breard was scheduled to be executed by the Commonwealth of Virginia in 1996. Ultimately, Breard filed a motion for habeas relief in Federal District Court, alleging that arresting authorities violated the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations when they failed to inform him that, as a foreign national, he had the right to contact the Paraguayan Consulate. The court concluded that Breard had procedurally defaulted on this claim by failing to raise it in state court. The Court of Appeals affirmed. In 1996, Paraguayan officials brought suit alleging that Virginia officials had violated their rights under the Vienna Convention by failing to inform Breard of his treaty rights and the Paraguayan consulate of Breard's situation. Ultimately, the District Court concluded that it lacked jurisdiction. The Court of Appeals affirmed.
The U.S. Supreme Court ruled Breard would not receive a stay of execution and/or other relief under the Vienna Convention.
In a per curiam opinion, the Court denied the stay applications and all other relief. The majority of the Court concluded that, because he had procedurally defaulted it, Breard could not raise his Vienna Convention claim on federal habeas corpus review. Moreover, the Court reasoned that Breard could not have demonstrated that the alleged violation of the Vienna Convention had an effect on his state trial that ought to have resulted in the overturning of his conviction. Additionally, the Court found that the Vienna Convention did not clearly provide a foreign nation with a private right of action in U.S. courts. Justices John Paul Stevens, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, and Stephen Breyer, in separate dissents, argued that the Court ought to have granted the stay applications and considered the merits of the case to different degrees.
The case is also notable, as a precedent, because it is one of the most recent affirmations at the U.S. Supreme Court level of the continued validity of the long-standing U.S. constitutional law principle that a duly Senate ratified treaty may be overridden by a later domestic statute enacted by mere majorities in each house of Congress.  Most countries do not permit treaties to be amended by domestic laws, and instead hold them to be superior to all legal enactments except the provisions of the national constitution in effect when the treaty was adopted.
Aftermath
Shortly after this decision, Ángel Francisco
Breard was executed by lethal injection administered by the Commonwealth of Virginia on April 14, 1998, aged 32.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 523
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 Sanchez-Llamas v. Oregon (2006)
 Medellin v. Texas (2008)
General:
 Capital punishment in Virginia
 Capital punishment in the United States
 List of people executed in Virginia
References
Further reading
External links
REPORTS ARCHIVE FOR THE YEAR 2004
Breard v. Greene: US Supreme Court Decision (17 Apr 98)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:International Court of Justice cases
Category:Legal history of Virginia
Category:1998 in United States case law
Category:1998 in international relations
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States death penalty case law
"""

From "Breedlove v. Suttles" ==> """
Breedlove v. Suttles, 302 U.S. 277 (1937), is an overturned United States Supreme Court decision which upheld the constitutionality of requiring the payment of a poll tax in order to vote in state elections.
Background
At the relevant time, Georgia imposed a poll tax of $1.00 per year, levied generally on all inhabitants. The statute exempted from the tax all persons under 21 or over 60 years of age, and all females who do not register for voting. Under the state constitution, the tax must be paid by the person liable, together with arrears, before he can be registered for voting.
Nolan Breedlove, a white male, 28 years of age, declined to pay the tax, and was not allowed to register to vote.  He filed a lawsuit challenging the Georgia law under the Fourteenth (both the Equal Protection Clause and the Privileges and Immunities Clause) and the Nineteenth amendments.  T. Earl Suttles was named defendant in the case in his official capacity as tax collector of Fulton County, Georgia.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|130px|right|Justice Butler delivered the unanimous opinion of the Court.
Associate Justice Pierce Butler delivered the opinion of the court, which unanimously upheld the Georgia law.
With respect to the differential treatment of men and women under the law, the court held that differences between women and men allowed for special consideration to be given to women:
With respect to the age discrimination claim, the court held that the upper age limit to the tax was similar to exemptions by age given for military or jury service.
With respect to the Nineteenth Amendment, which states that "The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of sex", the court dismissed the notion that the purpose of the tax was "to deny or abridge the right of men to vote on account of their sex", and denied the claim as a result.
Subsequent developments
Georgia abolished its poll tax in 1945.
This decision remained precedent until 1966, when the Supreme Court reversed it in a 6–3 decision in Harper v. Virginia State Board of Elections. Two years earlier, the 24th Amendment had been ratified, prohibiting the use of the poll tax (or any other tax) as a precondition for voting in federal elections.  Justice Hugo Black, who participated both in the Breedlove decision and in the Harper decision, dissented from the Harper decision declaring the poll tax to be unconstitutional.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 302
References
External links
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:History of voting rights in the United States
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Fourteenth Amendment case law
Category:United States Nineteenth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1937 in United States case law
Category:African-American history between emancipation and the civil rights movement
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:Georgia (U.S. state) elections
Category:African-American history of Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:Fulton County, Georgia
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
"""

From "Breithaupt v. Abram" ==> """
Breithaupt v. Abram, 352 U.S. 432 (1957), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that involuntary blood samples, taken by a skilled technician to determine intoxication, do not violate substantive due process under the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution.Breithaupt v. Abram, 352 U.S. 432, 433-34, 437, 439 (1957). This case was only the second time the Court considered whether police could forcibly enter inside a suspect's body to extract evidence.Blake A. Bailey, et al., Criminal Law - Lee v. Winston: Court-Ordered Surgery and the Fourth Amendment - A New Analysis of Reasonableness?, 60  149 (1984). Writing for a 6–3 majority, Justice Tom C. Clark argued that blood tests were necessary as a matter of public policy to ensure traffic safety on roads and highways, and that "modern community living requires modern scientific methods of crime detection."Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 439. Chief Justice Earl Warren and Justice William O. Douglas both wrote dissenting opinions in which they argued that the involuntary blood sample taken in this case was "repulsive" and violated substantive due process.Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 440  (Warren, C.J., dissenting); Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 444 (Douglas, J., dissenting).
Background
The constitutionality of searches inside the body
In the 1950s the Supreme Court of the United States addressed for the first time whether the constitution permits law enforcement to forcibly extract evidence from inside the human body. The first case to address this question, Rochin v. California, set strict limits on the power of police to remove evidence from inside the human body.Rochin v. California, 342 U.S. 165, 172-73 (1952). In Rochin, police officers broke into the home of an individual who was suspected of selling narcotics and observed him place several small capsules into his mouth.Rochin, 342 U.S. at 166; see also Brief for Petitioner, Rochin v. California, 342 U.S. 165 (U.S., 1952). After a brief struggle, officers attempted to force open the suspect's mouth, but were unable to retrieve the capsules.Rochin, 342 U.S. at 166 ("the three officers ‘jumped upon him’ and attempted to extract the capsules"). Officers then handcuffed the suspect and transported him to a local hospital, where "a doctor forced an emetic solution through a tube into Rochin's stomach against his will."Rochin, 342 U.S. at 166. Through this stomach pumping, officers discovered two capsules containing morphine.Rochin, 342 U.S. at 166; Brief for Petitioner, Rochin v. California, 342 U.S. 165 (U.S., 1952) ("the officer deduced they contained narcotics because there would be a strong suspicion on his part that they did contain narcotics"). In a unanimous decision, the United States Supreme Court held the forced stomach pumping violated the suspect's Fourteenth Amendment rights to substantive due process.Rochin, 342 U.S. at 172-73. Writing for the majority, Justice Felix Frankfurter stated:
Although the Court held that evidence obtained in violation of substantive due process must be excluded in criminal prosecutions, the court declined to incorporate a broad exclusionary rule for all constitutional violations.E. John Wherry, Jr., Vampire or Dinosaur: A Time to Revisit Schmerber v. California?, 19  503, 510 (1996) ("[The] Rochin decision applied the exclusionary rule to state courts for the first time, but only where conscience-shocking due process issues were present."). Likewise, the Court left unanswered the question of whether evidence obtained through involuntary blood samples violates the Fifth Amendment's privilege against self incrimination.See Schmerber v. California, 384 U.S. 757, 765 (1966).
Arrest and prosecution of Paul Breithaupt
In 1951, a truck driven by Paul Breithaupt collided with another vehicle while driving on a highway near Carlsbad, New Mexico.Brief for Petitioner, Breithaupt v. Abram, 352 U.S. 432 (U.S., 1957); see also , Breithaupt v. Abram. Three passengers in Breithaupt's truck were killed, and Breithaupt was taken to a local hospital to treat serious injuries.Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 433; Brief for Petitioner, Breithaupt v. Abram, 352 U.S. 432 (U.S., 1957). Responding officers found a nearly empty one-pint bottle of whiskey in the truck's glove compartment.Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 433. While Breithaupt lay unconscious in the emergency room, officers ordered physicians to take a sample of his blood.Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 433; Brief for Petitioner, Breithaupt v. Abram, 352 U.S. 432 (U.S., 1957). A chemical analysis of this blood sample determined that Breithaupt was under the influence of alcohol when the sample was taken.Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 433 ("laboratory analysis showed this blood to contain about .17% alcohol"); Brief for Petitioner, Breithaupt v. Abram, 352 U.S. 432 (U.S., 1957). This blood sample was admitted into evidence at trial, and Breithaupt was ultimately convicted of involuntary manslaughter.Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 433. Breithaupt filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus to the Supreme Court of New Mexico, but the state supreme court denied relief.Breithaupt v. Abram, 58 N.M. 385 (1954). He then filed an appeal with the Supreme Court of the United States, claiming the taking of the blood sample violated his rights to substantive due process.Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 434 ("Petitioner contends that his conviction, based on the result of the involuntary blood test, deprived him of his liberty without that due process of law guaranteed him by the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution."). On April 23, 1956, the Supreme Court granted Breithaupt's petition for certiorari.Breithaupt v. Abram, 351 U.S. 906 (1956).
Opinion of the Court
Writing for the Court's majority, Justice Tom C. Clark distinguished the facts of this case from the events that occurred in Rochin v. California.Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 435. Because the blood sample in this case was taken "under the protective eye of a physician," there was nothing "brutal" or "offensive" about the extraction.Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 435-36 ("certainly the test as administered here would not be considered offensive by even the most delicate"). Additionally, Justice Clark concluded that the absence of conscious consent "does not necessarily render the taking a violation of a constitutional right.Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at  435. Rather, courts should look to community standards of fairness and decency when evaluating constitutional violations:
Because blood tests were "routine in our everyday life," Justice Clark argued that "a blood test taken by a skilled technician" does not "shock the conscience" or offend an ordinary "sense of justice."Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 436-37. However, Justice Clark also cautioned in dicta that "indiscriminate taking of blood under different conditions or by those not competent to do so" may rise to the level of "brutality" set forth in Rochin.Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 437-38. If law enforcement and physicians do not provide "every proper medical precaution" to the accused, the extraction may violate the constitution.Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 438. Additionally, as a matter of public policy, Justice Clark argued that "modern community living requires modern scientific methods of crime detection" and blood tests were necessary to keep the roads safe.Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 439. Justice Clark also declined to incorporate the Fourth Amendment protection against warrantless searches or the Fifth Amendment privilege against self incrimination to the states.Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 434.
Chief Justice Warren's dissenting opinion
thumb|right|upright=1.0|In his dissenting opinion, Justice William O. Douglas argued for an expansive interpretation of the right against self incrimination, and that "under our system of government, police cannot compel people to furnish the evidence necessary to send them to prison."Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 443 (Douglas, J., dissenting).
Chief Justice Earl Warren wrote a dissenting opinion in which he argued that the facts of this case were analogous to those in Rochin, and that the blood test in this case violated Breithaupt's rights to substantive due process.Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 440 (Warren, C.J., dissenting) ("I cannot agree with the Court when it says, ‘we see nothing comparable here to the facts in Rochin.’"). He criticized Justice Clark's majority opinion for relying on policy arguments about highway safety to distinguish Rochin, and that narcotics enforcement "is surely a state interest of at least as great magnitude as the interest in highway law enforcement."Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 440 (Warren, C.J., dissenting). Chief Justice Warren also criticized Justice Clark's reliance on common standards of decency and the commonplace nature of blood tests, and instead urged the Court to hold that "bruishing the body, breaking skin, puncturing tissue or extracting body fluids" always constitute a due process violation when police collect evidence.Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 442 (Warren, C.J., dissenting).
Justice Douglas' dissenting opinion
Justice William O. Douglas also wrote a dissenting opinion in which he noted that the court had set aside convictions in the past when the police engaged in subtle, non-violent manipulation,See Leyra v. Denno, 347 U.S. 556 (1954). and that the Court should "take the same libertarian approach here."Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 443 (Douglas, J., dissenting). He also agreed that this case was indistinguishable from Rochin and it was "repulsive" for officers to stick a needle in the arm of an unconscious person.Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 444 (Douglas, J., dissenting). Justice Douglas also advocated for an expansive interpretation of the right against self incrimination, and that "under our system of government, police cannot compel people to furnish the evidence necessary to send them to prison."Breithaupt, 352 U.S. at 443 (Douglas, J., dissenting).
Subsequent developments
Although the Court declined to incorporate the Fourth Amendment's exclusionary rule or the Fifth Amendment's privilege against self incrimination in Breithaupt, the Court ultimately incorporated both of these rights to the states in 1964 and 1965.See Griffin v. California, 380 U.S. 609 (1965); Aguilar v. Texas, 378 U.S. 108 (1964); Malloy v. Hogan, 378 U.S. 1 (1964). Nine years after Breithaupt, the Court granted review in Schmerber v. California to clarify whether admitting involuntary blood samples into evidence in a criminal prosecution violated Fourth Amendment protections against unreasonable searches and seizures or the Fifth Amendment privilege against self incrimination.Schmerber v. California, 382 U.S. 971 (1966). In a 5-4 opinion, Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. held that blood samples do not implicate the right against self incrimination because the extraction and chemical analysis of blood samples do not involve "even a shadow of testimonial compulsion."Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 765. However, Justice Brennan also ruled that ordinarily, search warrants are required "where intrusions into the human body are concerned."Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 770. 
In 1985, the Supreme Court again revisited the topic of involuntary bodily intrusions in Winston v. Lee, when the Court held that the State of Virginia could not force an individual to undergo surgery to extract a bullet that may be evidence of a crime.Winston v. Lee, 470 U.S. 753, 767 (1985). The Court did not explicitly evaluate whether the surgery would violate substantive due process, but the Court applied Schmerber to conclude that the surgery would constitute an unreasonable search under the Fourth Amendment.Winston, 470 U.S. at 762-63.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 352
Missouri v. McNeely (2013)
Winston v. Lee (1985)
Schmerber v. California (1966)
Rochin v. California (1952)
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:United States Fourteenth Amendment case law
Category:1957 in United States case law
"""

From "The Bremen v. Zapata Off-Shore Co." ==> """
The Bremen v. Zapata Off-Shore Company, 407 U.S. 1 (1972), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court considered when a U.S. court should uphold the validity of a contractual forum selection clause.
The parties had entered into an agreement for a drilling rig to be towed from Louisiana to Italy, which included a clause stating that disputes would be settled by a court in England. When a storm forced the towing party to make land in Tampa, Florida, the other party sued there. After the lower courts refused to uphold the forum selection clause, the Supreme Court held that it was enforceable unless the party seeking to avoid it could meet the high burden of showing it to be unreasonable or unjust.
 Rationale 
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 407
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States admiralty case law
Category:United States civil procedure case law
Category:United States forum selection case law
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Brendlin v. California" ==> """
Brendlin v. California, 551 U.S. 249 (2007), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States that held that all occupants of a car are "seized" for purposes of the Fourth Amendment during a traffic stop, not just the driver.
Facts
In the early morning hours of November 27, 2001, a Sutter County deputy sheriff and his partner, who was a cadet at the time, stopped a car in which Bruce Brendlin was riding. The car's registration had expired, but the owner had applied for a renewal, and a valid temporary registration permit was properly affixed to the car. Nevertheless, the deputy decided to investigate further. He asked the driver of the car, Karen Simeroth, for her license, and noticed that Bruce Brendlin, "one of the Brendlin brothers," was sitting in the passenger seat. The deputy determined that there was a warrant out for Brendlin's arrest, and so he called for backup. Once backup arrived, Brendlin and Simeroth were arrested. The police found an orange syringe cap on Brendlin's person while on Simeroth's person and vehicle, they found methamphetamine, marijuana, and various drug paraphernalia along with equipment used to manufacture methamphetamine in the car.
Brendlin was charged with possession and manufacture of methamphetamine. Before trial, he moved to suppress the evidence found on his person and in the car as fruits of an unlawful seizure—unlawful because, he argued, the police had acted in violation of his Fourth Amendment rights and had neither probable cause, reasonable suspicion, or any warrant to make the traffic stop or seize Brendlin or any of his possessions and use it against him in court. The trial court denied the motion, reasoning that Brendlin was first "seized" at the point he was removed from the car and arrested. Brendlin pleaded guilty but reserved the right to appeal the suppression issue, and was sentenced to four years in prison.
The California Court of Appeal reversed the trial court's denial of the motion to suppress. However, the California Supreme Court reversed the Court of Appeal, reinstating the trial court's decision. Although the State conceded that the police had no lawful basis to effect the traffic stop, the California Supreme Court still held that the trial court was correct in denying the motion to suppress because, it reasoned, "a passenger is not seized as a constitutional matter in the absence of additional circumstances that would indicate to a reasonable person that he or she was the subject of the peace officer's investigation or show of authority."  Simeroth was the exclusive target of the traffic stop, and so Brendlin was not seized until the police did something else to cast their eyes upon him. The decision was at odds with several federal circuit courts of appeal.
The issue before the Court was whether a passenger in a vehicle subject to a traffic stop is thereby "detained" for purposes of the Fourth Amendment, thus allowing the passenger to contest the legality of the traffic stop.
Opinion of the Court
A person is "seized" for purposes of the Fourth Amendment when physical force or a show of authority terminates or restrains his freedom of movement. If the police's intent to restrain an individual is unclear, or if an individual's submission to a show of authority takes the form of passive acquiescence, a seizure does not occur unless a reasonable person would not feel free to leave in light of all the circumstances. If, however, the person has no desire to leave for reasons unrelated to the traffic stop, there is no seizure.
Before the Court's decision in this case, the law was clear that a traffic stop seized the driver of the car. The Court had also repeatedly suggested—but never formally held—that a traffic stop in fact seizes everyone in the vehicle. With its decision in this case, the Court expressly so held. "We think that in these circumstances any reasonable passenger would have understood the police officers to be exercising control to the point that no one in the car was free to depart without police permission."
A traffic stop necessarily curtails the freedom of movement of all within the vehicle, and a reasonable person riding in a stopped vehicle would know that some wrongdoing led the police to stop the vehicle. At the same time, any occupant of the vehicle cannot be sure of the reason for the stop. "If the likely wrongdoing is not the driving, the passenger will reasonably feel subject to suspicion owing to close association; but even when the wrongdoing is only bad driving, the passenger will expect to be subject to some scrutiny, and his attempt to leave the scene would be so obviously likely to prompt an objection from the officer that no reasonable passenger would feel free to leave in the first place." Moreover, no passenger could expect an officer to allow him to move around in ways that might jeopardize the officer's safety.
The California Supreme Court went astray by making three assumptions with which the Court disagreed. First, it reasoned that Brendlin was not the initial focus of the police's investigation, being concerned as they were with verifying the registration of the car, which Brendlin did not own. But the Court pointed out that this reasoning ignores the focus of the Fourth Amendment on what a reasonable person would believe, not the subjective intentions of the officers. Second, the California court reasoned that Brendlin was not in a position to submit to the officers' show of authority because only the driver of the car could do so. But the acts that constitute submission to a show of authority depend on what the person was doing beforehand. As a passenger in a vehicle, Brendlin could not affirmatively submit until the vehicle was stopped on the side of the road. Third, the California Supreme Court resisted the conclusion the Court drew because it feared that occupants of cars merely stuck in traffic would also be "seized" under a contrary holding. But the Court noted that "incidental restrictions on freedom of movement would not tend to affect an individual's sense of security and privacy in traveling in an automobile." Indeed, the California court's holding was a kind of incentive for the police to conduct "roving patrols" that would violate the Fourth Amendment rights of drivers.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 551
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 United States v. Drayton (2002)
 Manuel v. Joliet (2017)
References
External links
  Brief of Petitioner Brendlin
  Brief of Respondent State of California
  Reply brief of Petitioner
  Amicus brief of the ACLU
  Opinion of the California Supreme Court
  Opinion of the California Court of Appeal
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:2007 in California
Category:Legal history of California
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Brenner v. Manson" ==> """
Brenner v. Manson, 383 U.S. 519 (1966), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court in which the Court held that a novel process for making a known steroid did not satisfy the utility requirement because the patent applicants did not show that the steroid served any practical function.. The Court ruled that "a process patent in the chemical field, which has not been developed and pointed to the degree of specific utility, creates a monopoly of knowledge which should be granted only if clearly commanded by the statute."383 U.S. at 534. Practical or specific utility, so that a "specific benefit exists in currently available form" is thus the requirement for a claimed invention to qualify for a patent.383 U.S. at 534-35.
The case is known for the statement "a patent is not a hunting license."383 U.S. at 536. What Justice Fortas meant by this quip was that patents should not be granted so that the patentee could look for (hunt) a utility after gaining possession of a patent monopoly.
Appellate jurisdiction issue
The Manson case is the first in which the Court granted a writ of certiorari in an appeal of a patent office rejection of a patent application. For many years there had been uncertainty whether the United States Court of Customs and Patent Appeals (CCPA) was an Article III court, and thus one as to which the Supreme Court had certiorari jurisdiction.In , and , the Court had held that the CCPA and Court of Claims were Article I courts. See also . However, subsequent legislation made the matter unclear.
For many years, almost until the eve of the Manson case, the Solicitor General had opposed petitions for certiorari by disappointed patent applicants on the basis that the CCPA was an Article I court to which the Supreme Court's certiorari jurisdiction did not extend. In Lurk v. United States,. however, the Court held that judges of the CCPA (as well as those of the Court of Claims) were Article III judges.However, the Lurk decision  expressly left open the question whether  conferred certiorari jurisdiction over patent and trademark cases decided in the C.C.P.A., 370 U.S. at 578 n. 49. It suggested, however, that the prior law to the contrary was a museum piece. In the Manson case the Court expressly held, unanimously, that certiorari was available to review CCPA decisions.383 U.S. at 528 ("We therefore conclude that § 1256 authorizes the grant of certiorari in the present case."
This paved the way for the US Government to seek review in the Supreme Court of judgments of the CCPA (and its successor the Federal Circuit) reversing denials of patent applications, which it did beginning with Manson.
Substantive patent law issue
thumb|150px|Justice Abe Fortas
Justice Abe Fortas delivered the unanimous opinion of the Court on the jurisdictional issue in this case and the 7-2 opinion of the Court on the issue of utility. Justice John Marshall Harlan II, joined by Justice William O. Douglas, dissented on the utility issue.
Majority opinion
The substantive patent law issue in the case was the degree of specific utility a claimed invention must have in order to qualify for patenting. Andrew Manson applied for a patent on a novel process for making a form of dihydrotestosterone, a known steroid chemical. A specific use for the product was not known or disclosed by Manson, although it was hypothesized that it could be screened for possible anti-cancer utility. Other steroids of similar chemical structure were known to inhibit tumors in mice.383 U.S. at 521-22. The Patent Office took the position that a process for making a known product could be patented only if the product had a known utility,The agency said: "It is our view that the statutory requirement of usefulness of a product cannot be presumed merely because it happens to be closely related to another compound which is known to be useful." See 383 U.S. at 522. while Manson argued, and the Court of Customs and Patent Appeals subsequently agreed, that it was sufficient for the process to be useful in making the product regardless of whether the product itself had any particular utility. The Patent Office refused to allow Manson to proceed. He appealed, and the Court of Customs and Patent Appeals reversed the Patent Office, saying that "where a claimed process produces a known product, it is not necessary to show utility for the product" so long as the product "is not alleged to be detrimental to the public interest."383 U.S. at 522. The Office then sought review in the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court began by considering whether the fact that a closely related chemical had displayed anti-tumor activity in mice sufficed to satisfy the requirement in 35 U.S.C. § 101 that the subject matter of a patent must be "useful.".
The Court said it would not overturn the Office's finding that it did not follow from the mice data that the claimed process was useful, because whether the steroid product yielded by Manson's process would have similar tumor-inhibiting characteristics could not be assumed without proof, given the unpredictability of compounds in the steroid field.383 U.S. at 532. Nor was the fact that the invention was not "harmful to society" sufficient. "There are, after all, many things in this world which may not be considered "useful" but which, nevertheless are totally without a capacity for harm."383 U.S. at 533.
Manson argued that allowing such claims as his would encourage disclosure, discourage secrecy, and promote efforts to make technological advances. The Court replied that a ’more compelling consideration" was that the monopoly so granted would discourage inventive activity by others:
[A] process patent in the chemical field, which has not been developed and pointed to the degree of specific utility, creates a monopoly of knowledge which should be granted only if clearly commanded by the statute. Until the process claim has been reduced to production of a product shown to be useful, the metes and bounds of that monopoly are not capable of precise delineation. It may engross a vast, unknown, and perhaps unknowable area. Such a patent may confer power to block off whole areas of scientific development, without compensating benefit to the public. The basic quid pro quo contemplated by the Constitution and the Congress for granting a patent monopoly is the benefit derived by the public from an invention with substantial utility. Unless and until a process is refined and developed to this point—where specific benefit exists in currently available form—there is insufficient justification for permitting an applicant to engross what may prove to be a broad field.
Dissent
In dissent, Justice Harlan argued that the result of the ruling might be to retard chemical progress:
What I find most troubling about the result reached by the Court is the impact it may have on chemical research. Chemistry is a highly interrelated field, and a tangible benefit for society may be the outcome of a number of different discoveries, one discovery building upon the next. To encourage one chemist or research facility to invent and disseminate new processes and products may be vital to progress, although the product or process be without "utility" as the Court defines the term, because that discovery permits someone else to take a further but perhaps less difficult step leading to a commercially useful item. In my view, our awareness in this age of the importance of achieving and publicizing basic research should lead this Court to resolve uncertainties in its favor, and uphold the respondent's position in this case.383 U.S. at 540 (Harlan, J., dissenting).
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States patent case law
Category:1966 in United States case law
"""

From "Brentwood Academy v. Tennessee Secondary School Athletic Ass'n" ==> """
Brentwood Academy v. Tennessee Secondary School Athletic Association, 531 U.S. 288 (2001), is a United States Supreme Court case concerning whether the actions of an interscholastic sport-association that regulated sports among Tennessee schools could be regarded as a state actor for First Amendment and Due Process purposes.. The Court held that the sport-association can be sued as a state actor because its actions and history have been "entangled" with state action.. While the Supreme Court would reconsider this same case in the future, this specific decision became important in articulating a new principle of what entities are bound by the First Amendment.
Background
The Tennessee Secondary School Athletic Association (TSSAA) is a non-profit membership corporation organized to regulate interscholastic sports among its members (a large portion of the public and private high schools in Tennessee)..531 U.S. at 290.  The association's role in regulating interscholastic competition in public schools was recognized by the state's Board of Education in the case. Brentwood Academy is a private high school that fields interscholastic teams as a member of TSSAA. Brentwood was highly successful in sports competition, winning nine state football championships between 1969, when it was founded, and 1997. This success fostered resentment among opponent schools, which questioned the Academy's tactics for recruiting players.
In 1997, TSSAA investigated rumors that Brentwood Academy was engaging in illegal practices to recruit public school athletes to the school. No such practices were identified, but TSSAA discovered that Brentwood Academy's football coach had invited eighth grade boys who would be enrolling in the school the following school year to attend spring football practice. TSSAA identified this as a violation of its rules and fined the school $3,000 for contacting student athletes prior to their official enrollment at the school and for violating a TSSAA policy prohibiting "undue influence on a student (or) his or her parents...to secure or to retain a student for athletic purposes." The association also placed the school on four years' probation and banned it from participating in state playoff games for two years.
Brentwood Academy sued the association over this action.531 U.S. at 291. Brentwood argued that the enforcement of the rule constituted state action which they claimed violated the First Amendment and the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause. The school asserted that their due process rights had been violated because there were no evidentiary hearings to determine the validity of the claim that they inappropriately recruited football players. Further, they argued that the rule violated their freedom of speech because it restricted the ways the Academy could recruit. In July 1998, the District Court agreed with this argument and granted summary judgement to the Academy, while enjoining the association from enforcing the rule. A year later, the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed the lower court's decision, finding that the actions of the association did not constitute 'state action'.Brentwood Academy v. Tennessee Secondary School Athletic Ass'n, 180 F.3d 758 (6th Cir. 1999); rehearing en banc denied, 190 F.3d 705 (6th Cir. 1999).531 U.S. at 293. The United States Supreme Court granted certiorari of the case to review this question.
Decision
Before any questions of First Amendment law could be decided, the Court had to first determine whether TSSAA was a state entity and so whether the First Amendment applied..
The Court issued a divided decision, splitting 5–4 in favor of reversing the Sixth Circuit and finding the actions of the association as "state action."531 U.S. at 296.
Justice Souter wrote for the five-justice majority, "The nominally private character of the Association is overborne by the pervasive entwinement of public institutions and public officials in its composition and workings, and there is no substantial reason to claim unfairness in applying constitutional standards to it."531 U.S. at 295. Part of the basis for this determination were historical statements by the Tennessee Board of Education, which had granted regulatory authority to the association and recognition of its own independent authority. For example, the Board explicitly approved the TSSAA's rules and reserved the right to continuously review them in the future. Further, employees at the association were given state pensions. Because the association could essentially "coerce" the member schools to follow its rules and the state would back it up, it was using state police power.531 U.S. at 297. Therefore, Souter concluded, the restrictions on denial of due process would apply to the association, and the lawsuit could proceed in the lower courts..
Dissenting opinion
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by three other Justices. He criticized the usage of a new "entwinement" standard for determining state action, which he said "stretched the doctrine beyond its permissible limits."531 U.S. at 305-06 (Thomas, J., dissenting). He attacked the majority's decision as breaking a prohibition on extending the Fourteenth Amendment to "merely private conduct," relying on similar cases that did not extend 'state action' to collegiate sports associations. Further, he said the meaning of 'entwinement' is "unclear" because it was left undefined and possibly too expansive. He concluded by stating that the Court should have affirmed the Sixth Circuit's opinion.
Subsequent history
This case created the "entwinement test", the principle that a private organization could be connected in such a way with state organizations that the private organization itself exercises state power.. With this new rule announced, the Court sent the case back to lower courts to reconsider the arguments of Brentwood Academy.
The case was sent back to the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals who instructed the association that they could prevail if they showed the enforced rule was narrowly defined to promote "governmental interests". A second District Court trial on this factor again resulted in a finding in favor of Brentwood Academy. The Sixth Circuit this time affirmed. In 2007, the Supreme Court again granted review and this time reversed in favor of the association.Tennessee Secondary School Athletic Ass'n v. Brentwood Academy, . In a unanimous decision, Justice John Paul Stevens held that the actual rule did not violate the First Amendment and that the tactics used to recruit football players rose to the level of a governmental interest.Smirnov, Alexi. "Brentwood Academy v. TSSAA" , "TN Business", January 1, 2008. On other claims though, the case was sent back again to the Sixth Circuit. The Sixth Circuit rejected the remaining claims and the Supreme Court denied review, ending the case.
Notes
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:State action doctrine case law
Category:High school sports in Tennessee
Category:High school sports in the United States
Category:Education in Williamson County, Tennessee
Category:2001 in American sports
Category:2001 in education
"""

From "Brewer v. Williams" ==> """
Brewer v. Williams, 430 U.S. 387 (1977), is a decision by the United States Supreme Court that clarifies what constitutes "waiver" of the right to counsel for the purposes of the Sixth Amendment. Under Miranda v. Arizona, evidence obtained by police during interrogation of a suspect before he has been read his Miranda rights is inadmissible. Here, however, the defendant had been indicted in court and had asserted his desire to have counsel, thus his Sixth Amendment right to counsel had attached. At issue was whether a voluntary admission of incriminating facts in response to police statements made while the defendant was in custody and outside the presence of his lawyer constituted a waiver of this right to counsel.
Facts of the Case
On the afternoon of December 24, 1968, a 10-year-old girl named Pamela Powers went with her family to the YMCA in Des Moines, Iowa, to watch a wrestling tournament in which her brother was participating. When she failed to return from a trip to the washroom, a search for her began. The search was unsuccessful.
Robert Williams, who had recently escaped from a mental hospital, was a resident of the YMCA. Soon after the girl's disappearance Williams was seen in the YMCA lobby carrying some clothing and a large bundle wrapped in a blanket. He obtained help from a 14-year-old boy in opening the street door of the YMCA and the door to his automobile parked outside. When Williams placed the bundle in the front seat of his car the boy "saw two legs in it and they were skinny and white." Before anyone could see what was in the bundle, Williams drove away. His abandoned car was found the following day in Davenport, roughly  east of Des Moines. A warrant was then issued in Des Moines for his arrest on a charge of abduction.
On the morning of December 26, a Des Moines lawyer named Henry McKnight went to the Des Moines police station and informed the officers present that he had just received a long-distance call from Williams and that he had advised Williams to turn himself in to the Davenport police. Williams surrendered that morning to the police in Davenport, who booked him on the charge specified in the arrest warrant and gave him the warnings required by Miranda v. Arizona.. The Davenport police then telephoned the counterparts in Des Moines to inform them that Williams had surrendered. McKnight, the lawyer, was still at the Des Moines police headquarters, and Williams conversed with McKnight on the telephone.
In the presence of the Des Moines chief of police and a police detective named CleatusBovsun, Mara (2012).  "Bury her for Christmas: How the murder of Pamela Powers, 10, reached Supreme Court."  New York Daily News December 16, 2012. Retrieved January 4, 2019. Leaming (died 2001),"Cleatus Leaming" The Des Moines Register, February 25, 2001. Retrieved January 4, 2019. McKnight advised Williams that Des Moines police officers would be driving to Davenport to pick him up, that the officers would not interrogate him or mistreat him, and that Williams was not to talk to the officers about Pamela Powers until after consulting with McKnight upon his return to Des Moines. As a result of these conversations, it was agreed between McKnight and the Des Moines police officials that Detective Leaming and a fellow officer would drive to Davenport to pick up Williams, that they would bring him directly back to Des Moines and that they would not question him during the trip.
In the meantime, Williams was arraigned before a judge in Davenport on the outstanding arrest warrant. The judge advised him of his Miranda rights and committed him to jail. Before leaving the courtroom, Williams conferred with a lawyer named Kelly, who advised him not to make any statements until consulting with McKnight back in Des Moines.
Detective Leaming and his fellow officer arrived in Davenport about noon to pick up Williams and return him to Des Moines. Soon after their arrival they met with Williams and Kelly, who, they understood, was acting as Williams' lawyer. Detective Leaming repeated the Miranda warnings, and told Williams: "[W]e both know that you're being represented here by Mr. Kelly and you're being represented by Mr. McKnight in Des Moines, and... I want you to remember this because we'll be visiting between here and Des Moines."
Williams then conferred again with Kelly alone, and after this conference, Kelly reiterated to Detective Leaming that Williams was not to be questioned about the disappearance of Pamela Powers until after he had consulted with McKnight back in Des Moines. When Leaming expressed some reservations, Kelly firmly stated that the agreement with McKnight was to be carried out: that there was to be no interrogation of Williams during the automobile journey to Des Moines. Kelly was denied permission to ride in the police car back to Des Moines with Williams and the two officers.
The two detectives, with Williams in their charge, then set out on the 160 mi drive. At no time during the trip did Williams express a willingness to be interrogated in the absence of an attorney. Instead, he stated several times, "When I get to Des Moines and see Mr. McKnight, I am going to tell you the whole story." Detective Leaming knew that Williams was a former mental patient, and knew also that he was deeply religious.
The detective and his prisoner soon embarked on a wideranging conversation covering a variety of topics, including the subject of religion. Then, not long after leaving Davenport and reaching the interstate highway, Detective Leaming delivered what has been referred to in the briefs and oral arguments as the "Christian burial speech." Addressing Williams as "Reverend," the detective said:
"I want to give you something to think about while we're traveling down the road.... Number one, I want you to observe the weather conditions, it's raining, it's sleeting, it's freezing, driving is very treacherous, visibility is poor, it's going to be dark early this evening. They are predicting several inches of snow for tonight, and I feel that you yourself are the only person that knows where this little girl's body is, that you yourself have only been there once, and if you get a snow on top of it you yourself may be unable to find it. And, since we will be going right past the area on the way into Des Moines, I feel that we could stop and locate the body, that the parents of this little girl should be entitled to a Christian burial for the little girl who was snatched away from them on Christmas [E]ve and murdered. And I feel we should stop and locate it on the way in rather than waiting until morning and trying to come back out after a snow storm and possibly not being able to find it at all."
Williams asked Detective Leaming why he thought their route to Des Moines would be taking them past the girl's body, and Leaming responded that he knew the body was in the area of Mitchellville, a town they would be passing on the way to Des Moines. Leaming then stated: "I do not want you to answer me. I don't want to discuss it any further. Just think about it as we're riding down the road."
As the car approached Grinnell, a town approximately 100 mi west of Davenport, Williams asked whether the police had found the victim's shoes. When Detective Leaming replied that he was unsure, Williams directed the officers to a service station where he said he had left the shoes; a search for them proved unsuccessful. As they continued towards Des Moines, Williams asked whether the police had found the blanket, and directed the officers to a rest area where he said he had disposed of the blanket. Nothing was found. The car continued towards Des Moines, and as it approached Mitchellville, Williams said that he would show the officers where the body was. He then directed the police to the body of Pamela Powers.
Williams was indicted for first-degree murder. Before trial, his counsel moved to suppress all evidence relating to or resulting from any statements Williams had made during the automobile ride from Davenport to Des Moines. After an evidentiary hearing the trial judge denied the motion. He found that "an agreement was made between defense counsel and the police officials to the effect that the Defendant was not to be questioned on the return trip to Des Moines," and that the evidence in question had been elicited from Williams during "a critical stage in the proceedings requiring the presence of counsel on his request." The judge ruled, however, that Williams had "waived his right to have an attorney present during the giving of such information."
The evidence in question was introduced over counsel's continuing objection at the subsequent trial. The jury found Williams guilty of murder, and the judgment of conviction was affirmed by the Iowa Supreme Court, a bare majority of whose members agreed with the trial court that Williams had "waived his right to the presence of his counsel" on the automobile ride from Davenport to Des Moines. The four dissenting justices expressed the view that "when counsel and police have agreed defendant is not to be questioned until counsel is present and defendant has been advised not to talk and repeatedly has stated he will tell the whole story after he talks with counsel, the state should be required to make a stronger showing of intentional voluntary waiver than was made here."
Williams then petitioned for a writ of habeas corpus in federal court for the Southern District of Iowa. Counsel for the state and for Williams stipulated that "the case would be submitted on the record of facts and proceedings in the trial court, without taking of further testimony." The District Court made findings of fact as summarized above, and concluded as a matter of law that the evidence in question had been wrongly admitted at Williams' trial. This conclusion was based on three alternative and independent grounds: (1) Williams had been denied his constitutional right to the assistance of counsel; (2) he had been denied the constitutional protections defined by Escobedo v. Illinois,. and Miranda v. Arizona; and (3) in any event, his self-incriminatory statements on the automobile trip from Davenport to Des Moines had been involuntarily made. Further, the District Court ruled that there had been no waiver by Williams of the constitutional protections in question.
The Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit, with one judge dissenting, affirmed this judgment and denied a petition for rehearing en banc. The Supreme Court granted certiorari to consider the constitutional issues presented.
 Decision 
Stewart, joined by Brennan, Marshall, Powell, and Stevens, held that for a waiver of the Sixth Amendment right to be acknowledged by the court, it is “incumbent upon  the State to prove ‘an intentional relinquishment or abandonment …”   “… once adversary proceedings have commenced against an individual, he has a right to legal representation when the government interrogates him.”  The right to counsel “does not depend upon a request by the defendant, and the courts indulge in every reasonable presumption against waiver.”.  This is a strict standard and is applied equally to an alleged waiver whether it occurred at trial or in a pre-trial proceeding, such as interrogation.  This is not to be read as stating that a defendant may not waive his right to counsel after invoking it, but the strictness is necessary to counter the pressure of law enforcement in solving a crime.
Once judicial proceedings begin (here, the arraignment in Davenport, Iowa), the Sixth Amendment dictates that a suspect has the right to counsel. Williams had asserted his right to counsel.  He had two lawyers, both had expressed to police that Williams was not to be interrogated without them, and Williams had stated multiple times in the drive that he was going to speak but only after he consulted with a lawyer.  The statements made by Det. Leaming were interrogation since they were made with the intention of eliciting an incriminating statement and played on a known susceptibility.  There was no attempt on the part of Det. Leaming to determine whether Williams wished to waive his right.  There is no reasonable bases under the circumstances to assume that Williams had knowingly waived his right.  Therefore, Williams was being interrogated in custody without the protection of counsel and without having waived that right.
Justice Potter Stewart's majority opinion, however, contained a footnote suggesting that the evidence provided by Williams could still be constitutionally used in a trial:
While neither Williams’ incriminating statements themselves nor any testimony describing his having led the police to the victim’s body can constitutionally be admitted into evidence, evidence of where the body was found and of its condition might well be admissible on the theory that the body would have been discovered in any event, even had incriminating statements not been elicited from Williams. ... In the event that a retrial is instituted, it will be for the state courts in the first instance to determine whether particular items of evidence may be admitted.
 Aftermath 
Williams then received a second trial, in which his attorneys again moved to suppress all evidence stemming from the interrogation of Williams by the detectives. The judge ruled that Williams' statements to the detectives was inadmissible, but citing Stewart's footnote, ruled that the body was admissible as evidence, as it would have inevitably been discovered by law enforcement. On July 15, 1977, Williams was again convicted of first degree murder. This conviction was upheld by the Supreme Court in Nix v. Williams (1984), which affirmed the constitutionality of an inevitable discovery exception..
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
Murder of Sian O'Callaghan, 2011 English case where defendant's confession was suppressed because he was persuaded by police to show them to the body after being denied access to counsel
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Sixth Amendment assistance of counsel case law
Category:1977 in United States case law
"""

From "Charles River Bridge v. Warren Bridge" ==> """
Charles River Bridge v. Warren Bridge, 36 U.S. (11 Pet.) 420 (1837), was a case regarding the Charles River Bridge and the Warren Bridge of Boston, Massachusetts, heard by the United States Supreme Court under the leadership of Chief Justice Roger B. Taney.
In 1785, the Charles River Bridge Company was granted a charter to construct a bridge over the Charles River connecting Boston and Charlestown, roughly where the present-day Charlestown Bridge is located. When the Commonwealth of Massachusetts sanctioned another company to build the Warren Bridge in 1828, that would be very close in proximity to the first bridge and would connect the same two cities, the proprietors of the Charles River Bridge claimed that the Massachusetts legislature had broken its contract with the Charles River Bridge Company, and thus the contract clause had been violated. The owners of the first bridge claimed that the charter had implied exclusive rights to the Charles River Bridge Company. The Court ultimately sided with Warren Bridge.. This decision was received with mixed opinions, and had some impact on the remainder of Taney's tenure as Chief Justice.
 Charles River Bridge 
In 1640 the legislature of the Massachusetts Bay Colony, in accordance with common law, assumed control over public ferries. The legislature proceeded to give Harvard College permission to run a ferry on the Charles River between Boston and Charlestown. Harvard operated the ferry until 1785. That year, a group of men petitioned the state legislature to build a bridge across the river due to the inconvenience of the ferry. As time had passed, the two towns had grown and communication between them had become more important, and technology was at a point now where a bridge appeared to be a wise economic undertaking.
The request was granted and the Charles River Bridge Company was given permission to build a bridge and collect tolls for 40 years, but during those 40 years the company would have to pay 200 pounds (or ~$670) to Harvard College annually in order to make up for the profits the college would lose from the ferry. After 40 years of collecting tolls, the company would turn the bridge over to the state, but the government would still have to make the annual payment. In 1792, the Massachusetts legislature extended this charter to seventy years from the opening of the bridge.
 Warren Bridge 
As time passed, the population of Boston increased, as did the amount of business the city was doing with the rest of the world. With these increases, the Charles River Bridge collected more and more profits, and the value of the company's stock started to rise. Shares that had a par value of $333.33 sold for $1,650 in 1805, and by 1814, their price had risen to $2,080. By 1823, the value of the company was estimated to be $280,000, a substantial increase from its original value of $50,000. Between 1786 and 1827 the Charles River Bridge had collected $824,798 in tolls. Very few of the shares belonged to the company's original investors at this time, and the stock was now owned by men who had bought it at very high prices. The public started to complain about having to continue to pay tolls after the bridge's profits had far surpassed the original capital, with interest; but the new investors did not care. In their opinion, they had paid a large sum for the bridge stock, and they did not wish to stop collecting tolls until they themselves had turned a profit. These proprietors decided not to meet any of the public's demands, and they refused both to improve services and reduce tolls.
There were multiple attempts to convince the state legislature to give permission to build a new bridge between Boston and Charlestown, which would be in direct competition with the Charles River Bridge. Eventually, the legislature agreed to grant a charter for a new bridge between Charlestown and Boston. In 1828, a company was given the rights to build the Warren Bridge, 275 yards from the first one. The Warren Bridge would be turned over to the state once enough tolls had been collected to pay for the bridge's construction, or after a maximum of 6 years, after which it would be free to the public. Since it was free, and so close to the Charles River Bridge, the Warren Bridge would obviously take all of the competing bridge's traffic, and therefore its construction would leave the stock of the Charles River Bridge highly devalued and the shareholders would stand to lose a great deal of money. The owners of the Charles River Bridge appealed to the legislature, which responded by giving them another 30 years to collect tolls, extending the collection period to 100 years.
 Arguing the case 
After the Warren Bridge charter was granted, the Charles River Bridge Company filed a lawsuit in the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court (SJC) in an effort to stop the construction of the second bridge. The SJC was divided 2-2 on the matter, and the case was appealed to the United States Supreme Court. The case was argued before the Court in 1831, where the plaintiffs argued that it was unconstitutional for the Massachusetts legislature to charter the Warren Bridge, because creating a competing bridge violated the contract clause in Article I, Section 10, which states, "No State shall pass any Bill of Attainder, ex post facto Law, or Law impairing the Obligation of Contracts".
It appears as though Chief Justice John Marshall, Justice Joseph Story and Justice Smith Thompson, were all in agreement that the Massachusetts legislature had indeed violated the obligation of contract clause in the constitution, but because of justice absences, and disagreements between the justices, no final decision was reached, and the case languished for six years.  During that time, three new justices were appointed by President Andrew Jackson, including the new Chief Justice, Roger Taney; the Warren Bridge had been constructed, and made back the money it had cost to build, and had become a toll-free bridge. The Charles River Bridge was now closed, since it was no longer getting any traffic due to its toll.
Before the Charles River Bridge case was argued before the Supreme Court again, there was a situation in 1833 involving the Camden and Amboy Railroad and the Delaware and Raritan Canal companies. This was not a case that went before the Supreme Court, but many prominent lawyers and justices were asked for their opinion on the situation, and among them was Taney, who was then the Attorney General of the United States. Both of the companies had convinced the New Jersey legislature of 1832 to add a condition to their charters that no other companies would be able to build a means of transportation between Philadelphia and New York City for a certain amount of time. Taney's opinion on the case was that no legislature should have the power to stop the state from creating internal improvements because it was such an important aspect of the state's power.
 Rearguing the case 
The case of Charles River Bridge v. Warren Bridge began again, on January 19, 1837. Warren Dutton and Daniel Webster represented the Charles River Bridge Company; Simon Greenleaf, a Harvard Law School professor, and John Davis, a senator and former governor from Massachusetts, represented Warren Bridge Company.
The lawyers defending the Warren Bridge said that exclusive rights were not mentioned in the charter. The Charles River Bridge lawyers countered that, even though competing bridges were never explicitly addressed in the charter, it was implied in the contract that the Charles River Bridge Company had exclusivity to the bridge traffic between Charlestown and Boston.
The Charles River Bridge lawyers appealed to the Court by arguing that the Court's prime interest should be to protect the property interests of the nation. "I look to the law, to the administration of the law, and, above all, to the supremacy of the law, as it resides in this court," Dutton said, "for the protection of the rights of persons and property, against all encroachments by the inadvertent legislation of the states. So long as this court shall continue to exercise this most salutary and highest of all its functions, the whole legislation of the country will be kept within its constitutional sphere of action."
The plaintiffs discussed what effect the Supreme Court's decision would have on the security of property rights and on the general public around the country. Dutton stated that ten million dollars of property was at stake in Massachusetts alone. He argued that if the Court sided with the defense, the public would then be able to urge the legislature to render other corporations' property valueless, as it had for the Charles River Bridge Company. Dutton further claimed that since the Warren Bridge had now taken all of the traffic of the Charles River Bridge, the construction of the Warren Bridge had been an act of confiscation, and that the property of the plaintiffs had been taken from them and given to the public. If the Court sided with Warren Bridge, Dutton argued, then "all sense of security for the rights of persons and property would be lost."
The Warren Bridge lawyers responded that the state legislature's power was more limited than its opponents believed, and that the legislature did not have the power to give exclusive rights to a private enterprise such as the Charles River Bridge Company. Greenleaf argued that the legislature was entrusted with the right to "provide safe and convenient public ways," and that this right was to be used to benefit the public good; clearly, giving the Charles River Bridge Company exclusive rights would not better the public. The Warren Bridge lawyers also argued on the basis of eminent domain, which enables federal and state governments to take private property for public use as long as it provides the owner with compensation. The defense argued that this was a state, not federal, issue, and should not even be heard in the United States Supreme Court. Finally, the Warren Bridge lawyers pointed out that the Charles River Bridge was not an isolated situation; other enterprises had lost money because of public improvements, such as highways, which lost tolls when railroads were built.
 Deciding the case 
A decision was read on February 14, 1837, which was  5-2 in favor of Warren Bridge. Taney read the majority opinion. Justice John McLean read an opinion stating that he was in favor of the Charles River Bridge company but that it was not the Supreme Court's place to make a decision. Justice Story read a dissenting opinion entirely in favor of the Charles River Bridge Company.
In his opinion, Taney argued that the case was strictly about interpretation of contract, and that the charter contract should be interpreted as narrowly as possible, which meant that the Charles River Bridge did not have exclusive rights. He also stated that, in general, public grants should be interpreted closely and if there is ever any uncertainty in a contract, the decision made should be one to better the public. He said, "While the rights of private property are sacredly guarded, we must not forget that the community also have rights, and that the happiness and well-being of every citizen depends on their faithful preservation." In his remarks, Taney also explored what the negative effects on the country would be if the Court had sided with the Charles River Bridge Company. He stated that had that been the decision of the Court, transportation would be affected around the whole country. Taney made the point that with the rise of technology, canals and railroads had started to take away business from highways, and if charters granted monopolies to corporations, then these sorts of transportation improvements would not be able to flourish. If this were the case then, Taney said, the country would "be thrown back to the improvements of the last century, and obliged to stand still".
 Reactions 
The reactions to Bridge generally varied according to the political views of the critic in questions. Democrats were very much in favor of the decision because they saw it as a victory for states' rights, one of the party's leading platforms at the time.  One Democratic magazine wrote, in regard to Taney's opinion, "he pursues his unbroken chain of clear, logical reasoning, spreads light all around, leaving no cloud to confound or mislead those who may come after him."
The Whig Party, on the other hand, was much more disapproving of the decision.  Members of the party felt that the Massachusetts legislature had violated its contract, and that it was the federal government's responsibility to fix the state's mistake.  The federal government's failure to do so led the Whigs to believe that the power of the federal government was in decline.  The Whigs, who were largely businessmen, also feared that corporate property now had no legal protection.  Chancellor James Kent wrote in the Whig magazine, The New York Review, "A gathering gloom is cast over the future.  We seem to have sunk suddenly below the horizon, to have lost the light of the sun."  (2 New York Review 372, 385 (1838))  Many prominent men, including Daniel Webster and Chancellor Kent, a well-known jurist, expressed their disappointment in the Supreme Court for allegedly violating the Constitution.  Kent wrote, in a letter to Justice Story, "The court has fallen from its high station and commanding dignity, and has lost its energy, and spirit of independence, and accuracy, and surrendered up to the spirit of the day, the true principles of the Constitution."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 36
References
Further reading
 Newmyer, Kent. "Justice Joseph Story: The Charles River Bridge Case and the Crisis of Republicanism," American Journal of Legal History July 1973, Vol. 17 Issue 3, pp 232–245
 External links 
Category:1837 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:Contract Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
Category:Bridges in Boston
Category:Charles River
Category:Toll (fee)
Category:Transport controversies
"""

From "Briggs v. Elliott" ==> """
Briggs v. Elliott, 342 U.S. 350 (1952), on appeal from the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of South Carolina, challenged school segregation in Summerton, South Carolina..  It was the first of the five cases combined into Brown v. Board of Education (1954),. the famous case in which the U.S. Supreme Court declared racial segregation in public schools to be unconstitutional by violating the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause. Following the Brown decision, the district court issued a decree that struck down the school segregation law in South Carolina as unconstitutional and required the state's schools to integrate. Harry and Eliza Briggs, Reverend Joseph A. DeLaine, and Levi Pearson were awarded Congressional Gold Medals posthumously in 2003.
Background
thumb|right|250px|Educational segregation in the US prior to Brown
The case began in 1947 when Levi Pearson wrote a letter to the Clarendon County School District requesting that black children be provided with the same bus transportation that white children in the district received:
In Clarendon County, white children attended schools with a teacher for every grade, class sizes no higher than 30 students, brick schools with heat, indoor toilets, water fountains, modern textbooks, gyms, auditoriums and libraries. However, black children attended school in abandoned hunting or Masonic lodges and often drafty cabins adjacent to churches. Black children brought coal or wood to burn in oil drums for heat, and purchased textbooks that were discarded from white students. For restrooms, they dug and used privies and toted water from the local wells. One first grade teacher in Summerton handled 67 students; one second grade teacher was recorded as having a class of 79.
Prior to Levi Pearson's letter, the school board reserved all of its 30 buses for white children. Because of this, Pearson's children had a 9-mile journey, one-way, to attend the nearest black school. The black children of Clarendon County often had harsh commutes to attend school, including rowing paddle boats to cross bodies of water. In the neighboring Jordan community, some children walked up to 16 miles to and from school each day, and children had to frequently gather wood for heaters within schools.Baker, Robert J. Jordan Elementary School an empty, silent testament to unequal school facilities. "The Item. Feb. 23, 2011. Levi, his brother, Hammett Pearson, and neighbor Joseph Lemon raised $700 to buy the local children a used school bus to use ($8,336 in today dollars), but frequent maintenance led them to ask the local school superintendent, Roderick M. Elliott, for their own bus.Baker, Robert J. Briggs v. Elliott: Summerton schools still mostly segregated.  "The Item." Feb. 23, 2011, Elliott refused, saying that black citizens did not pay enough taxes to warrant a bus and that asking white taxpayers to fund that burden would be unfair.T. Woods, The Politically Incorrect Guide to American History, p. 196
To advance his efforts for safe transportation for black children, Pearson retained South Carolina attorney Harold Boulware and rising NAACP star Thurgood Marshall. Marshall argued that, since the local school board already provided bus transportation for white students, the county was in violation of the United States Supreme Court's “separate but equal” decision in the Plessy v. Ferguson case. The case, which was brought against Clarendon County District 26 on behalf of Pearson's son James, met with immediate resistance. As a result of his lawsuit, Pearson v. Clarendon County, Levi Pearson suffered from acts of domestic terror, such as gun shots fired into his home, as well as economic consequences: local banks refused to provide him with credit to purchase farming materials and area farmers refused to lend him equipment.
In 1948, Pearson v. Clarendon County was dismissed on a technicality when the superintendent noted that Pearson's large property covered multiple district lines. When Levi Pearson's brother, Hammett Pearson, learned of the issue, he offered to replace his brother in the lawsuit.
The rejection of Pearson v. Clarendon County caused the NAACP attorneys to pivot and raise their target to complete desegregation. In 1949, the NAACP agreed to provide funding and sponsor a case that would go beyond transportation and ask for equal educational opportunities in Clarendon County. The first step was to craft a local petition for educational equality. This was done by Rev. Joseph Armstrong DeLaine and Modjeska Monteith Simkins, the noted South Carolina civil rights worker. Simkins organized a national charitable effort for the relief of the oppressed African Americans of Clarendon County. Eventually, more than 100 Clarendon residents signed the petition.
Additional plaintiffs
Others agreed to join the suit of Levi Pearson. Named first in the suit, Harry Briggs, a service station attendant, and Eliza Briggs, a maid, became the main named plaintiffs. Elliott was named the defendant.
When Brown reached the U.S. Supreme Court, South Carolina was one of seventeen states that required school segregation. State law required complete segregation; Article 11, Section 7 of the 1896 Constitution of South Carolina read as follows: "Separate schools shall be provided for children of the white and colored races, and no child of either race shall ever be permitted to attend a school provided for children of the other race." Section 5377 of the Code of Laws of South Carolina of 1942 read: "It shall be unlawful for pupils of one race to attend the schools provided by boards of trustees for persons of another race."
There was little debate about if the Clarendon County schools were unequal. At the beginning of the hearings in U.S. District Court, the defendants shared on the record that "the educational facilities, equipment, curricula and opportunities afforded in School District No. 22 for colored pupils are not substantially equal to those afforded for white pupils."
thumb|Letter sent by Levi Pearson to the Clarendon County School District, requesting that black children be provided with the same bus transportation that white children in the district received.
Proceedings
The case would ordinarily have come up before Judge Julius Waring of the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of South Carolina. However, Judge Waring recommended to Thurgood Marshall for the case to be expanded from an equalization case into a desegregation case. Instead of asking for enforcement of the separate but equal doctrine by bringing the African American schools up to equality with the white schools, the plaintiffs asked for school segregation to be declared unconstitutional.
Three-judge panel
By expanding the case, both Waring and Marshall expected the plaintiffs to lose the case 2—1 and for the case to end up in the U.S. Supreme Court. As predicted, a three-judge panel found segregation lawful by a vote of 2–1, with Judge Waring writing a dissent in which he stated that "segregation is per se inequality." The other two judges were John J. Parker and George Timmerman. The panel also granted an injunction to equalize the uncontested inferiority of the schools used by African American students.
Originally litigated by NAACP lawyer Robert L. Carter, the Briggs case was notable for introducing into evidence the experiments of Kenneth and Mamie Clark, who used dolls to study children's attitudes about race. Under tests performed by Clark, African American students in segregated schools were shown a white doll and an African American doll and asked which one they preferred. When most African American students indicated their preference for the white doll, Clark concluded that segregated schooling decreased African American self-esteem.
Decision
In 1952, the Supreme Court heard the case and returned it to the district court for rehearing after Clarendon County school officials had sent a report on progress in making facilities equal. In March, the district court again heard the case. The Court found that progress had been made towards equality. Thurgood Marshall argued that it may be true, but the real issue was that as long as separation existed, the schools would be unequal. The case was appealed back to the Supreme Court in May. The case was then consolidated with several other school desegregation cases into Brown v. Board of Education.
Briggs was the first of the five Brown cases to be argued before the Supreme Court. Spottswood Robinson and Thurgood Marshall argued the case for the plaintiffs, and former Solicitor General and presidential candidate John W. Davis led the argument for the defense.
Following the Brown decision, the lower court complied with the mandate issued by the Supreme Court and declared the South Carolina school segregation law to be unconstitutional.
Aftermath
thumb|2003 Brown et al. v. the Board of Education of Topeka et al. Congressional Gold Medal
Although Brown resulted in a legal victory against segregation, it was a costly victory for those associated with Briggs. Reverend Joseph DeLaine, the generally acknowledged leader of Summerton's African-Americans, was fired from his post at a local school in Silver. His wife, Mattie, was also fired from her position at Scott's Branch, as were all of the other signatories. De Laine's church was burned, and he moved to Buffalo, New York in 1955 after he had survived an attempted drive-by shooting. Both Harry and Eliza Briggs, on behalf of whose children the suit was filed, lost their jobs. Harry spent more than a decade working in Florida to support the family. Eliza eventually joined her children in New York.
Judge Waring had already been shunned by the white community in Charleston and subjected to attacks for previous decisions favorable to equal rights. After his dissent in the three-judge panel, he retired in 1952 and moved to New York.
Eventually, the state of South Carolina awarded Eliza Briggs its highest civilian honor, the Order of the Palmetto. Reverend Joseph A. De Laine, Harry and Eliza Briggs, and Levi Pearson were awarded Congressional Gold Medals posthumously in 2003.108th Congress: Public Law 108-180
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 342
Summerton High School
References
Further reading
 Bernstein, Alice The People of Clarendon County (2007 - ),
External links
Good background with bibliography related to the case at The University of South Carolina-Aiken via archive.org
 Briggs Petition Petition of Harry Briggs, et al., to the board of trustees for School District No. 22. 11 November 1949.  Clarendon County Board of Education, L14167.  South Carolina Department of Archives and History, Columbia, South Carolina.
“Eyes on the Prize; Interview with Eliza and Harry Briggs Sr.,” 1985-10-25, American Archive of Public Broadcasting
“Eyes on the Prize; Interview with Harry Briggs Jr.,”  1985-11-02, American Archive of Public Broadcasting
Category:1952 in United States case law
Category:African-American history between emancipation and the civil rights movement
Category:African-American history of South Carolina
Category:Clarendon County, South Carolina
Category:Public education in South Carolina
Category:United States school desegregation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:Civil rights movement case law
"""

From "Brigham City v. Stuart" ==> """
Brigham City v. Stuart, 547 U.S. 398 (2006), is a United States Supreme Court case involving the exigent circumstances exception to the Fourth Amendment's warrant requirement.  The Court ruled that police may enter a home without a warrant if they have an objectively reasonable basis for believing that an occupant is or is about to be seriously injured.
The case involved the arrest of four adults seen restraining a juvenile, who punched one of the adults who was restraining him.  The trial court granted the defendants' motion to dismiss, arguing that the warrantless entry was not supported by exigent circumstances; the Utah Court of Appeals and Utah Supreme Court both affirmed the trial court's ruling. However, the U.S. Supreme Court reversed and remanded the case on May 22, 2006.
Background
On July 23, 2001, at about 3:00 AM, four Brigham City police officers were dispatched to a loud house party.  At the front door, the officers determined that knocking would not be productive and made their way down the driveway alongside the house to investigate. Through a slat fence they saw two minors drinking and entered the backyard, having probable cause to do so.  While in the backyard, the officers saw a fight inside the house, which appeared to be four adults restraining a juvenile. At one point, the juvenile broke free and struck one of the occupants of the house in the nose with his hand.
Two officers opened the screen door and "hollered" to identify themselves, but the occupants didn't notice. After entering the house, one officer shouted again to identify himself, this time alerting the occupants.  The occupants then became upset at the presence of the officers in the residence without permission.  The officers arrested the adults and charged them with contributing to the delinquency of a minor, disorderly conduct, and intoxication. The defendants filed a motion to suppress with the trial court. The trial court sided with the defendants, and the city twice appealed to the Utah Court of Appeals and the Utah Supreme Court, which both affirmed the trial court's ruling.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court reversed the decision of the Utah Supreme Court, in a unanimous opinion delivered by Chief Justice John Roberts.  Justice John Paul Stevens delivered a separate concurring opinion.
Exigency
The Court ruled that the officers' warrantless entry into the home was justified under the emergency aid exception to getting a warrant because their entry "was plainly reasonable under the circumstances." In ruling the officers' entry was supported by exigency, the Court cited Mincey v. Arizona, , 393–394:
[W]arrants are generally required to search a person’s home or his person unless 'the exigencies of the situation' make the needs of law enforcement so compelling that the warrantless search is objectively reasonable under the Fourth Amendment." ... One exigency obviating the requirement of a warrant is the need to assist persons who are seriously injured or threatened with such injury. ... Accordingly, law enforcement officers may enter a home without a warrant to render emergency assistance to an injured occupant or to protect an occupant from imminent injury. Mincey, supra, at 392; see also Georgia v. Randolph, 547
The court found that "the officers had an objectively reasonable basis for believing both that the injured adult might need help and that the violence in the kitchen was just beginning."
"Knock and announce" rule
The Court found that "the manner of the officers' entry was also reasonable."  The court found that after seeing the punch, one officer opened the screen door to the kitchen and yelled in "police." Upon nobody hearing him, he stepped into the kitchen and then announced himself again, which prompted the tumult to subside. The Court ruled that:
...the officer's announcement of his presence was at least equivalent to a knock on the screen door. Indeed, it was probably the only option that had even a chance of rising above the din. Under these circumstances, there was no violation of the Fourth Amendment’s knock-and-announce rule.
Also, the Court ruled that once the officers announced their presence, they were free to enter the house to deal with the tumult, as it would be pointless to stand at the door waiting for a response while people brawled inside.
External links
 Duke Law - Brigham City v. Stuart
 Utah Supreme Court - Full text opinion
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:Brigham City, Utah
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Brinegar v. United States" ==> """
Brinegar v. United States, 338 U.S. 160 (1949), was a United States Supreme Court case employing the "reasonableness test" in warrantless searches. The Court held that while the police need not always be factually correct in conducting a warrantless search, such a search must always be reasonable.
 Background 
In Brinegar, the defendant had a reputation for illegally transporting liquor across state lines in violation of 27 U.S.C. 223.Brinegar v. United States, .27 U.S.C. 223 (1936) provided: 
Whoever shall import, bring or transport any intoxicating liquor into any State in which all sales ... of intoxicating liquor containing more than 4 per centum of alcohol by volume are prohibited, otherwise than in the course of continuous interstate transportation through such State, or attempt so to do, or assist in so doing, shall ... if all importation, bringing, or transportation or intoxicating liquor into such State is prohibited by the law thereof; be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than $ 1,000 or imprisoned not more than one year, or both. 27 U.S.C. 223 (1936).
One day when the defendant's car passed an officer, who was parked on the edge of a highway, the officer recognized the defendant and noted that the defendant's vehicle looked "heavily loaded." Upon stopping the vehicle, the officer could see one case of alcohol in the front seat of the car, but the defendant later denied that any liquor was visible. The defendant was arrested for the 27 U.S.C. 223 violation, and the officer seized the alcohol in the car as well as the alcohol he found in the trunk after the arrest. The defendant challenged the constitutionality of his arrest on the grounds that the officer did not have probable cause, and thus the seizure of the alcohol was not pursuant to a valid stop.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court, in finding the arrest to be constitutional, stated that the officer had probable cause to stop the defendant's car.Brinegar, 338 U.S., at 170–71. The Court emphasized that "probable cause" was the standard for conducting the arrest, not "guilt beyond a reasonable doubt" as is required for criminal convictions. The Court stressed that if the "beyond a reasonable doubt" standard were used in ordinary arrests, officers rarely could take "effective" action in protecting the public good because the standard would be too high to meet. The Court noted that to require more than probable cause would harm law enforcement, while to allow less than probable cause would "leave law-abiding citizens at the mercy of the officers' whim or caprice."Brinegar, 338 U.S., at 176. Nonetheless, the Court cautioned, probable cause still requires "a reasonable ground for belief of guilt." Thus, the Court announced that it would consider the reasonableness of an officer's belief when it evaluates a warrantless search.
 Excerpts 
"[B]ecause many situations which confront officers in the course of executing their duties are more or less ambiguous, room must be allowed for some mistakes. . . . But the mistakes must be those of reasonable men, acting on facts leading sensibly to their conclusions of probability." ... "These long-prevailing standards seek to safeguard citizens from rash and unreasonable interferences with privacy and from unfounded charges of crime."
The citizen traveling on the highway "who has given no good cause for believing he is engaged in [illegal] activity is entitled to proceed on his way without interference."Brinegar, 338 U.S., at 177.
The probable cause standard "is a practical, nontechnical conception affording the best compromise that has been found for accommodating [the] often opposing interests" in "safeguarding citizens from rash and unreasonable interferences with privacy and from unfounded charges of crime" and in "giving fair leeway for enforcing the law in the community's protection".
Justice Jackson was "convinced that there are many unlawful searches of homes and automobiles of innocent people which turn up nothing incriminating, in which no arrest is made, about which courts do nothing, and about which we never hear." 
 Brinegar, 338 U.S., at 181.(Jackson, J., dissenting).
Probable cause determination guided by "the factual and practical considerations of everyday life on which reasonable and prudent men, not legal technicians, act".Brinegar, 338 U.S., at 175.
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1949 in United States case law
"""

From "Briscoe v. Bank of Kentucky" ==> """
Briscoe v. Bank of Kentucky, 36 U.S. (11 Pet.) 257 (1837), was a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States involving the intersection of states' rights and monetary policy. In an opinion by Justice John McLean, the Court held that a bank under the de facto control of the state of Kentucky could issue banknotes without violating a provision of the Constitution that forbade states from issuing "bills of credit". The 6–1 decision demonstrated the Taney Court's support for Jacksonian principles of states' rights and opposition to federal control of banking.
 Background 
A provision of the Constitution forbids the states from issuing "bills of credit", coining specie, or making "any Thing but gold and silver Coin a Tender in Payment of Debts". Coins were cumbersome, and they were often in short supply in the West; as such, the states searched for ways to sidestep the constitutional prohibition. In 1820, the state of Kentucky established the Bank of the Commonwealth of Kentucky and authorized it to issue and circulate banknotes. The bank's officials were selected by the Kentucky legislature; its stock was wholly owned by the state; all state funds were deposited into the bank; its dividends were placed into the state treasury. The bank loaned the banknotes it had issued, which could also be used to pay state taxes, to borrowers.
John Briscoe took out a loan from the bank and received payment in banknotes. He defaulted, and the bank sued to collect the debt. Briscoe maintained that the banknotes were bills of credit since they were only pieces of paper whose value stemmed from the state's full faith and credit. He argued that, since the bank was in effect an agent of the state, its issuance of banknotes was unconstitutional. The bank's attorney, Henry Clay, was tasked with explaining why the Court's recent decision in Craig v. Missouri (1830), in which a 4–3 majority had struck down loan certificates issued by Missouri as unconstitutional bills of credit, did not foreclose his arguments. He argued that the bank was not part of the state but instead a separate corporation to which the constitutional prohibition did not apply.
The Kentucky courts ruled in the bank's favor, and Briscoe appealed to the Supreme Court, citing Craig. The case was argued in 1835. A narrow majority of the Court was inclined to reach the same conclusion as in Craig, but the justices did not want to rule on the constitutional question until the vacancy created by Justice Gabriel Duvall's resignation had been filled. The death of Chief Justice John Marshall later that year reduced the number of available justices further. A newly reconstituted Court, on which all but two justices were appointees of President Andrew Jackson, reheard the case in 1837. Only a single justice from the Craig majority – Justice Joseph Story – remained on the bench.
 Decision 
thumb|Justice John McLean delivered the opinion of the Court in Briscoe.
The Court rendered its decision on February 11, 1837. By a 6–1 vote, the justices ruled in favor of the bank, upholding Kentucky's law. Justice John McLean, who had dissented in Craig, delivered the majority opinion. He opined that no previous case had "exceeded", and few had "equalled, the importance of that which arises in this case". McLean admitted that the bank had a strong connection to the state, but, observing that the bank could be sued independently of the state, he concluded that the bank's notes were not backed by the state's credit: they were instead the banknotes of a private corporation that simply happened to be owned by a state. He expressed concern that a ruling against Kentucky could render unconstitutional the banknotes issued by many other states. Although the majority did not reverse Craig directly, some scholars have argued that it effectively overruled the decision. Justices Smith Thompson and Henry Baldwin each filed separate concurring opinions.
The sole dissenter, Justice Story, filed an animated and lengthy opinion. Writing that the bank was "the sole and exclusive instrument of the State, managing its exclusive funds, for its exclusive benefit and under its exclusive management", he concluded that the bank was for all intents and purposes a part of the state, and thus in his view the banknotes were impermissible state currency. He argued that states could not lawfully permit others to do what they could not do themselves. Story, the protégé of Marshall, evoked the late chief justice's spirit by stating that "Mr. Chief Justice Marshall is not here to speak for himself" but that, if he had been, he would have ruled against the bank.
 Legacy 
The decision in Briscoe demonstrated the Taney Court's divergence from the Marshall Court. It illustrated the Taney Court's embrace of Jacksonian principles of states' rights and opposition to national control of banking. The decision enabled states to take action to combat a depression that began in 1837, but it is of little significance today due to broad federal control of the financial system. Scholars have been divided in their views of the Briscoe ruling. In his 1957 book Banks and Politics in America, the financial historian Bray Hammond denounced the decision as "about as weak and timid as any the Court ever pronounced"; the legal historian James Willard Hurst characterized the majority opinion as an "unconvincing attempt" that was "devastated" by Story's dissent. By contrast, the legal scholar David P. Currie in 1985 described Briscoe as "a hard case in which the opposing opinions dealt intelligently with the competing considerations".
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
Category:1837 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
"""

From "Briscoe v. LaHue" ==> """
Briscoe v. LaHue, 460 U.S. 325 (1983), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that Title 42 U.S.C. § 1983 did not authorize a convicted state defendant to assert a claim for damages against a police officer for giving perjured testimony at the defendant's criminal trial.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:United States tort case law
"""

From "Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. v. Superior Court" ==> """
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. v. Superior Court of California, San Francisco County, 582 U.S. ___ (2017), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that California courts lacked personal jurisdiction over the defendant on claims brought by plaintiffs who are not California residents and did not suffer their alleged injury in California.Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. v. Superior Court of California, San Francisco County, No. 16–466, 582 U.S. ____ (2017). It is part of a group of six cases decided since 2011 that have greatly changed the application of personal jurisdiction. 
Background
Bristol-Myers is a large pharmaceutical company that is incorporated in Delaware and has its principal place of business in New York.  The company manufactured and distributed the blood-thinning drug Plavix. A group of people who claimed they had been injured by taking Plavix, consisting of 86 California residents and 592 residents of other states, sued Bristol-Myers in California. Bristol-Myers sought to dismiss the claims of the non-California resident plaintiffs on the ground that the courts of California, a state where the company was neither incorporated nor headquartered, lacked personal jurisdiction over the company with respect to claimants who were not injured in California.
The California courts initially held that California had "general jurisdiction" over Bristol-Myers based on the company's extensive business ties with California. Subsequently, the U.S. Supreme Court decided Daimler AG v. Bauman, which held that a corporation is ordinarily subject to general jurisdiction only in its state of incorporation and the state where it maintains its principal Place of business. Following Daimler, the California courts determined that they did not have general jurisdiction over Bristol-Myers. However, the California Supreme Court upheld specific jurisdiction in this case, as to both the resident and non-resident plaintiffs.
The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari to review the California Supreme Court's decision.
 Opinion of the Court 
Associate Justice Samuel Alito authored the majority opinion, which was joined by all but one of the Justices.
The Court held that California state courts did not have jurisdiction over Bristol-Myers with respect to the non-residents' claims. Specific jurisdiction may exist only where the events underlying the lawsuit arise out of or relate to the defendant's contact with the forum state. Here, the non-resident plaintiffs were not prescribed Plavix in California, did not ingest it in California, and were not injured in California, nor was the drug manufactured in the state. The necessary affiliation between these plaintiffs' claims and the defendant's activities within the forum were thus lacking. The facts that other plaintiffs purchased the drug and were injured in California, and that Bristol-Myers engages in extensive research activities in California unrelated to Plavix, were irrelevant.
The Court concluded that its decision did not prevent the members of the plaintiff class from pursuing their claims. The options included bringing suit on behalf of all the claimants in Delaware or New York, or separate suits in the various states where different claimants reside. In addition, because the decision was based on application of the Due Process Clause to state courts, the Court reserved decision on whether the same jurisdictional limitations would apply to an action brought in federal court.
The key issue was that there was not a direct relation between the nonresidents' claims and the activities of Bristol-Meyers. Since the nonresidents had not bought Plavix in California, nor did they suffer the ill-effects of Plavix there, there could be no direct relation.
 Dissenting opinion 
Justice Sonia Sotomayor dissented. She found nothing unfair or contrary to due process in allowing the claims of a nationwide class of people allegedly injured by the same conduct of the same defendant, which is a Fortune 500 pharmaceutical company doing business nationwide, to be brought in a single litigation. The jurisdictional limitations announced in this case, in Sotomayor's view, would result in unnecessary multiple litigation as cases are brought in multiple states, and may deter some injured parties from pursuing their claims at all.
 Impact 
The case has further increased the difficulty for plaintiffs to succeed in tort cases, especially mass tort cases. Northeastern University law professor Stephen Subrin and colleagues questions the value of making plaintiffs file in their own state, echoing Sotomayor. He further wonders if the majority's alleged cause of "interstate federalism" was sufficient justification for a verdict that strongly favored well-resourced companies over injured plaintiffs.
Berkeley law professor Andrew Bradt writes that the decision does much to favor companies, by further hindering class action and mass-joinder suits (to which the Federal judiciary is already quite hostile). He goes on to add that unfortunately the decision has still not clarified the extremely complex subject of personal jurisdiction.
University of Mississippi professor Michael Hoffheimer cites the case as one of six that have been part of a "stealth revolution" around personal jurisdiction. He argues that the Court, under the guise of following precedent, has actually greatly changed the law at the expense of plaintiffs and in the name of lessening the power of the courts. He argues that this does not solve the underlying problem: that personal jurisdiction remains one of the hardest to understand and apply aspects of American law. Hoffheimer believes the Court's actions are an ill-informed attack on the legitimacy of lower courts, which reduces public trust in them.
Richard D. Freer of Emory University also cites the case as one of six Supreme Court cases that have greatly changed personal jurisdiction, starting in 2011 after a 21-year hiatus on personal jurisdiction cases. He emphasizes that the Court has devalued judicial discretion, and notes that the Court's actions in the six cases has been extensively criticized by legal scholars.
 See also 
 Daimler AG v. Bauman
 Ford Motor Co. v. Montana Eighth Judicial Dist.
 References 
External links
 SCOTUSblog coverage
Category:United States personal jurisdiction case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2017 in United States case law
Category:Bristol Myers Squibb
"""

From "Brnovich v. Democratic National Committee" ==> """
Brnovich v. Democratic National Committee, 594 U.S. ___ (2021), was a United States Supreme Court case related to voting rights established by the Voting Rights Act of 1965 (VRA), and specifically the applicability of Section 2's general provision barring discrimination against minorities in state and local election laws in the wake of the 2013 Supreme Court decision Shelby County v. Holder, which removed the preclearance requirements for election laws for certain states that had been set by Sections 4(b) and 5. Brnovich v. Democratic National Committee involves two of Arizona's election policies: one outlawing ballot collection and another banning out-of-precinct voting. The Supreme Court ruled in a 6–3 decision in July 2021 that neither of Arizona's election policies violated the VRA or had a racially discriminatory purpose.
Background
The Voting Rights Act of 1965 (VRA) was one of the most significant pieces of legislation to protect voter rights for minorities by preventing state and local governments from racial discrimination in their election laws. Passed during the civil rights movement, the VRA has been amended several times since passage and has seen a body of case law at the Supreme Court that is related to its various provisions and subsequent legislation amending the VRA in response to those decisions. Generally, the VRA has been upheld five times as constitutional.
However, in a 5–4 decision in Shelby County v. Holder (2013), the Supreme Court effectively eliminated VRA's Section 5 "preclearance" requirement, which had mandated state and local governments in 15 states (those with a past history of voting rights violations) to seek permission from a federal court or the US Justice Department before making significant changes to voting laws. The majority in Shelby County held that Section 4(b)'s coverage formula, which had been last amended by Congress in 1975, was "unconstitutional in light of current conditions" and "based on decades-old data and eradicated practices." The Supreme Court's decision left it to Congress to amend Section 4(b)'s coverage formula, but until Congress does so, Section 5's preclearance mandate is no longer valid law.
Shelby County, by eliminating the preclearance requirements, allowed certain state and local governments to freely pass voting laws without first seeking permission from the Federal courts or the U.S. Justice Department. A number of states passed new election laws ahead of the 2016 United States elections, which included the 2016 United States presidential election between the Republican candidate, Donald Trump, and the Democratic candidate, Hillary Clinton. While some laws were passed to support improved voting access recommendations from the Presidential Commission on Election Administration under Barack Obama, other laws were passed, particularly in states with conservative leadership such as in the South, to prevent voter fraud by requiring stricter identification checks for voting and shifting and reducing early voting periods, among other measures.
 Lower courts 
The case primarily dealt with two election-related policies in Arizona, one being passed as a result of Shelby County. Arizona was one of the 15 states that had been included in the Section 4(b)/5 preclearance requirements until they were nullified by Shelby County. An existing out-of-precinct policy from 1970 was shared by other states and requires election officials to reject ballots placed by voters that vote in the wrong precinct, including their votes for state and federal office. The new law, passed in 2016 as Arizona H.B. 2023 by the Republican-controlled Arizona State Legislature, made it a felony for anyone other than an election official or a family member or caregiver to handle or to collect a completed early voting or absentee ballot. The law thus banned ballot collection, a practice critics call "ballot harvesting." Arizona Governor Doug Ducey, a Republican, signed the bill into law and framed the legislation as similar to measures in 18 other states. Democratic lawmakers in Arizona questioned the lack of evidence related to voting fraud used to back the bill's passage.
Ahead of the election, the Democratic National Committee (DNC) sued and challenged both policies. The DNC claimed that Arizona's policy to reject ballots cast in the wrong precinct violated the First and Fourteenth Amendments related to voters' rights. The DNC further stated that H.B. 2023 violated the Fifteenth Amendment and Section 2 of the VRA, which states, "No voting qualification or prerequisite to voting, or standard, practice, or procedure shall be imposed or applied by any State or political subdivision to deny or abridge the right of any citizen of the United States to vote on account of race or color."Democratic Nat'l Comm. v. Hobbs, 948 F.3d 989 (9th Cir. 2020) (en banc). The DNC argued that the legislation directly discriminated against the state's Hispanic, African American, and Native American population. The DNC contended that the state legislature had purposely created H.B. 2023 to discriminate against minority voters by making it "particularly burdensome" for voters in counties with larger minority populations to vote, such as in Maricopa County, as they generally had fewer or no in-person voting locations.
The DNC initially sought a preliminary injunction to prevent Arizona from enforcing these laws and policy ahead of the 2016 election. The U.S. District Court for the District of Arizona denied the injunction but was reversed on appeal to an en banc panel at the Ninth Circuit four days prior to the election that voted 6–5 to enforce the injunction. The state requested a stay of the Ninth Circuit's injunction from the Supreme Court, which it granted the next day and thus left both policies in place during the election while litigation continued.
In May 2018, after a ten-day trial, the District Court ruled against the DNC by upholding Arizona's election laws as neither unconstitutional nor violating the VRA. The initial appeal to a three-judge Ninth Circuit panel upheld the ruling, but a majority of judges of the Ninth Circuit voted for an en banc rehearing of the case and vacated the decision of the three-judge panel.Democratic Nat'l Comm. v. Reagan, 911 F.3d 942 (9th Cir. 2019).
 Ninth Circuit 
In January 2020, the eleven-judge en banc Ninth Circuit panel reversed the judgment of the district court on a 7–4 vote and held that the ballot rejection policy and the absentee ballot collection law were unlawful by violating Section 2 of the VRA. The majority opinion was written by Judge William A. Fletcher, a concurring opinion was written by Judge Paul J. Watford, and separate dissents were written by Judges Diarmuid O'Scannlain and Jay Bybee. The en banc majority held that both the out-of-precinct policy and H.B. 2023 had a discriminatory impact on Native American, Hispanic, and African American voters. The court held that the policy violated the "results test" of Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act because they imposed a significant disparate burden on ethnic minority voters. The court found that in the 2016 election, minority groups were more than twice as likely to vote out-of-precinct than white voters, and that white voters were four times more likely to have home mail delivery and pickup compared to minority groups, which made both provisions discriminatory. Citing Thornburg v. Gingles, the court also held that the plaintiffs showed, under the "totality of circumstances," that the discriminatory burden created by the policies "was in part caused by or linked to 'social and historical conditions' that have or currently produce 'an inequality in the opportunities enjoyed by [minority] and white voters to elect their preferred representatives' and to participate in the political process." 
The court also held that H.B. 2023 was enacted with discriminatory intent and therefore violated the "intent test" of Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act and of the Fifteenth Amendment. The court stated that H.B. 2023 was unnecessary, as Arizona had already made ballot tampering a felony via prior law. Instead, the court found that the intent of H.B. 2023 had been to fight the DNC's "get out the vote" campaign designed to increase voter turnout, which relied in part on the use of ballot collectors in minority-dense areas of the state. In concluding that the law was enacted with a discriminatory intent, the court cited "Arizona's long history of race-based voting discrimination; the Arizona legislature's unsuccessful efforts to enact less restrictive versions of the same law when preclearance was a threat; the false, race-based claims of ballot collection fraud used to convince Arizona legislators to pass H.B. 2023; the substantial increase in American Indian and Hispanic voting attributable to ballot collection that was targeted by H.B. 2023; and the degree of racially polarized voting in Arizona—cumulatively and unmistakably revealed that racial discrimination was a motivating factor in enacting H.B. 2023." Having decided the case on the VRA and Fifteenth Amendment grounds, the court did not address the DNC's First and Fourteenth Amendment claims.
Supreme Court
Appeal
Both the state and the Republican National Committee (RNC) appealed the Ninth Circuit's decision to the Supreme Court, specifically on the applicability of Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. With the pending appeals, the Ninth Circuit put enforcement of its decision on hold for the 2020 elections and left the policy and the law in place. The Supreme Court granted the petition for a writ of certiorari in October 2020 since it agreed to hear the case, and it consolidated the two cases (Brnovich v. DNC and Arizona Republican Party v. Democratic National Committee) for briefing and oral argument.Brnovich v. Democratic National Committee, SCOTUSBlog. 
Oral arguments
Oral argument were held on March 2, 2021. Observers to the oral arguments said that a primary issue discussed by the justices was the standard that should be used to evaluate when discrimination occurs under Section 2 of the VRA. Those observers stated that there was a divide between the conservative justices, who appeared ready to support the state's policies, and the Court's three liberal members, who sought ways to maintain Section 2's relevance in the VRA.
During oral arguments, Michael Carvin, an attorney representing the Arizona Republican Party, was asked by Justice Amy Coney Barrett what interest the party had in defending the Arizona voting restrictions. Carvin replied, "Because it puts us at a competitive disadvantage relative to Democrats.... Every extra vote they get through unlawful interpretation of Section 2 hurts us."
Decision
The Court issued a 6–3 decision on July 1, 2021 that reversed the Ninth Circuit's decision, with the majority ruling that neither the out-of-precinct policy nor HB 2023 violated Section 2 of the VRA. Also, it did not find that H.B. 2023 had been passed with the intent of racial discrimination. The majority opinion was written by Justice Samuel Alito and joined by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justices Clarence Thomas, Neil Gorsuch, Brett Kavanaugh, and Amy Coney Barrett. Alito wrote that in his analysis of the two election policies under a statutory interpretation of the VRA, neither had a large effect on the openness of the election. In regards to the out-of-precinct policy, Alito stated, "Having to identify one's own polling place and then travel there to vote does not exceed the 'usual burdens of voting'" set by the VRA. He also stated that data from the 2020 election showed, "A policy that appears to work for 98% or more of voters to whom it applies — minority and non-minority alike — is unlikely to render a system unequally open.". On H.B. 2023, Alito referred to the per curiam decision in Purcell v. Gonzalez (2006): "A State indisputably has a compelling interest in preserving the integrity of its election process." He stated that the respondents had failed to show that the law had a disparate impact: "Limiting the classes of persons who may handle early ballots to those less likely to have ulterior motives deters potential fraud and improves voter confidence." 
Alito's majority was seen to weaken the VRA further by limiting Section 2 through the introduction of means to review Section 2 challenges. The non-binding slip opinion stated in its syllabus, "The Court declines in these cases to announce a test to govern all VRA [Section 2] challenges to rules that specify the time, place, or manner for casting ballots. It is sufficient for present purposes to identify certain guideposts that lead to the Court's decision in these cases." Alito laid out guideposts used to evaluate the state regulations in context of Section 2, which included the size of the burden created by the rule, the degree that the rule deviates from past practices, the size of the racial imbalance, and the overall level of opportunity afforded voters in considering all election rules.
Gorsuch wrote a concurring opinion.
Dissent
Justice Elena Kagan wrote a 41-page dissenting opinion, which was joined by Justices Stephen Breyer and Sonia Sotomayor. Kagan wrote, "This Court has no right to remake Section 2 [of the VRA]. Maybe some think that vote suppression is a relic of history—and so the need for a potent Section 2 has come and gone. ... But Congress gets to make that call." Kagan further wrote "What is tragic here is that the Court has (yet again) rewritten — in order to weaken — a statute that stands as a monument to America's greatness, and protects against its basest impulses. What is tragic is that the Court has damaged a statute designed to bring about 'the end of discrimination in voting.'"
Reactions
RNC Chair Ronna McDaniel called the decision as a "resounding victory for election integrity", claiming "Democrats were attempting to make Arizona ballots less secure for political gain, and the Court saw right through their partisan lies." Georgia Secretary of State Brad Raffensperger, who was defending the state's election laws under review by the US Department of Justice (DOJ) under Section 2 of the VRA, supported the Court's decision and stated that the DOJ should "heed this decision and dismiss their wrong, politically motivated lawsuit against Georgia." 
US President Joe Biden said that he was "deeply disappointed" in the ruling. He said, "In a span of just eight years, the Court has now done severe damage to two of the most important provisions of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 -- a law that took years of struggle and strife to secure. After all we have been through to deliver the promise of this Nation to all Americans, we should be fully enforcing voting rights laws, not weakening them." Derrick Johnson, the president of the NAACP, called the ruling a "frontal attack on democracy" and stated that "the Court sent the clear message that vote suppressors around the country will go unchecked as they enact voting restrictions that disproportionately impact voters of color."
Impact
Court observers identified that Brnovich may be a landmark Supreme Court case on voting rights, following the large amount of litigation filed prior to and after the 2020 election related to voting laws and policies and the lack of any congressional action to amend the VRA. At least 165 state bills related to election laws were introduced between the 2020 election and the end of February 2021, with 28 laws passed across 17 states when the Court's ruling was issued. Analysts stated that some of the bills appeared purposely to restrict voting rights further and limit minority voting if they passed. They emphasized the need to strengthen the voting rights for minorities set by the VRA through the Supreme Court.
The Court's decision came while Congress was debating over passing an amendment to the VRA to strengthen protections for voting rights further after the 2020 election.
 See also 
Shelby County v. Holder (2013) A case dealing with Sections 4(b) and 5 of the VRA
Abbott v. Perez (2018) A case dealing with Section 2 of the VRA in redistricting/gerrymandering
 Help America Vote Act (HAVA)
 National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (NVRA)
 Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act (UOCAVA)
 Voter suppression in the United States
Notes
References
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:2021 in United States case law
"""

From "Broadcast Music, Inc. v. CBS Inc." ==> """
Broadcast Music Inc. v. Columbia Broadcasting System Inc., 441 U.S. 1 (1979), was an important antitrust case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States.
 Background 
The TV network CBS (also, at the time, owner of Columbia Records) filed an antitrust suit against licensing agencies alleging that the system by which these agencies received fees for the issuance of blanket licenses to perform copyrighted musical compositions amounted to illegal price fixing.
The basic question in the case is "whether the issuance by ASCAP and BMI to CBS of blanket licenses to copyrighted musical compositions at fees negotiated by them is price fixing per se unlawful under the antitrust laws."
Judgment
The Supreme Court held that blanket licenses issued by ASCAP and BMI did not necessarily constitute price fixing. The judgment, delivered by White J, was unanimous in holding that such practice should instead be examined under the rule of reason to determine if it is unlawful. Stevens J agreed with the majority, but would not have remanded the case to the lower courts for rehearing. He would have held that the blanket license were a breach of s1 of the Sherman Act using the rule of reason.
Significance
The case was part of the court's retreat from applying rigid per se rules in antitrust to a more permissive rule of reason.
See also
 US antitrust law
 Westmoreland v. CBS (S.D.N.Y. 1982)
 Estate of Martin Luther King, Jr., Inc. v. CBS, Inc. (11th Cir. 1999)
External links
 References 
Category:1979 in United States case law
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:CBS Television Network
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Broadcast Music, Inc.
"""

From "Broadrick v. Oklahoma" ==> """
Broadrick v. Oklahoma, 413 U.S. 601 (1973), is a United States Supreme Court decision upholding an Oklahoma statute which prohibited state employees from engaging in partisan political activities. Broadrick is often cited to enunciate the test for a facial overbreadth challenge that "the overbreadth of a statute must not only be real, but substantial as well, judged in relation to the statute's plainly legitimate sweep."
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Void for vagueness case law
Category:Overbreadth case law
Category:1973 in United States case law
"""

From "Brockett v. Spokane Arcades, Inc." ==> """
Brockett v. Spokane Arcades, Inc., 472 U.S. 491 (1985), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that though portions of a law against obscenity and prostitution might be invalid, it would not be invalidated as a whole unless severing unconstitutional provisions would result in an unworkable law.
Background
The case involved a state statute that punished the publication of obscene materials. Obscene or lewd materials were defined by the law to include all materials that appeal to the prurient interest, among other things. "Prurient" was defined as material that incites lasciviousness or lust. The law was challenged as overbroad under the First Amendment because material that arouses only a "normal, healthy interest in sex" is constitutionally protected, but was banned by the law.
Opinion of the Court
The Court agreed with lower court rulings that the law was overbroad, however found that the entire statute could not be stricken. The code contained a severability provision indicating that the law should not be completely invalidated unless the one unconstitutional provision could not be stricken without making the law unworkable. The Court remanded the case to allow the lower court to decide if the objectionable provision could be stricken and the remainder of the law upheld.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 472
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:History of Spokane, Washington
Category:United States obscenity case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Brogan v. United States" ==> """
Brogan v. United States, 522 U.S. 398 (1998), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that the Fifth Amendment does not protect the right of those being questioned by law enforcement officials to deny wrongdoing falsely.
 Majority opinion 
The case determined the ultimate status of the “exculpatory no," a right found by several circuit courts, which courts claimed that Section 1001. of Title 18 of the United States Code should be interpreted as the law not applying to those who simply deny wrongdoing. In the majority opinion, Justice Scalia explained that although others have interpreted the law to apply only to situations in which the lie "pervert[s] government functions," the language of the statute is clear, and the court had no power to overrule the wording of the statute, as created by Congress, even if the law was being used beyond its intended purpose.
The court also ruled that the Fifth Amendment does not apply in this situation. The Fifth Amendment must be explicitly indicated. It gives the person involved the right to remain silent but not the right to make an explicit lie.
 Concurring opinion 
Justice Ginsburg, joined by Justice Souter, argued that although Section 1001 is written such that its relevance in this case is incontrovertible, the current wording of Section 1001 leads to unreasonable and unintended circumstances like that of  Brogan and so it should be rewritten. She detailed the circumstances of the case, recalling that investigators arrived unannounced at Brogan's home, already having secured evidence that he had received illicit cash payments. They asked him if he had received the illicit payments he had received, and Brogan replied, "No." The investigators then concluded the interview, stating that they knew he was lying and that his lie was a crime. In other words, the interview had not served to gather information but simply to coerce Brogan into committing an additional crime.
 Dissenting opinion 
Justice Stevens, joined by Justice Breyer, followed the reasoning given by Justice Ginsburg but argued that logic gives the court the right and the means to exempt the application of Section 1001 from cases involving an "exculpatory no." They showed a willingness to go against the literal meaning of the law, as enacted by the legislature, in the interest of sustaining the spirit of the law.
See also
textualism
 References 
External links
Category:1998 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court criminal cases
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Bronston v. United States" ==> """
Bronston v. United States, 409 U.S. 352 (1973), is a seminalTiersma, Peter; Did Clinton Lie? Defining "Sexual Relations" ,; 79 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 927, 939, 2004. United States Supreme Court decision strictly construing the federal perjury statute. Chief Justice Warren Burger wrote for a unanimous Court that responses to questions made under oath that relayed truthful information in and of themselves but were intended to mislead or evade the examiner could not be prosecuted. Instead, the criminal-justice system had to rely on more carefully worded follow-up questions.
The decision has been cited in many cases since then and has become the controlling legal standard of perjury in federal jurisprudence. It was invoked during Bill Clinton's  impeachment proceedings in 1998 as a defense to charges of perjury against him.
It has long been criticized for the loophole it creates in the perjury statutes as essentially allowing a witness to lie without consequences. Nevertheless, later Courts have refused to overrule or otherwise limit it despite some moves in that direction by lower courts.
Background of the case
Samuel Bronston was a New York-based movie producer who, between 1959 and 1964, made films in various European countries as Samuel Bronston Productions, Inc., a company he wholly owned. He was a pioneer in using countries such as Spain to take advantage of lower production costs. As part of its business operations, the company maintained bank accounts in the countries in which it did business — 37 separate accounts in five different countries, it would be established later..
In 1964, after the epic The Fall of the Roman Empire failed, the company filed for federal bankruptcy protection. Two years later, its owner was being questioned under oath at a creditors' committee meeting about the company's overseas assets. It included the following exchange between Bronston and one of the lawyers for his creditors:
All those answers were truthful, although the second one is not a direct answer to the question. It would later be discovered that Bronston personally had had an account with International Credit Bank in Geneva, on which he made deposits and drew checks totalling up to $180,000 during the five years in which the company was active and closed just before the bankruptcy filing. As a result, the matter was referred to federal prosecutors, who secured a perjury indictment against Bronston.
Trial
The government contended that Bronston intentionally answered the second of the series of questions by referring to the company's account in Zurich instead of his own personal one, as the questioner had implied, to leave the impression that he did not have and never had had an account in Switzerland, which was not true. Jurors were instructed that they must consider the witness's state of mind, that if they found that Bronston "fully understood the questions put to him but nevertheless gave false answers knowing the same to be false",Bronston, 409 U.S. at 355. they should convict him. After seven hours of deliberations, during which they requested not only additional instructions but that the original instructions be read back to them, as well as reviewing several exhibits in the case, they returned a conviction.
Appeal
On appeal, Bronston claimed the key question was imprecise and that he should not have been convicted for making an answer that was true and accurate.Bronston, 409 U.S. at 356. A divided court upheld the conviction on the grounds that "an answer containing half of the truth which also constitutes a lie by negative implication, when the answer is intentionally given in place of the responsive answer called for by a proper question, is perjury".
The circuit's chief judge, J. Edward Lumbard, dissented, arguing the proper remedy for such answers was "questioner's acuity".Bronston, 409 U.S. at 362. Bronston's attorneys filed for certiorari from the Supreme Court, and got it in 1971.
Decision
The Court heard arguments on November 15, 1972. Sheldon Elsen argued for Bronston, with Andrew Frey taking the federal government's side.
Less than two months later, the Court issued its brief ruling, unanimously siding with the appellant. While he conceded that Bronston's answer may have been intended to mislead, Burger felt it would be going far beyond Congress's intent to apply the statute that broadly.Bronston, 409 U.S. at 358. He considered Bronston's answer to be a "testimonial mishap that could readily have been reached with a single additional question by counsel alert — as every examiner ought to be — to the incongruity of petitioner's unresponsive answer", a point he reiterates several times throughout the opinion. Such an application also conflicted with the literal wording of the law, which defined perjury as willfully stating under oath any material matter which the witness does not believe to be true.Bronston, 409 U.S. at 357.
A casual listener might have believed from Bronston's answer that he himself had never had any Swiss bank accounts, he agreed. "But we are not dealing with casual conversation and the statute does not make it a criminal act for a witness to willfully state any material matter that implies any material matter that he does not believe to be true" since intent to mislead or evade might not be the underlying reason: "Under the pressures and tensions of interrogation, it is not uncommon for the most earnest witnesses to give answers that are not entirely responsive. Sometimes the witness does not understand the question, or may in an excess of caution or apprehension read too much or too little into it."
Witnesses, he understood, might also be reluctant to discuss personally embarrassing matters, particularly in a bankruptcy proceeding. "If a witness evades, it is the lawyer's responsibility to recognize the evasion and to bring the witness back to the mark, to flush out the whole truth with the tools of adversary examination." The trial jury's finding that Bronston had intended to mislead was of no consequence, and indeed should not have been a determination they were allowed to make:
He reviewed the history of perjury, and recalled that when it first started being prosecuted, authorities realized it had to be narrowly construed, otherwise people would be deterred from testifying over fears of being prosecuted themselves. Existing case law supported that position as well.Bronston, 409 U.S. at 359-60.
"Precise questioning is imperative as a predicate for the offense of perjury", he said, one last time, a sentence frequently quoted since then.Bronston, 409 U.S. at 362.
Legacy
The standard established by the decision has become known in criminal law as the "literal truth" rule"The Perils of Perjury ", 112 Harvard L Rev 1783-1788; retrieved June 25, 2007. (the "stark contrast" rule requiring perjury indictments to set out the difference between the allegedly false testimony and the actual truth is often attributed to this case, but arose in a latter appellate decision). Over the years since it was handed down, Bronston has remained, in the words of one commentator, "much-maligned".Green, Stuart; November 2001; Lying, Misleading and Falsely Denying: How Moral Concepts Inform the Law of Perjury, Fraud and False Statements ; 63 Hastings Law Journal 158, 176; retrieved June 22, 2007. Criticisms have ranged from prosecutors upset at the limitations it placed on their ability to use the threat of perjury prosecution to compel truthful testimony from hostile witnesses to a Wake Forest professor who cites it as among many aspects of the legal system that have caused a general decline in morality when they became broadly applied outside of the practice of law.Castleman, Don; 2004; Paper 380, "Has The Law Made Liars of Us All?"; retrieved from bepress.com June 22, 2007.
Bronston was never able to successfully return to producing films afterwards, managing to make only 1984's Fort Saganne, a French film directed by Alain Corneau. He died ten years later.Lyons, Richard D.; January 15, 1994; "Samuel Bronston, Film Producer, 85; Made Epic 'El Cid'"; The New York Times; retrieved June 27, 2007.
Clinton impeachment defense
The case came to the fore in 1998, when Bill Clinton's attorneys invoked it as a defense to perjury charges brought by the House of Representatives during his impeachment.December 8, 1998; White House Rebuttal Parts IV-VI (specifically, Part IV.C ""Literal Truth" and Non-Responsive Answers Do Not Constitute Perjury); reprinted in The Washington Post; retrieved June 24, 2007. They argued that lawyers for Paula Jones had failed to follow up on questions asking Clinton generally if he had ever been alone with Monica Lewinsky to which he had answered "I don't recall". Even though later testimony had established that she was indeed alone with him on several brief occasions, he had not specifically denied it and that the Jones lawyers' failure to ask follow-up questions about specific occasions barred prosecution as surely as the similar failure by Bronston's questioner. They also cited other occasions where Clinton had similarly claimed he didn't remember, and his questioners had simply left the answer at that. The president's purportedly false testimony was, to them, "simply a confused deposition record that could have been clarified contemporaneously".
In response, House impeachment manager Steve Chabot called the resort to Bronston "the cornerstone of the president's defense" and a "legal smokescreen", when presenting the case to the Senate.Chabot, Steve; January 15, 1999; Jan. 15: Chabot on Perjury Law; The Washington Post; retrieved June 24, 2007. Clinton, he claimed, could very well remember those things he claimed not to. "[T]he record establishes", Chabot told senators, "that the President repeatedly lied, he repeatedly deceived, he repeatedly feigned forgetfulness."
In 2004, Loyola professor Peter Tiersma, who specializes in language and the law, analyzed Clinton's alleged perjuries closely under the Bronston standard and concluded that while he had not broken the law, he was likely aware of the literal-truth standard from his own time as a law professorTiersma at 940. and was certainly exploiting it to mislead his questioners. They erred, he said, in coming up with their own definition of sexual relations, which allowed Clinton to look for ambiguities and then take advantage of them on the stand.Tiersma at 956.
Conflicting appellate cases
As with other Supreme Court cases, those who have disagreed with Bronston have looked for test cases that might give another set of Supreme Court justices a chance to revisit the original ruling and, if not overrule it, at least limit its scope. Two such cases that reached the federal appeals courts gave rise to such hopes (or fears) with regard to Bronston, but neither made it past that level.
United States v. Robbins
Like Bronston, this 1988 case arose from a bankruptcy proceeding. Robbins was testifying about a company he had formed called MacArthur and 11th Properties. His questioner mistakenly asked about "11th and Meridian". He answered that that name was unfamiliar to him but he knew of an "11th and MacArthur". Both those answers were true but as a result the line of questioning about the real company was dropped.
The Eighth Circuit upheld his conviction five years later on the grounds that "[a]bsent fundamental ambiguity or impreciseness in the questioning, the meaning and truthfulness of the declarant's answer is for the jury." The Supreme Court declined to hear the case. Legal commentator Barry Tarlow distinguishes the case from Bronston, however, by noting that in this case the defendant had more actively misled the questioner, by volunteering a different yet equally erroneous version of the company name.Tarlow, Barry; May 1999; RICO Report; Champion; retrieved from nacdl.org June 25, 12007.
United States v. DeZarn
Later in the 1990s came the DeZarn case. It began with an investigation into possible Hatch Act violations by officers of the Kentucky National Guard. Key to the case was a 1990 Preakness Day party attended by Robert DeZarn, later made adjutant general by Brereton Jones after the latter was elected governor. DeZarn was being questioned about that party by Col. Robert Tripp of the Army Inspector General's office, under oath, when he was mistakenly asked about a 1991 party, which was not at issue. He testified truthfully about it. As a result, the investigators issued a report that the allegations were unsubstantiated.
After the report, another Guard officer came to Tripp and his colleagues with new information which did substantiate some of the allegations, and revealed to them DeZarn's role in the 1990 party. He was indicted on a perjury charge in 1996. His attorneys unsuccessfully sought to have the indictment dismissed on the grounds that his answers were literally truthful. The district court refused to do so since other witnesses had answered questions about the 1991 party with reference to the 1990 one, and that DeZarn's other answers had shown he knew which party was at issue.
He repeated this defense at trial, while prosecutors introduced Louisville Courier-Journal articles showing that he knew very well which party investigators were concerned about. In September he was convicted, and sentenced to 15 months in prison. After his motion for a directed verdict failed, he filed an appeal.
In 1998, a Sixth Circuit panel upheld the conviction (as well as his sentence, which he had argued was improperly enhanced). Gerald Rosen, Chief Judge for the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan, sitting by designation, distinguished DeZarn's answer from the one at issue in Bronston''', by noting that DeZarn was not only aware of the party at issue, but unlike Bronston, DeZarn's answer was "unequivocal and directly and fully responsive". Rosen also pointed to subsequent answers which only made sense if DeZarn was referring to the 1991 party. DeZarn had also attempted to argue Robbins wasn't relevant, since in that case the defendant had introduced the mistake, but Judge Rosen noted that fact played no role in the verdict there.
The case was never appealed beyond the Sixth Circuit. Commentators have either hailed Dezarn as "nudg[ing] federal criminal law closer to everyday morality" or decrying it as requiring witnesses to guess what a questioner really means. "The DeZarn'' decision appears to place the witness at risk — if he or she subjectively misinterprets the state of mind of the interrogator and gives a literally true answer", wrote Barry Tarlow. "This expansion of the traditional definition of perjury is both unwise and unnecessary."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 409
References
External links
Perjury Cases -- Special Problems and Defenses -- Evasive and Unresponsive Answers from U.S. Department of Justice's Criminal Resource Manual.
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Supreme Court criminal cases
Category:1973 in United States case law
Category:Perjury
"""

From "Brooke Group Ltd. v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp." ==> """
Brooke Group Ltd. v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp., 509 U.S. 209 (1993), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the court required that an antitrust plaintiff alleging predatory pricing must show not only changes in market conditions adverse to its interests, as a threshold matter, but must show on the merits that (1) the prices complained of are below an appropriate measure of its rival's costs, and (2) that the competitor had a reasonable prospect or a "dangerous probability" of recouping its investment in the alleged scheme.
Holding
An oligopoly's interdependent pricing may provide a means for achieving recoupment, and thus may form the basis of a primary-line injury claim. Predatory pricing schemes, in general, are implausible, and are even more improbable when they require coordinated action among several firms. They are least likely to occur where, as alleged here, the cooperation among firms is tacit, since effective tacit coordination is difficult to achieve.  
Since there is a high likelihood that any attempt by one oligopolist to discipline a rival by cutting prices will produce an outbreak of competition; and since a predator's present losses fall on it alone, while the later supracompetitive profits must be shared with every other oligopolist in proportion to its market share, including the intended victim.  
Ultimately, Justice Kennedy, held that: 
 There is no per se rule of nonliability under Robinson-Patman Act for predatory price discrimination when recoupment is alleged to take place through supracompetitive oligopoly pricing, but 
 Competitor's alleged below-cost sales of generic cigarettes through discriminatory volume rebates did not create competitive injury in violation of Robinson-Patman Act.
 See also 
 Weyerhaeuser Co. v. Ross-Simmons Hardwood Lumber Co. (applying the same analysis to "predatory buying")
External links
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1993 in United States case law
Category:United States tobacco case law
Category:Brown & Williamson
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:History of Louisville, Kentucky
"""

From "Browder v. Gayle" ==> """
Browder v. Gayle, 142 F. Supp. 707 (1956),Browder v. Gayle, 142 F. Supp. 707 (M.D. Ala.), affirmed, 352 U.S. 903 (1956) (per curiam). was a case heard before a three-judge panel of the United States District Court for the Middle District of Alabama on Montgomery and Alabama state bus segregation laws. The panel consisted of Middle District of Alabama Judge Frank Minis Johnson, Northern District of Alabama Judge Seybourn Harris Lynne, and Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals Judge Richard Rives. The main plaintiffs in the case were Aurelia Browder, Claudette Colvin, Susie McDonald, and Mary Louise Smith. Jeanetta Reese had originally been a plaintiff in the case, but intimidation by segregationists (including threatening phone calls and pressure from a senior police officer for whom she worked) caused her to withdraw in February. She falsely claimed she had not agreed to the lawsuit, which led to an unsuccessful attempt to disbar Fred Gray for supposedly improperly representing her.
On June 5, 1956, the District Court ruled 2-1, with Lynne dissenting, that bus segregation is unconstitutional under the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
The state and city appealed, and the decision was summarily affirmed by the United States Supreme Court on November 13, 1956.
Background
Shortly after beginning the Montgomery bus boycott in December 1955, black community leaders began to discuss filing a federal lawsuit to challenge the City of Montgomery and Alabama bus segregation laws. They sought a declaratory judgment that Alabama state statutes and ordinances of the city of Montgomery providing for and enforcing racial segregation on "privately"-operated buses were in violation of Fourteenth Amendment protections for equal treatment.
The cause of action was brought under Reconstruction-era civil rights legislation, specifically 42 U.S.C. sections 1981, 1983.http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/USCODE-2009-title42/pdf/USCODE-2009-title42-chap21-subchapI-sec1981.pdf  The United States District Court had original jurisdiction to hear the case because it was a federal question (section 1331)http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/USCODE-2011-title28/pdf/USCODE-2011-title28-partIV-chap85-sec1331.pdf  and because it concerned civil rights (section 1343). A three-judge district court panel was required under 28 U.S.C. § 2281http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/USCODE-2009-title28/pdf/USCODE-2009-title28-partVI-chap155-sec2281.pdf  for the granting of an interlocutory or the permanent injunction restraining the enforcement of a state statute by restraining the action of a state officer, such as an official of the Alabama Public Service Commission. The court held that since officials admitted that they were enforcing state statutes, a three-judge court had jurisdiction over the case.
About two months after the bus boycott began, civil rights activists reconsidered the case of Claudette Colvin. She was a 15-year-old girl who had been the first person arrested in 1955 for refusing to give up her seat on a Montgomery bus, nine months before Rosa Parks' action. Fred Gray, E.D. Nixon, president of the NAACP and secretary of the new Montgomery Improvement Association; and Clifford Durr (a white lawyer who, with his wife, Virginia Durr, was an activist in the Civil Rights Movement) searched for the ideal case law to challenge the constitutional legitimacy of Montgomery and Alabama bus segregation laws.
Durr was concerned that an appeal of Parks's case would get tied up in the Alabama state courts and thought that they needed a way to get directly to federal courts. Gray did research for the lawsuit and consulted with NAACP Legal Defense Fund attorneys Robert L. Carter and Thurgood Marshall (who would later become United States Solicitor General and the first African-American United States Supreme Court Justice). Gray approached Colvin, Aurelia Browder, Susie McDonald, Mary Louise Smith, and Jeanetta Reese, all women who had been discriminated against by drivers enforcing segregation policy in the Montgomery bus system. They agreed to become plaintiffs in a federal civil action lawsuit, thus bypassing the Alabama court system. Reese dropped out of the case in February 1956 because of intimidation by members of the white community. She falsely claimed she had not agreed to the lawsuit, which led to an unsuccessful attempt to disbar Gray for supposedly improperly representing her.
Decision
On February 1, 1956, Gray filed the case Browder v. Gayle in U.S. District Court. Aurelia Browder was a Montgomery woman, W. A. Gayle was the mayor of Montgomery.
On June 5, 1956, the District Court ruled that "the enforced segregation of black and white passengers on motor buses operating in the City of Montgomery violates the Constitution and laws of the United States" because the conditions deprived people of equal protection under the Fourteenth Amendment. The court further enjoined Alabama and Montgomery from continuing to operate segregated buses.
The state and city appealed the district court's decision to the U.S. Supreme Court. On November 13, 1956, the Supreme Court summarily affirmed the District Court's ruling and ordered Alabama and Montgomery to desegregate its buses. One month later, on December 17, the Supreme Court denied the state's petition for rehearing, and on December 20, the ruling was implemented after Gayle was handed official written notice by federal marshals.
Commemoration
In 2019 a statue of Rosa Parks was unveiled in Montgomery, Alabama, and four granite markers were also unveiled near the statue on the same day to honor four plaintiffs in Browder v. Gayle  - Aurelia Browder, Susie McDonald, Claudette Colvin, and Mary Louise Smith. One of those plaintiffs, Mary Louise Smith, took part in the unveiling ceremony.
 See also 
Aurelia Browder
Claudette Colvin
Susie McDonald
Mary Louise Smith
Plessy v. Ferguson (1896), case upholding "separate but equal" accommodations
Brown v. Board of Education (1954), declared segregated schools were inherently unequal.
Bolling v. Sharpe (1954), found segregated schools in the District of Columbia were unconstitutional
Keys v. Carolina Coach Co. (1955), overturned Plessy v. Ferguson
References
 External links 
 Text, Browder v. Gayle Judgment, Gilder Lehrman Center
District Court decision
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States racial desegregation case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:Montgomery bus boycott
Category:History of Montgomery, Alabama
Category:African-American history of Alabama
Category:1956 in United States case law
Category:1956 in Alabama
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Law articles needing an infobox
"""

From "Brown v. Barry" ==> """
Brown v. Barry, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 365 (1797), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the court determined the following: The suspension of a statute for a limited time is not a repeal of it.
The intention of the legislature when discovered must prevail, any rule of construction. declared by previous acts, to the contrary notwithstanding.
In an action on a bill of exchange, which had not been protested for non-payment, it is not necessary to aver in the declaration that the bill had been protested for non-acceptance.
As to bills of exchange drawn in the United States payable in Europe, the custom of merchants in this country does not ordinarily require, to recover on a protest for non-payment, that a protest for non-acceptance shall be produced, though the bills were not accepted.
Where the action is for foreign money, and its value is not averred, a verdict cures the defect.
The reason that debet for foreign money is ill, is the uncertainty of its value; and this is cured by a verdict.Condensed reports of cases in the Supreme court of the United States: containing the whole series of the decisions of the court from its organization to the commencement of the Peters's Reports at January term 1827, with copious notes of parallel cases in the Supreme, Circuit, and ..., Volume 1, (Thomas, Cowperthwait, 1844) pg. 165 
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Ellsworth Court
Category:1797 in United States case law
"""

From "Brown v. Board of Education" ==> """
Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 347 U.S. 483 (1954), was a landmark decision by the U.S. Supreme Court, which ruled that U.S. state laws establishing racial segregation in public schools are unconstitutional, even if the segregated schools are otherwise equal in quality. The decision partially overruled the Court's 1896 decision Plessy v. Ferguson, which had held that racial segregation laws did not violate the U.S. Constitution as long as the facilities for each race were equal in quality, a doctrine that had come to be known as "separate but equal". The Court's decision in Brown paved the way for integration and was a major victory of the civil rights movement, and a model for many future impact litigation cases.
The underlying case began in 1951 when the public school system in Topeka, Kansas, refused to enroll local black resident Oliver Brown's daughter at the elementary school closest to their home, instead requiring her to ride a bus to a segregated black school farther away.  The Browns and twelve other local black families in similar situations filed a class-action lawsuit in U.S. federal court against the Topeka Board of Education, alleging that its segregation policy was unconstitutional. A special three-judge court of the U.S. District Court for the District of Kansas rendered a verdict against the Browns, relying on the precedent of Plessy and its "separate but equal" doctrine. The Browns, represented by NAACP chief counsel Thurgood Marshall, then appealed the ruling directly to the Supreme Court.
In May 1954, the Supreme Court issued a unanimous 9–0 decision in favor of the Browns. The Court ruled that "separate educational facilities are inherently unequal", and therefore laws that impose them violate the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. However, the decision's 14 pages did not spell out any sort of method for ending racial segregation in schools, and the Court's second decision in Brown II () only ordered states to desegregate "with all deliberate speed".
In the Southern United States, especially the "Deep South", where racial segregation was deeply entrenched, the reaction to Brown among most white people was "noisy and stubborn". Many Southern governmental and political leaders embraced a plan known as "Massive Resistance", created by Virginia Senator Harry F. Byrd, in order to frustrate attempts to force them to de-segregate their school systems. Four years later, in the case of Cooper v. Aaron, the Court reaffirmed its ruling in Brown, and explicitly stated that state officials and legislators had no power to nullify its ruling.
Background
right|thumb|350px|Educational segregation in the US prior to Brown
For much of the 60 years preceding the Brown case, race relations in the United States had been dominated by racial segregation. Such state policies had been endorsed by the United States Supreme Court ruling in Plessy v. Ferguson (1896), which held that as long as the separate facilities for separate races were equal, state segregation did not violate the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause ("no State shall ... deny to any person ... the equal protection of the laws"). Racial segregation in education varied widely from the 17 states that required racial segregation to the 16 in which it was prohibited. Beginning in the 1930s, a legal strategy was pursued, led by scholars at Howard University and activists at the NAACP, that sought to undermine states' public education segregation by first focusing on the graduate school setting. This led to success in the cases of Sweatt v. Painter, 339 U.S. 629 (1950) and McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents, 339 U.S. 637 (1950), suggesting that racial segregation was inherently unequal (at least in some settings), which paved the way for Brown.
The plaintiffs in Brown asserted that the system of racial separation in all schools, while masquerading as providing separate but equal treatment of both white and black Americans, instead perpetuated inferior accommodations, services, and treatment for black Americans.  Brown was influenced by UNESCO's 1950 Statement, signed by a wide variety of internationally renowned scholars, titled The Race Question. This declaration denounced previous attempts at scientifically justifying racism as well as morally condemning racism. Another work that the Supreme Court cited was Gunnar Myrdal's An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy (1944). Myrdal had been a signatory of the UNESCO declaration.
The United States and the Soviet Union were both at the height of the Cold War during this time, and U.S. officials, including Supreme Court justices, were highly aware of the harm that segregation and racism were doing to America's international image. When Justice William O. Douglas traveled to India in 1950, the first question he was asked was, "Why does America tolerate the lynching of Negroes?" Douglas later wrote that he had learned from his travels that "the attitude of the United States toward its colored minorities is a powerful factor in our relations with India." Chief Justice Earl Warren, nominated to the Supreme Court by President Dwight D. Eisenhower, echoed Douglas's concerns in a 1954 speech to the American Bar Association, proclaiming that "Our American system like all others is on trial both at home and abroad, ... the extent to which we maintain the spirit of our constitution with its Bill of Rights, will in the long run do more to make it both secure and the object of adulation than the number of hydrogen bombs we stockpile."Mary L. Dudziak "Brown as a Cold War Case" Journal of American History, June 2004 
District court case
Filing and arguments
In 1951, a class-action lawsuit was filed against the Board of Education of the City of Topeka, Kansas, in the United States District Court for the District of Kansas. The plaintiffs were thirteen Topeka parents on behalf of their 20 children.
The suit called for the school district to reverse its policy of racial segregation. The Topeka Board of Education operated separate elementary schools due to a 1879 Kansas law, which permitted (but did not require) districts to maintain separate elementary school facilities for black and white students in 12 communities with populations over 15,000. The plaintiffs had been recruited by the leadership of the Topeka NAACP. Notable among the Topeka NAACP leaders were the chairman McKinley Burnett; Charles Scott, one of three serving as legal counsel for the chapter; and Lucinda Todd.
The named African-American plaintiff, Oliver Brown, was a parent, a welder in the shops of the Santa Fe Railroad, as well as an assistant pastor at his local church. He was convinced to join the lawsuit by a childhood friend, Charles Scott. Brown's daughter Linda Carol Brown, a third grader, had to walk six blocks to her school bus stop to ride to Monroe Elementary, her segregated black school one mile (1.6 km) away, while Sumner Elementary, a white school, was seven blocks from her house.
As directed by the NAACP leadership, the parents each attempted to enroll their children in the closest neighborhood school in the fall of 1951. They were each refused enrollment and redirected to the segregated schools.
The case "Oliver Brown et al. v. The Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas" was named after Oliver Brown as a legal strategy to have a man at the head of the roster. The lawyers, and the National Chapter of the NAACP, also felt that having Mr. Brown at the head of the roster would be better received by the U.S. Supreme Court justices. The 13 plaintiffs were: Oliver Brown, Darlene Brown, Lena Carper, Sadie Emmanuel, Marguerite Emerson, Shirley Fleming, Zelma Henderson, Shirley Hodison, Maude Lawton, Alma Lewis, Iona Richardson, Vivian Scales, and Lucinda Todd. The last surviving plaintiff, Zelma Henderson, died in Topeka, on May 20, 2008, at age 88.
District court opinion
The District Court ruled in favor of the Board of Education, citing the U.S. Supreme Court precedent set in Plessy v. Ferguson. Judge Walter Huxman wrote the opinion for the three-judge District Court panel, including nine "findings of fact", based on the evidence presented at trial.  Although finding number eight stated that segregation in public education has a detrimental effect on negro children, the court denied relief on the ground that the negro and white schools in Topeka were substantially equal with respect to buildings, transportation, curricula, and educational qualifications of teachers.  This finding would be specifically cited in the subsequent Supreme Court opinion of this case.
Supreme Court arguments
The case of Brown v. Board of Education as heard before the Supreme Court combined five cases: Brown itself, Briggs v. Elliott (filed in South Carolina), Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County (filed in Virginia), Gebhart v. Belton (filed in Delaware), and Bolling v. Sharpe (filed in Washington, D.C.).
All were NAACP-sponsored cases. The Davis case, the only case of the five originating from a student protest, began when 16-year-old Barbara Rose Johns organized and led a 450-student walkout of Moton High School. The Gebhart case was the only one where a trial court, affirmed by the Delaware Supreme Court, found that discrimination was unlawful; in all the other cases the plaintiffs had lost as the original courts had found discrimination to be lawful.
The Kansas case was unique among the group in that there was no contention of gross inferiority of the segregated schools' physical plant, curriculum, or staff. The district court found substantial equality as to all such factors. The lower court, in its opinion, noted that, in Topeka, "the physical facilities, the curricula, courses of study, qualification and quality of teachers, as well as other educational facilities in the two sets of schools [were] comparable."Brown, 98 F. Supp. at 798. The lower court observed that "colored children in many instances are required to travel much greater distances than they would be required to travel could they attend a white school" but also noted that the school district "transports colored children to and from school free of charge" and that "no such service [was] provided to white children." In the Delaware case the district court judge in Gebhart ordered that the black students be admitted to the white high school due to the substantial harm of segregation and the differences that made the separate schools unequal.
Under the leadership of Walter Reuther, the United Auto Workers donated $75,000 to help pay for the NAACP's efforts at the Supreme Court. The NAACP's chief counsel, Thurgood Marshall—who was later appointed to the U.S. Supreme Court in 1967—argued the case before the Supreme Court for the plaintiffs. Assistant attorney general Paul Wilson—later distinguished emeritus professor of law at the University of Kansas—conducted the state's ambivalent defense in his first appellate argument.
In December 1952, the Justice Department filed a friend of the court brief in the case. The brief was unusual in its heavy emphasis on foreign-policy considerations of the Truman administration in a case ostensibly about domestic issues. Of the seven pages covering "the interest of the United States", five focused on the way school segregation hurt the United States in the Cold War competition for the friendship and allegiance of non-white peoples in countries then gaining independence from colonial rule. Attorney General James P. McGranery noted that "the existence of discrimination against minority groups in the United States has an adverse effect upon our relations with other countries. Racial discrimination furnishes grist for the Communist propaganda mills." The brief also quoted a letter by Secretary of State Dean Acheson lamenting that "the United States is under constant attack in the foreign press, over the foreign radio, and in such international bodies as the United Nations because of various practices of discrimination in this country."
British barrister and parliamentarian Anthony Lester has written that "Although the Court's opinion in Brown made no reference to these considerations of foreign policy, there is no doubt that they significantly influenced the decision."
Consensus building
thumb|right|The members of the U.S. Supreme Court that on May 17, 1954, ruled unanimously that racial segregation in public schools is unconstitutional.
In spring 1953, the court heard the case but was unable to decide the issue and asked to rehear the case in fall 1953, with special attention to whether the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause prohibited the operation of separate public schools for whites and blacks.See Smithsonian, Separate is Not Equal: Brown v. Board of Education 
The court reargued the case at the behest of Associate Justice Felix Frankfurter, who used reargument as a stalling tactic, to allow the court to gather a consensus around a Brown opinion that would outlaw segregation. The justices in support of desegregation spent much effort convincing those who initially intended to dissent to join a unanimous opinion. Although the legal effect would be same for a majority rather than unanimous decision, it was felt that dissent could be used by segregation supporters as a legitimizing counter-argument.
Conference notes and draft decisions illustrate the division of opinions before the decision was issued. Justices William O. Douglas, Hugo Black, Harold Hitz Burton, and Sherman Minton were predisposed to overturn Plessy. Fred M. Vinson noted that Congress had not adopted desegregation legislation; Stanley F. Reed discussed incomplete cultural assimilation and states' rights, and was inclined to the view that segregation worked to the benefit of the African-American community; Tom C. Clark wrote that "we had led the states on to think segregation is OK and we should let them work it out." Felix Frankfurter and Robert H. Jackson disapproved of segregation, but were also opposed to judicial activism and expressed concerns about the proposed decision's enforceability. Chief Justice Vinson had been a key stumbling block. After Vinson died in September 1953, President Dwight D. Eisenhower appointed Earl Warren as Chief Justice. Warren had supported the integration of Mexican-American students in California school systems following Mendez v. Westminster. However, Eisenhower invited Earl Warren to a White House dinner, where the president told him: "These [southern whites] are not bad people. All they are concerned about is to see that their sweet little girls are not required to sit in school alongside some big overgrown Negroes." Nevertheless, the Justice Department sided with the African-American plaintiffs.
While all but one justice personally rejected segregation, the judicial restraint faction questioned whether the Constitution gave the court the power to order its end. The activist faction believed the Fourteenth Amendment did give the necessary authority and were pushing to go ahead. Warren, who held only a recess appointment, held his tongue until the Senate confirmed his appointment.
Warren convened a meeting of the justices, and presented to them the simple argument that the only reason to sustain segregation was an honest belief in the inferiority of Negroes. Warren further submitted that the court must overrule Plessy to maintain its legitimacy as an institution of liberty, and it must do so unanimously to avoid massive Southern resistance. He began to build a unanimous opinion. Although most justices were immediately convinced, Warren spent some time after this famous speech convincing everyone to sign onto the opinion. Justice Jackson dropped his concurrence and Reed finally decided to drop his dissent. The final decision was unanimous. Warren drafted the basic opinion and kept circulating and revising it until he had an opinion endorsed by all the members of the court. Reed was the last holdout and reportedly cried during the reading of the opinion.
Decision
thumb|upright=1.0|right|Chief justice Earl Warren, the author of the court's unanimous opinion in Brown
On May 17, 1954, the Supreme Court issued a unanimous 9–0 decision in favor of the Brown family and the other plaintiffs. The decision consists of a single opinion written by chief justice Earl Warren, which all the justices joined.
The Court's opinion began by noting that it had tried to determine whether the Fourteenth Amendment was meant to abolish segregation in public education—even hearing a second round of oral arguments from the parties' lawyers specifically on the historical sources—but to no avail.
The Court said that the question was complicated by the major social and governmental changes that had taken place in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The Court observed that public schools had been uncommon in the American South in the late 1860s, when the Fourteenth Amendment had been adopted. At that time, Southern white children whose families could afford schooling usually attended private schools, while the education of black children was "almost nonexistent", to the point that in some Southern states any education of black people had been forbidden by law.Brown, 347 U.S. at 490. The Court contrasted this with the situation in 1954: "Today, education is perhaps the most important function of our local and state governments."Brown, 347 U.S. at 493. The Court concluded that, in making its ruling, it would have to "consider public education in light of its full development and its present place in American life throughout the Nation." (quoting Brown, 347 U.S. at 492–93).
During the segregation era, it was common for black schools to have fewer resources and poorer facilities than white schools despite the equality required by the "separate but equal" doctrine. The Brown Court did not address this issue, however, probably because some of the school districts involved had made improvements to their black schools to "equalize" them with the quality of the white schools. This prevented the Court from finding a violation of the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause in "measurable inequalities" between all white and black schools, and instead required it to look to the effects of segregation itself. Thus, the Court framed the case around the more general question of whether the principle of "separate but equal" was constitutional when applied to public education. 
In answer, the Court held that it did. It ruled that state-mandated segregation, even if implemented in schools of otherwise equal quality, is inherently unequal because of its psychological impact.
The Court supported this conclusion with citations—in a footnote, not the main text of the opinion—to several psychological studies purporting to show that segregating black children made them feel inferior and interfered with their learning. These studies included those of Kenneth and Mamie Clark, whose experiments in the 1940s had suggested that black American children from segregated environments preferred white dolls over black dolls.
The Court then concluded its relatively short opinion by declaring that segregated public education was inherently unequal, violated the Equal Protection Clause, and therefore was unconstitutional:
The Court did not close with an order to implement the integration of the schools of the various jurisdictions. Instead, it requested the parties re-appear before the Court the following Term to hold arguments on what the appropriate remedy should be. This became the case known as Brown II, described below.
Reaction and aftermath
Although Americans generally cheered the Court's decision in Brown, most white Southerners decried it. Many Southern white Americans viewed Brown as "a day of catastrophe—a Black Monday—a day something like Pearl Harbor." In the face of entrenched Southern opposition, progress on integrating American schools moved slowly. The American political historian Robert G. McCloskey described:
In Virginia, Senator Harry F. Byrd organized the Massive Resistance movement that included the closing of schools rather than desegregating them.
For several decades after the Brown decision, African-American teachers, principals, and other school staff who worked in segregated Black schools were fired or laid off as Southerners sought to create a system of integrated schools with White leadership. According to historian Michael Fultz, "In many ways the South moved faster, with more 'deliberate speed' in displacing Black educators than it did in desegregating schools."
Deep South
Texas Attorney General John Ben Shepperd organized a campaign to generate legal obstacles to the implementation of desegregation.Howell, Mark C., John Ben Shepperd, Attorney General of the State of Texas: His Role in the Continuation of Segregation in Texas, 1953–1957, Master's Thesis, The University of Texas of the Permian Basin, Odessa, Texas, July 2003.
In September 1957, Arkansas governor Orval Faubus called out the Arkansas Army National Guard to block the entry of nine black students, later known as the "Little Rock Nine", after the desegregation of Little Rock Central High School. President Dwight D. Eisenhower responded by asserting federal control over the Arkansas National Guard and deploying troops from the U.S. Army's 101st Airborne Division stationed at Fort Campbell to ensure the black students could safely register for and attend classes.
Also in 1957, Florida's response was mixed. Its legislature passed an Interposition Resolution denouncing the decision and declaring it null and void. But Florida Governor LeRoy Collins, though joining in the protest against the court decision, refused to sign it, arguing that the attempt to overturn the ruling must be done by legal methods.
In Mississippi, fear of violence prevented any plaintiff from bringing a school desegregation suit for the next nine years.Michael Klarman, The Supreme Court, 2012 Term – Comment: Windsor and Brown: Marriage Equality and Racial Equality 127 Harv. L. Rev. 127, 153 (2013). When Medgar Evers sued in 1963 to desegregate schools in Jackson, Mississippi, White Citizens Council member Byron De La Beckwith murdered him.Id. citing Klarman, From Jim Crow to Civil Rights: The Supreme Court and the Struggle for Racial Equality at 352–354 (2004). Two subsequent trials resulted in hung juries. Beckwith was not convicted of the murder until 1994.
In June 1963, Alabama governor George Wallace personally blocked the door to the University of Alabama's Foster Auditorium to prevent the enrollment of two black students in what became known as the "Stand in the Schoolhouse Door" incident. Wallace sought to  uphold his "segregation now, segregation tomorrow, segregation forever" promise he had given in his 1963 inaugural address. Wallace moved aside only when confronted by General Henry V. Graham of the Alabama National Guard, whom President John F. Kennedy had ordered to intervene.
Native American communities were also heavily impacted by segregation laws with native children also being prohibited from attending white institutions. Native American children considered light-complexioned were allowed to ride school buses to previously all white schools, while dark-skinned Native children from the same band were still barred from riding the same buses. Tribal leaders, having learned about Martin Luther King Jr.'s desegregation campaign in Birmingham, Alabama, contacted him for assistance. King promptly responded to the tribal leaders and through his intervention the problem was quickly resolved.
Upper South
In North Carolina, there was often a strategy of nominally accepting Brown, but tacitly resisting it. On May 18, 1954, the Greensboro, North Carolina school board declared that it would abide by the Brown ruling. This was the result of the initiative of D. E. Hudgins Jr., a former Rhodes Scholar and prominent attorney, who chaired the school board. This made Greensboro the first, and for years the only, city in the South, to announce its intent to comply. However, others in the city resisted integration, putting up legal obstacles to the actual implementation of school desegregation for years afterward, and in 1969, the federal government found the city was not in compliance with the 1964 Civil Rights Act. Transition to a fully integrated school system did not begin until 1971, after numerous local lawsuits and both nonviolent and violent demonstrations. Historians have noted the irony that Greensboro, which had heralded itself as such a progressive city, was one of the last holdouts for school desegregation.
In Moberly, Missouri, the schools were desegregated, as ordered. However, after 1955, the African-American teachers from the local "negro school" were not retained; this was ascribed to poor performance. They appealed their dismissal in Naomi Brooks et al., Appellants, v. School District of City of Moberly, Missouri, Etc., et al.; but it was upheld, and SCOTUS declined to hear a further appeal.
Virginia had one of the companion cases in Brown, involving the Prince Edward County schools. Significant opposition to the Brown verdict included U.S. Senator Harry F. Byrd, who led the Byrd Organization and promised a strategy of Massive Resistance. Governor Thomas Stanley, a member of the Byrd Organization, appointed the Gray Commission, 32 Democrats led by state senator Garland Gray, to study the issue and make recommendations. The commission recommended giving localities "broad discretion" in meeting the new judicial requirements. However, in 1956, a special session of the Virginia legislature adopted a legislative package which allowed the governor to simply close all schools under desegregation orders from federal courts. In early 1958, newly elected Governor J. Lindsay Almond closed public schools in Charlottesville, Norfolk, and Warren County rather than comply with desegregation orders, leaving 10,000 children without schools despite efforts of various parent groups. However, he reconsidered when on the Lee-Jackson state holiday, the Virginia Supreme Court ruled the closures violated the state constitution, and a panel of federal judges ruled they violated the U.S. Constitution. In early February 1959, both the Arlington County (also subject to a NAACP lawsuit, and which had lost its elected school board pursuant to other parts of the Stanley Plan) and Norfolk schools desegregated peacefully. Soon all counties reopened and integrated with the exception of Prince Edward County. That took the extreme step of choosing not to appropriate any funding for its school system, thus forcing all its public schools to close, although Prince Edward County provided tuition grants for all students, regardless of their race, to use for private, nonsectarian education. Since no private schools existed for blacks within the county, black children in the county either had to leave the county to receive any education between 1959 and 1963, or received no education. All private schools in the region remained racially segregated. This lasted until 1964, when the U.S. Supreme Court ruled Prince Edward County's decision to provide tuition grants for private schools that only admitted whites violated the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment, in the case of Griffin v. County School Board of Prince Edward County.
North
Many Northern cities also had de facto segregation policies, which resulted in a vast gulf in educational resources between black and white communities. In Harlem, New York, for example, not a single new school had been built since the turn of the century, nor did a single nursery school exist, even as the Second Great Migration caused overcrowding of existing schools. Existing schools tended to be dilapidated and staffed with inexperienced teachers. Northern officials were in denial of the segregation, but Brown helped stimulate activism among African-American parents like Mae Mallory who, with support of the NAACP, initiated a successful lawsuit against the city and State of New York on Brown'''s principles. Mallory and thousands of other parents bolstered the pressure of the lawsuit with a school boycott in 1959. During the boycott, some of the first Freedom Schools of the period were established. The city responded to the campaign by permitting more open transfers to high-quality, historically-white schools. (New York's African-American community, and Northern desegregation activists generally, now found themselves contending with the problem of white flight, however.)<ref>{{cite web |last1=Back |first1=Adina |title=Exposing the Whole Segregation Myth: The Harlem Nine and New York City Schools" in Freedom north: Black freedom struggles outside the South, 1940–1980 |url=http://hisofblackamfall2014.voices.wooster.edu/files/2014/08/Adina_Back_Exposing_the_Whole_Segregation_Myth3.pdf |publisher=Palgrave Macmillan |access-date=5 September 2022 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20170227045104/http://hisofblackamfall2014.voices.wooster.edu/files/2014/08/Adina_Back_Exposing_the_Whole_Segregation_Myth3.pdf |archive-date=27 February 2017 |pages=65–91 |date=2003 |url-status=unfit}}</ref>
Topeka
thumb|Judgment and order of the Supreme Court for the case
The Topeka junior high schools had been integrated since 1941. Topeka High School was integrated from its inception in 1871 and its sports teams from 1949 onwards. The Kansas law permitting segregated schools allowed them only "below the high school level".
Soon after the district court decision, election outcomes and the political climate in Topeka changed. The Board of Education of Topeka began to end segregation in the Topeka elementary schools in August 1953, integrating two attendance districts. All the Topeka elementary schools were changed to neighborhood attendance centers in January 1956, although existing students were allowed to continue attending their prior assigned schools at their option. Plaintiff Zelma Henderson, in a 2004 interview, recalled that no demonstrations or tumult accompanied desegregation in Topeka's schools: "They accepted it ... It wasn't too long until they integrated the teachers and principals."Erin Adamson, "Breaking barriers: Topekans reflect on role in desegregating nation's schools" , The Topeka Capital-Journal (May 11, 2003)
The Topeka Public Schools administration building is named in honor of McKinley Burnett, NAACP chapter president who organized the case.
Monroe Elementary was designated a National Historic Site under the National Park Service on October 26, 1992, and redesignated a National Historical Park on May 12, 2022.
The intellectual roots of Plessy v. Ferguson, the landmark United States Supreme Court decision upholding the constitutionality of racial segregation in 1896 under the doctrine of "separate but equal" were, in part, tied to the scientific racism of the era. However, the popular support for the decision was more likely a result of the racist beliefs held by many whites at the time.Race, Law, and Culture: Reflections on Brown v. Board of Education By Austin Sarat. Page 55 and 59. 1997.  In deciding Brown v. Board of Education, the Supreme Court rejected the ideas of scientific racists about the need for segregation, especially in schools. The court buttressed its holding by citing (in footnote 11) social science research about the harms to black children caused by segregated schools.
Both scholarly and popular ideas of hereditarianism played an important role in the attack and backlash that followed the Brown decision. Mankind Quarterly was founded in 1960, in part in response to the Brown decision.Science for Segregation: Race, Law, and the Case Against Brown v. Board of Education. By John P. Jackson.  Page 148
Legal criticism and praise
thumb|right|U.S. circuit judges (from left to right) Robert A. Katzmann, Damon J. Keith, and Sonia Sotomayor at a 2004 exhibit on the Fourteenth Amendment, Thurgood Marshall, and Brown v. Board of Education
William Rehnquist wrote a memo titled "A Random Thought on the Segregation Cases" when he was a law clerk for Justice Robert H. Jackson in 1952, during early deliberations that led to the Brown v. Board of Education decision. In his memo, Rehnquist argued: "I realize that it is an unpopular and unhumanitarian position, for which I have been excoriated by 'liberal' colleagues but I think Plessy v. Ferguson was right and should be reaffirmed." Rehnquist continued, "To the argument ... that a majority may not deprive a minority of its constitutional right, the answer must be made that while this is sound in theory, in the long run it is the majority who will determine what the constitutional rights of the minorities are."William Rehnquist, "A Random Thought on the Segregation Cases" , S. Hrg. 99-1067, Hearings Before the Senate Committee on the Judiciary on the Nomination of Justice William Hubbs Rehnquist to be Chief Justice of the United States (July 29, 30, 31, and August 1, 1986). Rehnquist also argued for Plessy with other law clerks.Peter S. Canellos,Memos may not hold Roberts's opinions, The Boston Globe, August 23, 2005. Here is what Rehnquist said in 1986 about his conversations with other clerks about Plessy:I thought Plessy had been wrongly decided at the time, that it was not a good interpretation of the equal protection clause to say that when you segregate people by race, there is no denial of equal protection. But Plessy had been on the books for 60 years; Congress had never acted, and the same Congress that had promulgated the 14th Amendment had required segregation in the District schools. . . . I saw factors on both sides. . . . I did not agree then, and I certainly do not agree now, with the statement that Plessy against Ferguson is right and should be reaffirmed. I had ideas on both sides, and I do not think I ever really finally settled in my own mind on that. . . . [A]round the lunch table I am sure I defended it. . . . I thought there were good arguments to be made in support of it.S. Hrg. 99-1067, Hearings Before the Senate Committee on the Judiciary on the Nomination of Justice William Hubbs Rehnquist to be Chief Justice of the United States (July 29, 30, 31, and August 1, 1986).
However, during his 1971 confirmation hearings, Rehnquist said, "I believe that the memorandum was prepared by me as a statement of Justice Jackson's tentative views for his own use." Jackson had initially planned to join a dissent in Brown. Later, at his 1986 hearings for the slot of Chief Justice, Rehnquist put further distance between himself and the 1952 memo: "The bald statement that Plessy was right and should be reaffirmed, was not an accurate reflection of my own views at the time." In any event, while serving on the Supreme Court, Rehnquist made no effort to reverse or undermine the Brown decision, and frequently relied upon it as precedent.Cases where Justice Rehnquist has cited Brown v. Board of Education in support of a proposition , S. Hrg. 99-1067, Hearings Before the Senate Committee on the Judiciary on the Nomination of Justice William Hubbs Rehnquist to be Chief Justice of the United States (July 29, 30, 31, and August 1, 1986).
Chief Justice Warren's reasoning was broadly criticized by contemporary legal academics with Judge Learned Hand decrying that the Supreme Court had "assumed the role of a third legislative chamber"Michael Klarman, The Supreme Court, 2012 Term – Comment: Windsor and Brown: Marriage Equality and Racial Equality, 127 Harv. L. Rev. 127, 142 (2013) citing Learned Hand, The Bill of Rights at 55 (Oliver Wendell Holmes Lecture, 1958). and Herbert Wechsler finding Brown impossible to justify based on neutral principles.Id., Pamela Karlan, What Can Brown Do For You: Neutral Principles and the Struggle Over the Equal Protection Clause, 58 DUKE L.J. 1049 (2008) citing Herbert Wechsler, Toward Neutral Principles of Constitutional Law, 73 HARV. L. REV. 1 (Oliver Wendell Holmes Lecture, 1959).
Some aspects of the Brown decision are still debated. Notably, Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas, himself an African American, wrote in Missouri v. Jenkins (1995) that at the very least, Brown I has been misunderstood by the courts.
Some Constitutional originalists, notably Raoul Berger in his influential 1977 book "Government by Judiciary," make the case that Brown cannot be defended by reference to the original understanding of the 14th Amendment. They support this reading of the 14th Amendment by noting that the Civil Rights Act of 1875 did not ban segregated schools and that the same Congress that passed the 14th Amendment also voted to segregate schools in the District of Columbia. Other originalists, including Michael W. McConnell, a federal judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit, in his article "Originalism and the Desegregation Decisions," argue that the Radical Reconstructionists who spearheaded the 14th Amendment were in favor of desegregated southern schools.Response to McConnell: 
Response to Klarman:  Evidence supporting this interpretation of the 14th Amendment has come from archived Congressional records showing that proposals for federal legislation which would enforce school integration were debated in Congress a few years following the amendment's ratification.
In response to Michael McConnell's research, Raoul Berger argued that the Congressmen and Senators who were advocating in favor of school desegregation in the 1870s were trying to rewrite the 14th Amendment in order to make the 14th Amendment fit their political agenda and that the actual understanding of the 14th Amendment from 1866 to 1868 (which is when the 14th Amendment was actually passed and ratified) does, in fact, permit US states to have segregated schools. Berger criticized McConnell for being unable to find any reference to school segregation—let alone any reference to a desire to prohibit it—among supporters of the 14th Amendment in the congressional history of this amendment (specifically in the recordings of the 39th United States Congress, since that was the US Congress that actually passed the 14th Amendment) and also criticized McConnell's view that the 1954 view of "civil rights" should be decisive in interpreting the 14th Amendment as opposed to the 1866 view of "civil rights." Berger also argues that McConnell failed to provide any evidence that the state legislatures who ratified the 14th Amendment understood it at the time as prohibiting school segregation and that whenever the question of school segregation's compatibility with the US Constitution (as opposed to the separate question of school segregation's compatibility with US state law and/or US state constitutions, where courts have often ruled against school segregation) reached the judiciary in the couple of decades after the passage and ratification of the 14th Amendment (whether in Ohio, Nevada, California, Indiana, or New York), courts have always affirmed the constitutionality of school segregation—as did Michigan Supreme Court Chief Justice Thomas M. Cooley in his 1880 treatise The General Principles of Constitutional Law in the United States of America. In addition, Berger argues that the views of the draftsmen of the 14th Amendment in 1866 are decisive—as opposed to the views of later readers of the 14th Amendment (including the views of supporters of the 14th Amendment after this amendment's passage and ratification due to the fact that even their views and beliefs about the meaning and scope of this Amendment could and sometimes did change over time—like with Nevada U.S. Senator William Morris Stewart, who initially opposed school desegregation but later changed his mind and supported it). To back up his view about original intent being decisive, Berger cites—among other things—an 1871 quote by James A. Garfield to John Bingham where Garfield challenged Bingham's recollection of a statement that Bingham had previously made in 1866—with Garfield telling Bingham that he can make but not unmake history.
The case also has attracted some criticism from more liberal authors, including some who say that Chief Justice Warren's reliance on psychological criteria to find a harm against segregated blacks was unnecessary. For example, Drew S. Days has written: "we have developed criteria for evaluating the constitutionality of racial classifications that do not depend upon findings of psychic harm or social science evidence. They are based rather on the principle that 'distinctions between citizens solely because of their ancestry are by their very nature odious to a free people whose institutions are founded upon the doctrine of equality,' Hirabayashi v. United States, 320 U.S. 81 (1943). . . ."
In his book The Tempting of America (page 82), Robert Bork endorsed the Brown decision as follows:
In June 1987, Philip Elman, a civil rights attorney who served as an associate in the Solicitor General's office during Harry Truman's term, claimed he and Associate Justice Felix Frankfurter were mostly responsible for the Supreme Court's decision, and stated that the NAACP's arguments did not present strong evidence.Harvard Law Review, Vol. 100, No. 8 (June 1987), pp. 1938–1948 Elman has been criticized for offering a self-aggrandizing history of the case, omitting important facts, and denigrating the work of civil rights attorneys who had laid the groundwork for the decision over many decades.See, e.g., Randall Kennedy. "A Reply to Philip Elman." Harvard Law Review 100 (1987):1938–1948. However, Frankfurter was also known for being one of court's most outspoken advocates of the judicial restraint philosophy of basing court rulings on existing law rather than personal or political considerations.A Justice for All, by Kim Isaac Eisler, page 11;  Public officials in the United States today are nearly unanimous in lauding the ruling. In May 2004, the fiftieth anniversary of the ruling, President George W. Bush spoke at the opening of the Brown v. Board of Education National Historic Site, calling Brown "a decision that changed America for the better, and forever." Most Senators and Representatives issued press releases hailing the ruling.
In a 2016 article in Townhall.com, an outlet of the Salem Media Group, economist Thomas Sowell argued that when Chief Justice Earl Warren declared in the landmark 1954 case of Brown v. Board of Education that racially separate schools were "inherently unequal", Dunbar High School was a living refutation of that assumption. And it was within walking distance of the Supreme Court."  In Sowell's estimation, "Dunbar, which had been accepting outstanding black students from anywhere in the city, could now accept only students from the rough ghetto neighborhood in which it was located" as a detrimental consequence of the SCOTUS decision.
Brown II
In 1955, the Supreme Court considered arguments by the schools requesting relief concerning the task of desegregation. In their decision, which became known as "Brown II"Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka,  the court delegated the task of carrying out school desegregation to district courts with orders that desegregation occur "with all deliberate speed," a phrase traceable to Francis Thompson's poem "The Hound of Heaven".
Supporters of the earlier decision were displeased with this decision. The language "all deliberate speed" was seen by critics as too ambiguous to ensure reasonable haste for compliance with the court's instruction. Many Southern states and school districts interpreted "Brown II" as legal justification for resisting, delaying, and avoiding significant integration for years—and in some cases for a decade or more—using such tactics as closing down school systems, using state money to finance segregated "private" schools, and "token" integration where a few carefully selected black children were admitted to former white-only schools but the vast majority remained in underfunded, unequal black schools.
For example, based on "Brown II", the U.S. District Court ruled that Prince Edward County, Virginia did not have to desegregate immediately. When faced with a court order to finally begin desegregation in 1959 the county board of supervisors stopped appropriating money for public schools, which remained closed for five years, from 1959 to 1964.
White students in the county were given assistance to attend white-only "private academies" that were taught by teachers formerly employed by the public school system, while black students had no education at all unless they moved out of the county. But the public schools reopened after the Supreme Court overturned "Brown II" in Griffin v. County School Board of Prince Edward County, declaring that "...the time for mere 'deliberate speed' has run out", and that the county must provide a public school system for all children regardless of race.
Brown III
In 1978, Topeka attorneys Richard Jones, Joseph Johnson and Charles Scott Jr. (son of the original Brown team member), with assistance from the American Civil Liberties Union, persuaded Linda Brown Smith—who now had her own children in Topeka schools—to be a plaintiff in reopening Brown. They were concerned that the Topeka Public Schools' policy of "open enrollment" had led to and would lead to further segregation. They also believed that with a choice of open enrollment, white parents would shift their children to "preferred" schools that would create both predominantly African-American and predominantly European-American schools within the district. The district court reopened the Brown case after a 25-year hiatus, but denied the plaintiffs' request finding the schools "unitary". In 1989, a three-judge panel of the Tenth Circuit on 2–1 vote found that the vestiges of segregation remained with respect to student and staff assignment. In 1993, the Supreme Court denied the appellant School District's request for certiorari and returned the case to District Court Judge Richard Rodgers for implementation of the Tenth Circuit's mandate.
After a 1994 plan was approved and a bond issue passed, additional elementary magnet schools were opened and district attendance plans redrawn, which resulted in the Topeka schools meeting court standards of racial balance by 1998. Unified status was eventually granted to Topeka Unified School District No. 501 on July 27, 1999. One of the new magnet schools is named after the Scott family attorneys for their role in the Brown case and civil rights.Topeka Public Schools Desegregation History: "The Naming of Scott Computer Technology Magnet" 
 Other comments 
A PBS film called Simple Justice retells the story of the Brown vs. Board of Education case, beginning with the work of the NAACP's Legal Defense Fund's efforts to combat 'separate but equal' in graduate school education and culminating in the historical 1954 decision.
Linda Brown Thompson later recalled the experience of being refused enrollment:
...we lived in an integrated neighborhood and I had all of these playmates of different nationalities. And so when I found out that day that I might be able to go to their school, I was just thrilled, you know. And I remember walking over to Sumner school with my dad that day and going up the steps of the school and the school looked so big to a smaller child. And I remember going inside and my dad spoke with someone and then he went into the inner office with the principal and they left me out ... to sit outside with the secretary. And while he was in the inner office, I could hear voices and hear his voice raised, you know, as the conversation went on. And then he immediately came out of the office, took me by the hand and we walked home from the school. I just couldn't understand what was happening because I was so sure that I was going to go to school with Mona and Guinevere, Wanda, and all of my playmates.
Linda Brown died on March 25, 2018, at the age of 76.
See also
 Runyon v. McCrary (1976), bars segregation in private schools whereas Brown only applies to public schools
 Ruby Bridges, the first black child to attend an all-white elementary school in the South
 Civil rights movement (1896–1954)
 Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857)
 History of African Americans in Kansas
 Rubey Mosley Hulen, federal judge who made a similar ruling in an earlier case
 Little Rock Nine
 List of 14th amendment cases
 Loving v. Virginia (1967)
 Lum v. Rice (1927)
 Plessy v. Ferguson (1896)
 Mendez v. Westminster (9th Cir. 1947)
 Timeline of the civil rights movement
Notes
References
Citations
Works cited
Further reading
 Keppel, Ben. Brown v. Board and the Transformation of American Culture (LSU Press, 2016). xiv, 225 pp.
 Patterson, James T., and William W. Freehling. Brown v. Board of Education: A civil rights milestone and its troubled legacy (Oxford University Press, 2001).
External links
 Case Brief for Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka at Lawnix.com
 Case information and transcripts on The Curiae Project
 Brown v. Board of Education National Historical Park (US Park Service)
 A copy of Florida's 1957 Interposition Resolution in Response to the Brown decision, with Gov. Collin's handwritten rejection of it. Made available for public use by the State Archives of Florida.
U.S. District Court of Kansas: Records of Brown v. Board of Education, Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library 
Online documents relating to Brown vs. Board of Education, Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library
 Documents from the district court, including the original complaint and trial transcript, at the Civil Rights Litigation Clearinghouse
 60th Anniversary of Brown v. Board of Education curated by Michigan State University's Diversity of Excellence through Artistic Expression
 Brown v. Board of Education, Civil Rights Digital Library.
 "Supreme Court Landmark Case Brown v. Board of Education" from C-SPAN's Landmark Cases: Historic Supreme Court Decisions
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:1954 in United States case law
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:Public education in Kansas
Category:History of education in the United States
Category:Legal history of Kansas
Category:Presidency of Dwight D. Eisenhower
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States school desegregation case law
Category:1954 in Kansas
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:African-American history of Kansas
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1954 in education
Category:School segregation in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Thurgood Marshall
"""

From "Brown v. Davenport" ==> """
Brown v. Davenport, 596 U.S. ___ (2022), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court. The case concerned whether habeas relief may be granted if the Brecht v. Abrahamson test alone is satisfied, or if the application of Chapman v. California by the state courts was unreasonable because of AEDPA. The court held that federal courts can not grant habeas relief when state courts have already ruled on a prisoner's claim, unless the situation satisfies the test laid out in Brecht v. Abrahamson, and the test laid out in AEDPA.
 Background 
In 2008, Ervine Davenport was convicted of first-degree murder. His conviction was challenged because during his trial he had been placed in shackles. His wrists, waist, and ankles were all restrained, but there was a curtain to prevent the jury from seeing the shackles. The state said that although the shackles were unconstitutional, they did not effect the jury's verdict. Michigan's Court of Appeals agreed with the state. The Michigan Supreme Court disagreed, however, after several jurors testified that they had seen the shackles or heard comments about them, and then sent the case back to the lower courts. The lower court again determined that the shackles did not affect the verdict, and the appellate court agreed with the state once again, and the Michigan Supreme Court denied an appeal.
Davenport then challenged his conviction in the federal courts. The district court refused to hear the case. He then petitioned the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 6th Circuit, which agreed the hear the case. This appeals court cited the Deck v. Missouri decision, and quoted from Holbrook v. Flynn: "shackling is inherently prejudicial". The court found that the state had not met the burden of proof necessary to show that the jury was not influenced by the shackling, and provided habeas relief, over the dissent of Judge Chad Readler. The state attempted to have the decision stayed, but the court declined.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act case law
"""

From "Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association" ==> """
Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association, 564 U.S. 786 (2011), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court that struck down a 2005 California law banning the sale of certain violent video games to children without parental supervision. In a 7–2 decision, the Court upheld the lower court decisions and nullified the law, ruling that video games were protected speech under the First Amendment as other forms of media.
The ruling was seen as a significant victory for the video game industry. Several of the Court's justices suggested that the issue might need to be re-examined in the future, considering the changing nature of video games and their continuously improving technology.
 Background 
Many video games, as early as 1976's Death Race, incorporate some aspect of violence into the gameplay mechanic, such as killing an enemy with a weapon, using explosives to destroy a structure, or engaging in dangerous vehicle races. With modern technology, representations of such violence have become more realistic. This has led to concerns that minors who play such video games will be influenced by the violence, altering their real-life behavior. Academic studies have attempted to find a connection between violent video games and the rate of violence and crimes from those that play them; some have stated a connection exists, while others find no link between the matters. Incidents such as the Columbine High School massacre in 1999 have heightened concerns of a potential connection between video games and violent actions. Accordingly, many concerned groups including politicians and parents have sought to enact regulatory controls of video games to prevent their sales to youth. Prior and during the Brown v. EMA case, parties like the Entertainment Software Association (ESA) sought to overturn similar state laws that placed limits on the sales of violent video games to minors in Michigan and Illinois. The ESA won these cases, with the laws being found unconstitutional and overly restrictive of protected speech. These states did not further challenge the court rulings. The ESA similarly defeated a Louisiana bill in the 2006 Entertainment Software Association v. Foti case that would have attempted to ban sales of violent video games to minors.
thumb|left|A typical ESRB rating label will identify the appropriate age group and specific content descriptors for each rated game.
To counteract these increasing complaints and attempts at legislation, the video game industry in the United States created the Entertainment Software Rating Board (ESRB) in 1994. This was prompted by a 1993 congressional hearing over the violence in the video game Mortal Kombat and lack of consistent content ratings between publishers, with Congress threatening to pass legislation that would mandate a ratings system if the industry did not take its own steps. The industry reacted by forming the Interactive Digital Software Association, which would become the ESA, and establishing the ESRB. The ESRB, like the Motion Picture Association of America's rating system, is a voluntary and self-regulated body that examines the content of video games as provided by the publisher before distribution, and given a rating describing the content within, generally classified from being all ages-appropriate to adult audiences only. Video game distributors are similarly bound by voluntary compliance to check the age of the purchaser against the rating of the game to prevent the sale of mature titles to younger players. Most stores prevent the sale of unrated games, so virtually every video game sold at retail in the United States is rated by the ESRB.
Attempts have been made to mandate the ratings system; the Family Entertainment Protection Act, a 2005 bill introduced into the U.S. Congress by Senators Hillary Clinton, Joseph Lieberman, and Evan Bayh, would have made ESRB participation mandatory with oversight by the Federal Trade Commission, and introduced fines for selling Mature or Adult-Only content to minors. The bill, however, did not clear the Senate. Though the ESRB met criticism in 2000–2005 for the ease of access of mature-rated games to minors, the Board has improved its efforts to enforce the ratings system at retailers. A 2011 report issued by the Federal Trade Commission found that the voluntary controls by the ESRB had the highest success rate of any media industry, preventing sales of mature titles to minors 87% of the time. Similar content rating systems exist in other countries, including the EU's Pan European Game Information (PEGI) system, the Australian Classification Board, and Japan's Computer Entertainment Rating Organization.
 California law 
right|thumb|upright|Former California state senator Leland Yee introduced CA Law AB 1179, the law debated in the case.
In 2005, the California State Legislature passed AB 1179, sponsored by then-California State Senator Leland Yee, which banned the sale of violent video games to anyone under age 18 and required clear labeling beyond the existing ESRB rating system. The law would have a maximum $1000 fine for each infraction. The definition of "violent video game" used a variation of the Miller test, a three-pronged test used previously by the United States Supreme Court to define when obscene speech is not protected under the First Amendment. The bill was signed into law by Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger in October 2005. The law would have gone into effect in January 2006.
The law was a second attempt by Yee to enact restrictions for video game sales to minors. Yee's background as a child psychologist led him to assert there was a connection between video games and violence and believed that the government had strong interest in restricting video game sales to minors as was already done for pornographic works. In 2004, Yee had drafted a law that would have required mature-rated video games to be stocked separately from other titles. Though the bill ultimately passed as CA Law AB 1793, the bill's language was diluted at its passage, only requiring stores to display the ESRB ratings system and provide information to parents about it.
 Legal challenges 
 The District Court opinion 
Before the California bill was signed into law, the ESA and the Video Software Dealers Association (VSDA), now known as the Entertainment Merchants Association (EMA), were preparing a lawsuit to overturn the law, fearing that the "violent video game" definition would affect many titles that the ESRB has otherwise labeled appropriate for younger players, and threaten to harm the video game industry. The VSDA filed suit in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California and was later joined by the ESA. The two groups succeeded in obtaining a preliminary injunction in December 2005 to block enforcement of the law during the case; U.S. District Judge Ronald M. Whyte cited in his preliminary decision: "The plaintiffs have shown at least that serious questions are raised concerning the States' ability to restrict minors' First Amendment rights in connection with exposure to violent video games, including the question of whether there is a causal connection between access to such games and psychological or other harm to children." In August 2007, Whyte ultimately ruled for the plaintiffs, holding that the law violated the First Amendment, and that there was an insufficient showing of proof that either video games differed from other media or that there was established causality between violent video games and violent behavior.
 The Ninth Circuit appeal 
thumb|upright|Then-Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger led the appeal of the lower courts' decisions. California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger appealed the ruling in September 2007, stating that he would "vigorously defend this law" and that he and the people of California have "a responsibility to our kids and our communities to protect against the effects of games that depict ultra-violent actions". The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed Whyte's decision in 2009.
The Ninth Circuit considered the constitutionality of the law; given the timeframe of the law's passing relative to litigation, it was referred to as the "Act" in the court's opinion. The Ninth Circuit affirmed the District Court's Summary Judgment for the VSDA by holding:
The Act is a presumptively invalid content-based restriction on speech, so it is subject to strict scrutiny and not the "variable obscenity" standard from Ginsberg v. New York..
The Act violates rights protected by the First Amendment because the state has not demonstrated a compelling interest, has not tailored the restriction to its alleged compelling interest, and there exists a less-restrictive means that would further the State's expressed interest.
The Act's labeling requirement is unconstitutionally compelled speech under the First Amendment because it does not require the disclosure of purely factual information, but compels the carrying of the State's controversial opinion.
The court first addressed the VSDA's argument that the entire Act should be invalidated based on the defendant's concession on appeal that the definition of "violent video game" in the Act is unconstitutionally broad. However, the statute had a severability clause,California Civil Code § 1746.5. so the court went through the severability test set forth in Hotel Employees & Rest. Employees Int'l Union v. Davis. The court held that the definition for "violent video game" is grammatically and functionally separable because, as an alternative definition of "violent video game", it can be removed from the Act without affecting the wording or function of the Act's other provisions. Further, the definitions are volitionally separable because those sections were not of critical importance to the passage of the Act and the legislative body would have adopted the Act had it foreseen the partial invalidation of the statute. These definition sections were only included to avoid the possibility that a court would rule the terms unconstitutionally vague; the court found that the legislature would still have enacted the statute without this definition section.
The court next went on to determine what level of scrutiny should be applied in reviewing the Act's prohibitions. The defendants insisted that the "variable obscenity" standard from Ginsberg v. New York should be used. However, the court held that the "variable obscenity" standard does not apply to violence. The Court in Ginsberg was careful to place substantive limits on its holding, and concern in Ginsberg regarded only "sex material", not violence. The court declined to extend the application of the "variable obscenity" standard to violence, so strict scrutiny was applied instead.
In applying the strict scrutiny standard, the court recognized that "content-based regulations are presumptively invalid",. and to survive invalidation, the Act had to fulfill two qualifications:
Restrictions "must be narrowly tailored to promote a compelling Government interest".
"If a less restrictive alternative would serve the Government's purpose, the legislature must use that alternative.".
The court invalidated the statute on both accounts. First, the court said that in considering its decision, the court limited the purpose of the Act to the actual harm to the brain of a child playing a violent video game. As a result, the state was required to show that "the recited harms are real, not merely conjectural, and that the regulation will in fact alleviate these harms in a direct and material way".. Here, the defendants failed to do so because all of the reports they relied on in making these claims were admittedly flawed. While the state is allowed to protect minors from actual psychological or neurological harm, it is not permitted to control minors' thoughts. Second, the court held that the defendants did not demonstrate the absence of less restrictive alternative means. In fact, video games already comply with a voluntary rating system that rates video games based on their topics and age appropriateness. This is a clear example of a less restrictive means. The court noted that the least restrictive means is not the same as the most effective means.
The court also evaluated the constitutionality of the Act's labeling provision, which requires that a label be affixed to the front of every package the state deems to be a "violent video game". Generally, "freedom of speech prohibits the government from telling people what they must say".. However, the court has upheld compelled commercial speech where it is the inclusion of "purely factual and uncontroversial information" in advertising.. However, the labeling requirement of "violent video game" is not factual information. The Act has not clearly and legally provided a way to determine if a video game is violent so the sticker does not convey factual information. Consequently, the court found that the Act is unconstitutional.
 Supreme Court appeal 
thumb|upright|Justice Antonin Scalia, along with those supporting the ESA side of the case, questioned whether violent video games should be treated differently from other media with similar violence regularly exposed to minors, such as the fairy tale of Hansel and Gretel.
Gov. Schwarzenegger again appealed to the Supreme Court, looking to overturn the Ninth Circuit's ruling, filing a writ of certiorari to the Court in May 2009. The Supreme Court agreed to hear the case, at this point filed as Schwarzenegger v. Entertainment Merchants Ass'n. The fact that the Court accepted this case was considered surprising, based on the previous case record for such violent video game laws that were unanimously overturned in other states. Analysts believed that because the Court agreed to hear this case, there were unanswered questions between the protection of free speech from the First Amendment, and the legal enforcement of protecting minors from unprotected free speech such as through restrictions on the sales of pornography to minors. Just a week prior to the acceptance of the certiorari, in United States v. Stevens the Court overturned another law that sought restrictions on depictions of animal cruelty, which some analysts felt would reflect the Court's position to likely overturn the violent video game law.
The Entertainment Consumers Association (ECA) launched an online petition along with their amicus brief to provide the Supreme Court additional information. The Progress & Freedom Foundation and the Electronic Frontier Foundation together submitted an amicus brief citing social research that declared Super Mario Bros. to be a violent video game. It was compared to Mighty Mouse and Road Runner, cartoons that depict a similar form of violence with little negative reaction from the public. Video game developers Microsoft and Activision Blizzard supported the ESA effort. Industry associations for musical works, movies, and publishing, including the National Association of Broadcasters, the Motion Picture Association of America, Recording Industry Association of America, National Cable & Telecommunications Association, and the Future of Music Coalition, also submitted briefs to the court in favor of striking down the law, fearing that should the law be found constitutional, their industries would also be affected. Associations for the protection of civil rights, including the American Civil Liberties Union, the National Coalition Against Censorship, and the National Youth Rights Association, submitted amicus briefs. Also filing amicus briefs against the State of California was a coalition of other states including Rhode Island, Arkansas, Georgia, Nebraska, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Utah and Washington, as well as Puerto Rico, which stated the law was unnecessary as no evidence linked video games to youth violence and the voluntary ESRB system was working well. Also submitting an amicus brief opposing the law was a coalition of 82 psychologists, criminologists, medical scientists and media researchers concerned that the State of California had misrepresented the science on video games.
The State of California was joined by eleven other States, including those that had passed laws later declared unconstitutional; the States, in an amicus brief, stated that they are "vitally interested in protecting the welfare of children and in helping parents raise them" but the District Court's decision restricts their authority to do so. Further supporting the State of California were the American Academy of Pediatrics, the California Psychological Association, Common Sense Media, and the Eagle Forum.
Oral arguments were held on November 2, 2010. To California's attorney, the Justices voiced concern on the distinction between video games and other commercial works such as films and comic books. Justice Antonin Scalia wondered if the law with its vague definition of "violence" could also be applied to Grimms' Fairy Tales. To the ESA and other trade groups, the Justices suggested that California and other states do have precedence to protect minors from certain forms of violence, though under narrower terms than the California law. Justice John Roberts argued that while companies can provide parental filters on such violent games, "any 13-year-old can bypass [them] in about five minutes". Several questions centered on the controversial game Postal 2, where the player can urinate on non-player characters and set them ablaze, among other violent acts. The Justices, in general, agreed that upholding California's law would require a "novel extension of First Amendment principles to expressions concerning violence".
With Jerry Brown winning the 2010 California Governor election, the case was renamed to Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Ass'n after the oral hearings.
 Opinion 
thumb|upright|Justice Antonin Scalia wrote the majority opinion in the case.
On June 27, 2011, the Supreme Court issued a 7–2 opinion striking down the California law as unconstitutional on the basis of the First and Fourteenth Amendments. The majority opinion was authored by Justice Antonin Scalia and joined by Justices Ginsburg, Kennedy, Sotomayor, and Kagan. It first held that "video games qualify for First Amendment protection":
Justice Scalia then affirmed that, while states may pass laws to block obscene material from minors as previously decided in the 1968 Ginsberg v. New York case, "speech about violence is not obscene", and California's statute was unlawful. The decision pointed to fairy tales like those of the Brothers Grimm, which are regularly given to children to read, "contain no shortage of gore" that are also present in video games. The decision further compared video games to classical works like The Divine Comedy, stating that "Even if we can see in them nothing of any possible value to society ..., they are as much entitled to the protection of free speech as the best of literature." Scalia's decision also stated that the current self-moderated industry standards like the ESRB are operated effectively to regulate the sale of more mature games to minors, and that "filling the remaining modest gap in concerned-parents' control can hardly be a compelling state interest" requiring a law to enforce. The Court's decision also determined that from the evidence, there was no "compelling" link between violent video games and its effects on children. The decision cited one medical report that asserted that cartoons like Looney Tunes generate the same effects in children as in games like Sonic the Hedgehog or imagery of guns.
 Alito's concurrence 
Justice Samuel Alito wrote a separate concurrence supporting the majority decision, and was joined by Chief Justice John Roberts. Though Alito agreed with the constitutional application to the California law, believing that its "threshold requirement" that guides what material would be covered by the law was too broad, he questioned the potential double standard that existed between violence and sexual content in regards to this threshold. Alito wrote that he was unsure that there was no connection between violent video games and effects on children, stating that "There are reasons to suspect that the experience of playing violent video games just might be very different from reading a book, listening to the radio, or watching a movie or a television show", referencing the book Infinite Reality which highlights the psychological effects of virtual reality, and argued that the decision "would not squelch legislative efforts to deal with what is perceived by some to be a significant and developing social problem".
 Dissents 
Justices Clarence Thomas and Stephen Breyer dissented, each writing a separate dissent. Justice Thomas, in his dissent, considered that historically, the Founding Fathers "believed parents to have complete authority over their minor children and expected parents to direct the development of those children", and that the intent of the First Amendment "does not include a right to speak to minors (or a right of minors to access speech) without going through the minors' parents or guardians".
Breyer wrote separately, concerned that the majority's decision conflicts with previous rulings from Ginsberg and Miller. He contrasted the previous findings regulating sales of publications containing nudity to those of violent video games: "But what sense does it make to forbid selling to a 13-year-old boy a magazine with an image of a nude woman, while protecting a sale to that 13 year-old of an interactive video game in which he actively, but virtually, binds and gags the woman, then tortures and kills her?" Breyer further argued that "This case is ultimately less about censorship than it is about education", believing that the Government has a vested interest in allowing parents to make decisions for their child as to "raise future generations committed cooperatively to making our system of government work", and that "California's law imposes no more than a modest restriction on expression." Breyer also expressed concern that the self-regulation of the industry still allowed for 20% of minors to purchase mature video games on a national average, and as high as 50% in the case of one nationwide chain, based on the aforementioned 2011 Federal Trade Commission study.
 Reactions 
The ruling was praised by the video game industry, which had expected the law to be ruled unconstitutional, but sought affirmation by the Court. ESA's CEO, Michael Gallagher, responded that "The Court declared forcefully that content-based restrictions on games are unconstitutional; and that parents, not government bureaucrats, have the right to decide what is appropriate for their children." Bo Anderson of the EMA stated that "there now can be no argument whether video games are entitled to the same protection as books, movies, music, and other expressive entertainment", while Electronic Arts' (former) CEO John Riccitiello asserted that the decision "affirmed the constitutional rights of game developers". Other entertainment industries, such as the Motion Picture Association of America, also showed support for the Court's decision. Former U.S. Senator and current head of the Association Chris Dodd recognized that the motion picture industry has seen similar attempts to limit its freedom of expression, and that "We applaud the Supreme Court for recognizing the far-reaching First-Amendment implications posed by the California law."
Groups that supported the California law were critical of the decision. California State Senator Leland Yee was very critical of the decision, claiming that "It is simply wrong that the video game industry can be allowed to put their profit margins over the rights of parents and the well-being of children." Yee stated he would review the opinions and attempt to reintroduce a new bill within the constitutionality of the decision, and claimed it was "disappointing the court didn't understand just how violent these games are". James Steyer of Common Sense Media also criticized the decision, citing that "If parents decide a violent game is okay for their kid, that's one thing, but millions of kids are not able to judge the impact of ultra-violence on their own." Andy Schlafly, who had submitted a brief to the court on behalf of the Eagle Forum and Legal Defense Fund, heavily criticized the majority opinion, believing that "the court's latest disregard of parental rights is on a crash course with technological advances". Tim Winter of the Parents Television Council asserted that the Court's decision "replaces the authority of parents with the economic interests of the video game industry". The Washington Post opined that the California law "did nothing to infringe on the rights of adults" while dealing with "reasonable limitations on minors' access to extremely violent games that even the video game industry acknowledges are inappropriate", and that with the high bar for any future legislation, the onus is on the video game industry to maintain its self-policing of video game sales.
Analysts believed that while this was a major victory for the video game industry, the challenge is not yet over. Dan Offner, a partner for the video game industry analysis firm Loeb & Loeb believed that similar laws and regulations will be sought by State and Federal governments, as "the regulation of mature content with respect to minors as a hot button issue for the Federal Trade Commission and the various state governments". Other analysts cited that as more game content becomes available online as opposed to retail channels, the focus may shift more towards "privacy and security" of children and preventing children from amassing large fees from pay-to-use gaming services, pointing to a $3 million settlement that Playdom had to pay for violating privacy of its younger users. Sean Bersell of the EMA noted that future debates over violent video games may involve public opinion in addition to new legislation, noting that "Retailers along with publishers and parents all have a role in keeping kids away from these games." Seth Schiesel of The New York Times proposed that the Court's decision should be a challenge to the industry to show that they can mature on the decision that video games are a form of art, asking the industry: "Will you use it as cover to pump out schlock or will you rise to the opportunity and respectability that has been afforded you?" Schiesel also considered that even if games with increased interactivity and reality may make the games more dangerous, this could also make the player more aware of the potential consequences of his or her actions, even when such an action is made with the purpose to gain points/level or to kill a "dangerous enemy" in that game.
In January 2012, the state of California agreed to pay the ESA $950,000 for reimbursing the ESA's legal fees during the Supreme Court trial, atop approximately $350,000 in fees from the previous trials at lower courts. The ESA stated that it will use an unspecified portion of this money to help create after-school programs in "underserved" communities in the Oakland and Sacramento areas to help teach students job skills. The total cost of defending the case is estimated around $1.8 million, including the State's own legal costs.
In March 2012, Kenneth Doroshow and Paul M. Smith, the lawyers for the EMA who argued the case, were presented with the Ambassador Award by the Game Developers Choice Awards. The Ambassador Award "honors an individual or individuals who have helped the game industry advance to a better place, either through facilitating a better game community from within, or by reaching outside the industry to be an advocate for video games".
In a seminar given in November 2014, Justice Elena Kagan expressed her thoughts on the decision in this case, noting that for herself, she faced a difficult decision between what she felt was right – allowing parents to decide what their children should watch and play – and what the state of the law was, and in hindsight, was still not sure if they made the right decision. She noted that she, along with four others on the court, effectively added language to the decision that would preempt any future laws that attempted to restrict game sales.
Mike Gallagher, CEO of the ESA, observed in 2017 that the same moral panic that led to concerns over video games and resulting in this case were starting to appear for newer video game systems that can further blur lines between the virtual and real world, such as virtual reality, augmented reality, and mixed reality, and anticipates that there will be further tests of the applicability of First Amendment protection toward these new forms of media. Gallagher cites the AR-based game Pokémon Go as a good example of how the courts may re-examine the case.
 Public opinion 
A national telephone poll conducted in the second quarter of 2011 by Fairleigh Dickinson University's PublicMind showed that a majority of American voters (57%) agreed that states should have the "right to regulate the sale of video games [that are violent] in order to protect minors; the same way states regulate tobacco, alcohol and pornography". On the other hand, 39% of voters agreed with the Court's majority that "parents should make the decision" about what video games they purchase for their children, and what constitutes "too violent". These voters agreed with the statement "states do not have the right to decide that some video games are too violent for [minors], any more than they have the right to decide what literature or fairy tales are too violent". The poll was conducted before the Court released its decision on June 27, 2011.Fairleigh Dickinson University's PublicMind (June 6, 2011). "U.S. Public Says Regulate Violent Video Games, the Focus of Brown v. Entertainment Merchants".  [Press Release] June 6, 2011. See e.g. Maryam K. Ansari, "California Video Game Law Before U.S. Supreme Court".  FindLaw. June 8, 2011.
 See also 
Video gaming in the United States
 References 
 Further reading 
 External links 
Supreme Court of the United States: docket for ''Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association, #08-1448
Transcript of the Supreme Court hearing on November 2, 2010
Supreme Court Blog
Arstechnica on Supreme Court Granting Cert
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Video game law
Category:Video game censorship
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:Video gaming in the United States
Category:2011 in video gaming
"""

From "Brown v. Hotel and Restaurant Employees" ==> """
Brown v. Hotel and Restaurant Employees, 468 U.S. 491 (1984), is a 4-to-3 ruling by the United States Supreme Court which held that a New Jersey state gaming law requiring union leaders to be of good moral character was not preempted by the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA).. Lee and Chelius, "Government Regulation of Labor-Management Corruption: The Casino Industry Experience in New Jersey," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, July 1989.
Background
In 1976, New Jersey amended their state constitution to permit casino gambling in Atlantic City.
On June 2, 1977, Governor Brendan Byrne signed the Casino Control Act (N.J. Stat. Ann. Section 5:12-1 et seq.) into law.Waggoner, "Casino Unit's Power Is Termed Absolute," New York Times, June 4, 1977. The act established the New Jersey Casino Control Commission and instituted comprehensive regulation of casino gambling—including the regulation of labor unions representing gaming industry employees. In an attempt to forestall organized crime influence over labor unions, Sections 86 and 93 of the act imposed certain qualifications on officials of labor organizations representing casino industry workers. Among these qualifications were that the official be of "good moral character," not been convicted of certain felonies, and was not associated with organized crime. If a labor union's leaders did not meet these criteria, the union was prohibited from collecting or receiving dues from its members and from administering pension and welfare funds.Janson, "Judges' Reasoning on Casino Unions," New York Times, June 12, 1983; Mattiace, "State Moves Against Casino Union, Cites Mob," Associated Press, May 14, 1981.
Hotel Employees and Restaurant Employees Union Local 54 represented about 12,000 workers, 10,000 of whom were employed in Atlantic City casinos. Almost all of these casino workers had been organized since the legalization of gambling in the state.
On May 13, 1981, the Casino Control Commission found that Frank Gerace, president of Local 54, and Frank Materio, the local's grievance manager, were associated with organized crime. The commission also ruled that Karlos LaSane, the union's business agent, was ineligible to be a union officer or agent because he had previously been convicted of extortion. The commission also found that union officers refused to cooperate with Casino Control Commission investigators, and held stock in Resorts International, Inc. (which owned one of the casinos in which Local 54 represented workers). Both actions contravened state regulations. The commission feared that Local 54 was being influenced by Nicodemo "Little Nicky" Scarfo, a reputed leader of the Scarfo organized crime "family" based in Philadelphia.
National and state AFL–CIO officials, fearing the New Jersey law might open the door to extensive new state regulation of labor unions, asked Local 54 to test the New Jersey law in court. After a regulatory appeal, the Casino Control Commission unanimously rejected the union's contention that the law was unconstitutional and preempted by the NLRA.Janson, "Casino Agency Rebuts Attack by Local Union," New York Times, August 6, 1981.
Local 54 then filed suit in federal district court, seeking a permanent injunction prohibiting enforcement of the act. At trial, the union argued that the law infringed on its members' constitutional right of freedom of association and was preempted by federal labor law. The state countered that the regulation was a permissible infringement of the freedom of association because keeping criminal elements out of the gaming industry was a compelling governmental interest.
On March 22, 1982, the United States District Court for the District of New Jersey held that the New Jersey statute was not unconstitutionally vague and did not impermissibly infringe on union members' First Amendment rights.
The union appealed.
While the appeal was pending, the Casino Control Commission ordered Gerace and Materio to vacate their union positions. The commission demanded that both men relinquish their union offices by October 12, 1982, or the local would not be permitted to collect dues or administer its pension plan.Wade, "Leaders Ordered Out of Casino Workers' Union," Associated Press, September 28, 1982.
On June 30, 1983, a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit ruled 2-to-1 that the district court had erred.  The appellate court granted the union's injunction, finding that Section 93 of the act was preempted by Section 7 of the NLRA.Janson, "Court Hears Appeal by Casino Union," New York Times, November 21, 1982. The Court of Appeals relied heavily on the Supreme Court's decision in Hill v. Florida ex rel. Watson, 325 U.S. 538 (1945), when it concluded that Section 7 conferred "an unfettered right on employees to choose the officials of their own bargaining representatives."Brown, 468 U.S. at 504.
The state sought a rehearing en banc, but the entire court of appeals refused to rehear the case after it deadlocked in a 5-to-5 vote.Janson, "Court Won't Rehear Case on Casino Union Control," New York Times, July 6, 1983.
The state appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which granted certiorari (464 U.S. 990 (1983)).
Decision
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor delivered the opinion of the Court, in which Chief Justice Burger and Justices Harry Blackmun and William Rehnquist joined. Justice Byron White, joined by Justices Lewis F. Powell, Jr. and John Paul Stevens, dissented. Justices William J. Brennan, Jr.  and Thurgood Marshall did not participate in the hearing or decision of the case.
Majority opinion
Justice O'Connor concluded that Section 7 of the NLRA did not contain explicit pre-emptive language nor indicate congressional intent to usurp a state role in labor-management relations. "[A]ppropriate consideration for the vitality of our federal system and for a rational allocation of functions belies any easy inference that Congress intended to deprive the States of their ability to retain jurisdiction over such matters."Brown, 468 U.S. at 503.
O'Connor then rejected the appellate court's reading of Hill v. Florida ex rel. Watson. Subsequent to Hill, O'Connor noted, Congress had enacted the Labor Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (the "Landrum-Griffin Act"). Section 504(a) of the Landrum-Griffin Act explicitly barred from office for a five-year period union officers convicted of any number of crimes.  By enacting Section 504(a), O'Connor concluded, Congress "unmistakably indicated that the right of employees to select the officers of their bargaining representatives is not absolute..."Brown, 468 U.S. at 505. Citing the plurality opinion in De Veau v. Braisted,. O'Connor noted that the Court had previously held that the Landrum-Griffin Act had not preempted the role of state legislation in regulating union officials.
O'Connor next addressed the New Jersey statute's enforcement mechanism.  O'Connor recognized the continuing controlling nature of Hill in this regard, and acknowledged that questions of constitutionality and preemption must "be assessed independently in terms of its potential conflict with the federal enactment."Brown, 468 U.S. at 510. O'Connor concluded, however, that the record was too incomplete on this issue, and remanded the issue to the appellate court so that it could order further proceedings.
Dissenting opinion
Justice White, writing for the dissent, argued that the linkage between Section 93 and Section 86 of the New Jersey act rendered the act preempted by federal law.  If Section 86 merely imposed qualifications on union officials, White concluded, the law would not be preempted by the NLRA.Brown, 468 U.S. at 513-14 (White, J., dissenting). But the act went far beyond that, and imposed sweeping penalties on the union. For the dissent, this proved critical:
It is not clear what portion of the statute the Court upholds since it expressly refuses to decide whether the dues prohibition and fund administration provisions are valid. Section 93(b) does nothing more than impose those two restrictions on unions whose officials are disqualified under the criteria set forth in § 86. It does not, by its terms, provide a mechanism for disqualifying any union officer. Therefore, while it appears that the Court holds that a State is free to disqualify certain individuals from acting as union officials as long as it does not impose sanctions on the union itself, it is not clear that anything in § 93(b) enables the State to do that.Brown, 468 U.S. at 514, FN 1.
White noted that although Section 7 of the NLRA granted employees the absolute right to choose collective bargaining representatives of their choosing, that right was not coextensive with the less absolute right to determine who should serve as officers in that organization.Brown, 468 U.S. at 514, FN 3. In the current case, White noted, the workers had chosen an organization rather than an individual as their collective bargaining agent. White agreed with the majority that the state can permissibly impose qualifications on the officers of Local 54. But the language of Section 7 of the NLRA as well as the Court's ruling in Hill permitted the state to impose sanctions only on the officers, not on the union. Interfering with the relatively untrammeled right of the union to carry out its duties as collective bargaining agent was impermissible as a matter of federal law:
Allowing the State to so restrict the union's conduct infringes on the employees' right to bargain collectively through the representative of their own choosing because it prevents that representative from functioning as a collective-bargaining agent. ... A union which cannot sustain itself financially obviously cannot effectively engage in collective-bargaining activities on behalf of its members.Brown, 468 U.S. at 515.
The record, White noted, was quite clear in showing that Local 54 would not be able to function if either of the Casino Control Commission's sanctions were imposed.Only one of the Commission's sanctions—denying the union the right to collect dues—had been imposed.  The majority argued that since the other sanction—denying the union the right to administer its pension and benefit funds—had not been imposed, this made the matter unripe for review by the Court. 468 U.S. at 512.  Thus, White would have overturned the statute on grounds of preemption under Section 7 of the NLRA:
I am willing to hold that, as a matter of law, a statute like § 93(b), which prohibits a union from collecting dues from its members, impairs the union's ability to represent those members to such an extent that it infringes on their § 7 right to bargain through the representative of their choice.Brown, 468 U.S. at 515-16.
Consequences of the ruling
Gerace resigned shortly after the Supreme Court's ruling.  However, Local 54 immediately rehired Gerace as a $48,000-a-year "consultant."  The Casino Control Commission declared this "a subterfuge." The gaming commission declined to impose either of its statutory sanctions, and instead sought a court injunction forcing Gerace to resign his consultancy.  In November 1984, a New Jersey state superior court ruled that the gaming commission had the right to force Gerace's resignation. Gerace initially fought the court's order, but eventually resigned after concluding that the continuing legal battle would "be disruptive to the operation of the union." Materio and LaSane also resigned, but were later hired by the union as business agents to handle non-casino related matters.Janson, "State to Keep Monitoring the Casino Union," New York Times, December 16, 1984.
Five years after the ruling in Brown v. Hotel and Restaurant Employees an academic study concluded that the Casino Control Act had been only marginally successful in preventing or eliminating organized crime influence in New Jersey's casino unions.  The study noted that the law had not been used since its initial 1981 enforcement action, and that many union officials were merely rehired as consultants rather than as elected officers. The state gaming commission never again attempted to use its two statutory sanctions against any union, and relied instead on the threat of injunctions to remove officials it suspected of links to organized crime.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 468
Notes
References
"Court Rules New Jersey Can Regulate Casino Unions." New York Times. July 3, 1984.
Janson, Donald. "Casino Agency Rebuts Attack by Local Union." New York Times. August 6, 1981.
Janson, Donald. "Casinos and Nevada Back Jersey on Union Rules." New York Times. January 15, 1984.
Janson, Donald. "Court Hears Appeal by Casino Union." New York Times. November 21, 1982.
Janson, Donald. "Court Won't Rehear Case on Casino Union Control." New York Times. July 6, 1983.
Janson, Donald. "Judges' Reasoning on Casino Unions." New York Times. June 12, 1983.
Janson, Donald. "State to Keep Monitoring the Casino Union." New York Times. December 16, 1984.
Janson, Donald. "Union Testing Casino Agency's Regulatory Powers." New York Times. July 26, 1981.
Lee, Barbara A. and Chelius, James. "Government Regulation of Labor-Management Corruption: The Casino Industry Experience in New Jersey." Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 42:4 (July 1989).
Mattiace, Peter. "State Moves Against Casino Union, Cites Mob." Associated Press. May 14, 1981.
Wade, Robert. "Leaders Ordered Out of Casino Workers' Union." Associated Press. September 28, 1982.
Waggoner, Walter. "Casino Unit's Power Is Termed Absolute." New York Times. June 4, 1977.
External links
Category:UNITE HERE
Category:United States trade union case law
Category:United States gambling case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:Gambling in New Jersey
Category:History of Atlantic City, New Jersey
"""

From "Brown v. Illinois" ==> """
Brown v. Illinois, 422 U.S. 590 (1975), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the Fourth Amendment's protection against the introduction of evidence obtained in an illegal arrest is not attenuated by reading the defendant their Miranda Rights.
History
On May 13, 1968, Richard Brown was arrested outside of his Chicago, IL. apartment by two members of the Chicago Police.. The two officers, William Nolan and William Lenz, entered Mr. Brown's apartment without probable cause later testifying that they had entered to question Brown concerning the death of Roger Corpus, who had been killed a week prior.
Following his arrest, Mr. Brown was taken to a police station for interrogation; prior to beginning his interrogation, Mr. Brown was read his Miranda Rights.422 U.S. at 593-94. During interrogation Mr. Brown produced a two-page written document acknowledging his role in the killing of Roger Corpus.422 U.S. 594-95. Mr. Brown would later give another statement to the Assistant State's Attorney assigned to the case  again acknowledging his role in Mr. Corpus' death but also containing a number of factual inaccuracies.422 U.S. at 595. Both statements would later be introduced at trial, ultimately resulting in Mr. Brown's conviction for the murder of Roger Corpus.422 U.S. at 596.
On review, the Illinois Supreme Court held that by giving Mr. Brown Miranda Warnings, the causal chain between the illegal arrest and statements obtained had been broken, and the statements were thus the result of free will.56 Ill.2nd at 315.
Decision
In the case syllabus, the Court sums up its holding in three parts:
"The Illinois courts erred in adopting a per se rule that Miranda warnings in and of themselves broke the causal chain so that any subsequent statement, even one induced by the continuing effects of unconstitutional custody, was admissible so long as, in the traditional sense, it was voluntary and not coerced in violation of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments."422 U.S. at 590.
"The question whether a confession is voluntary under Wong Sun must be answered on the facts of each case."
"The State failed to sustain its burden in this case of showing that petitioner's statements were admissible under Wong Sun."422 U.S. at 591.
Writing for a unanimous court, Justice Blackmun held that reading a defendant their Miranda Rights does not remove the taint of an illegal arrest. The Court acknowledges that under Wong Sun statements and evidence obtained from an illegal search can be admissible if the connection between the search and the evidence is so attenuated that the taint is dissipated.422 U.S. at 598-99. However, the Supreme Court held that attenuation under Wong Sun requires a showing on the facts of the individual case. Allowing Miranda Rights to automatically attenuate an illegal search would dilute the exclusionary rule.422 U.S. at 602.
Under the attenuation doctrine, evidence obtained through government misconduct is admissible if "the connection between the misconduct and the discovery of the evidence is attenuated —weakened— so as to make the evidence untainted by the government's conduct."Stratton, Brent D., The Attenuation Exception to the Exclusionary Rule: A study in Attenuated Principle and Dissipated Logic, 75 J.Crim.L. & Criminology 139 (1984) Because there was no intervening event in the two hours between Mr. Brown's illegal arrest and the first statement that he made, the trial court erred in admitting it. Similarly, as the second statement was a direct result of the first statement, it too is inadmissible.422 U.S. at 604-05.
See also
 Wong Sun v. United States, 
 Utah v. Strieff
 Fruit of the Poisonous Tree
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:20th-century American trials
"""

From "Brown v. Louisiana" ==> """
Brown v. Louisiana, 383 U.S. 131 (1966), was a United States Supreme Court case based on the First Amendment in the U.S. Constitution. It held that protesters have a First and Fourteenth Amendment right to engage in a peaceful sit-in at a public library. Justice Fortas wrote the plurality opinion and was joined by Justice Douglas and Justice Warren. Justices Brennan and Byron White concurred. Justices Black, Clark, Harlan and Stewart dissented.
Background
In order to protest their denial of their right to equal treatment guaranteed by the Constitution, five African-Americans entered the Audubon Regional Library. Audubon Regional Library is a public library in Clinton, Louisiana. There was no one else in the library room except the library assistant. One of the African-Americans (Brown) requested a book, and upon checking, the library assistant informed Brown that they did not have the book, and that she would request it from the State Library. (The book was later mailed to him with instructions for its return). The library assistant then asked them to leave, but instead for the purpose of maintaining their silent protest against the library's policy of segregation, Brown sat down and the others stood around him. There was no noise or boisterous talking. 10 to 15 minutes after they had entered the library, the sheriff and deputies arrived, and they were arrested. They were charged under the Louisiana breach of the peace statute, which makes it a crime to "with intent to provoke a breach of the peace, or under circumstances such that a breach of the peace may be occasioned thereby" or to crowd in a public place and refuse to disperse.
Justice Fortas and Justice Black each included a summary of the events in their opinions. Justice Fortas' summary for the majority is more concise than Justice Black's in his dissent.
Decision
Justice Abe Fortas wrote the plurality opinion, joined by Chief Justice Warren, and Justice Douglas, with Justices Brennan and White writing concurring opinions. Fortas concluded that there was no evidence to support the use of the breach of the peace statute, and that the protest was considerably less disruptive than earlier situations that the Court had invalidated convictions—including Cox v. Louisiana.
Dissent
Justice Black, in his dissent, finds nothing preventing Louisiana from banning sit-in demonstrations, and criticises the majority opinion for acting as if Louisiana had intended to deny access to the libraries based upon race. Black also noted that when Brown asked for a book, he was served. Thus showing that he was not denied access or service, and discussed that there was no racial discrimination on the part of the library.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 383
Cox v. Louisiana
Adderley v. Florida
Edwards v. South Carolina
External links
Category:Freedom of assembly
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1966 in United States case law
"""

From "Brown v. Maryland" ==> """
Brown v. Maryland, 25 U.S. (12 Wheat.) 419 (1827), was a significant United States Supreme Court case which interpreted the Import-Export and Commerce Clauses of the U.S. Constitution to prohibit discriminatory taxation by states against imported items after importation, rather than only at the time of importation. The state of Maryland passed a law requiring importers of foreign goods to obtain a license for selling their products. Brown was charged under this law and appealed. It was the first case in which the U.S. Supreme Court construed the Import-Export Clause.Boris I. Bittker & Brannon P. Denning, The Import-Export Clause, 68 Miss. L.J. 521, 526 (1998). Chief Justice John Marshall delivered the opinion of the court, ruling that Maryland's statute violated the Import-Export and Commerce Clauses and the federal law was supreme. He alleged that the power of a state to tax goods did not apply if they remained in their "original package". A license tax on the importer was essentially the same as a tax on an import itself. Despite arguing the case for Maryland, future chief justice Roger Taney admitted that the case was correctly decided.Robert J. Steamer, Brown v. Maryland: Quick Reference, Oxford Reference, http://www.oxfordreference.com/view/10.1093/oi/authority.20110803095531624 (last visited November 6, 2019).
Background
In 1821, the Maryland legislature passed a law which required anyone who sold imported items to obtain a license, costing fifty dollars (approximately $1076 in 2016 dollars),See Morgan Friedman, The Inflation Calculator, Westegg, http://www.westegg.com/inflation/   (last accessed March 24, 2017)($50 in 1827 is $1075.72 in 2016). before the imported goods could be legally sold in the state.. The plaintiff was charged with importing one package of dry goods and selling it without a license.25 U.S. at 436. Counsel for the plaintiff contended that this violated two clauses of the U.S. Constitution: the Import-Export Clause and the Commerce Clause.25 U.S. at 436–437.
The Import Export Clause (Article I, Section 10, Clause 2) states that:Art. I, § 10, Cl. 2 U.S. Const.
The Commerce Clause (Article I, Section 8, Clause 3) states that:Art. I, § 8, Cl. 3 U.S. Const.
Both the City Court of Baltimore and, on appeal, the Court of Appeals of Maryland upheld the charges against Brown for violating an act of the Maryland legislature. The U.S. Supreme Court accepted the case to determine "whether the legislature of a state can constitutionally require the importer of foreign articles to take out a license from the state before he shall be permitted to sell a bale or package so imported."25 U.S. at 436.
Court's opinion
thumb|Chief Justice John Marshall, who wrote the Court's opinion
thumb|Maryland's attorney Roger Taney, who would later become Marshall's successor as Chief Justice in 1835
Chief Justice John Marshall delivered the majority opinion. He summarized the question at issue by stating that the case "depends entirely on the question whether the legislature of a state can constitutionally require the importer of foreign articles to take out a license from the state before he shall be permitted to sell a bale or package so imported."
Import-Export Clause
The Import-Export Clause had not previously been construed by the U.S. Supreme Court.Bittker & Denning at 526. Marshall began with a lexicographical analysis of the Import-Export Clause:
The Import-Export Clause has an exception for state inspection laws. Since state inspections were carried out on land, for both imports and exports, a "tax or duty of inspection" was "frequently, if not always, paid for service performed on land" once the imported item was within the country.25 U.S. at 438. Marshall thus concluded that "th[e] exception in favor of duties for the support of inspection laws goes far in proving that the framers of the Constitution classed taxes of a similar character with those imposed for the purposes of inspection, with duties on imports and exports, and supposed them to be prohibited." However, he found that this narrow view of the subject was not enough to strike down the Maryland tax on importers and proceeded to examine the motivation of the Founders in including the Import-Export tax and its role in the federal framework of the Constitution.See 25 U.S. at 438 ("If we quit this narrow view of the subject, and passing from the literal interpretation of the words, look to the objects of the prohibition, we find no reason for withdrawing the act under consideration from its operation."); 25 U.S. at 238–240.
Imposts and duties on imports and exports was a subject given solely to Congress, "plainly because, in the general opinion, the interest of all would be best promoted by placing that whole subject under the control of Congress."25 U.S. at 439. Regardless of whether that power was to prevent state taxation from disrupting harmony between the states, prevent states from hindering uniform trade relations between the US and foreign nations, or reserve this source of revenue solely to the government, "it is plain that the object would be as completely defeated by a power to tax the article in the hands of the importer the instant it was landed as by a power to tax it while entering the port. There is no difference in effect between a power to prohibit the sale of an article and a power to prohibit its introduction into the country. ... No goods would be imported if none could be sold." It was not relevant how small or large the tax was or whether states would act in a manner injurious to their commercial interests, as "it cannot be conceded that each [state] would respect the interests of others."25 U.S. at 440. Furthermore, if the major importing states levied taxes on imports that were then transported to other states, the latter would likely impose countervailing measures.
Marshall then addresses an issue that Maryland had argued "with great reason": that prohibiting taxation of imports would greatly interfere in the power of taxation that is "essential" to the states.25 U.S. at 440–441. Maryland insisted that the point when the prohibition on taxation ends should be the time of importation, to which Marshall responded:
The plaintiffs' attorney argued that the payment of import duties to the federal government necessarily conferred on importers the right to sell the imports. Maryland argued that such a reading would allow importers to "exert that right when, where, and as [they] please[]" or allow them to use the imported items for personal use and thus obtain valuable items not subject to household excise taxes.25 U.S. at 442–443.
Commerce Clause
Marshall began this analysis by noting that "[t]he oppressed and degraded state of commerce previous to the adoption of the Constitution can scarcely be forgotten."25 U.S. at 445. Although Congress could make treaties with foreign nations, prior to the adoption of the federal Constitution, the states regulated foreign commerce in their own interests and Congress could not effectively enforce treaty obligations on the states. Therefore, it is unsurprising that Congress' power under the Commerce Clause "should be as extensive as the mischief and should comprehend all foreign commerce and all commerce among the states." The extent of Congress' Commerce Clause power was resolved in Gibbons v. Ogden, 22 U.S. (9 Wheat.) 1 (1824), which determined that it does not end at a state's border but extends to commerce within a state "must be capable of authorizing the sale of those articles which it introduces." "Sale is the object of importation", therefore, "Congress has a right not only to authorize importation, but to authorize the importer to sell."25 U.S. at 447. Although Maryland's tax was on the importer rather than the imports, it was "too obvious for controversy" that such a tax interferes with Congress' ability to regulate commerce.
The opinion concluded by noting: "It may be proper to add that we suppose the principles laid down in this case to apply equally to importations from a sister state. We do not mean to give any opinion on a tax discriminating between foreign and domestic articles."25 U.S. at 449.
Legacy
Twenty years after the Brown decision, Roger Taney, who had succeeded Marshall as Chief Justice of the United States in 1836,Roger B. Taney, Oyez, https://www.oyez.org/justices/roger_b_taney (last visited Mar 30, 2017). remarked on the case and the wisdom of Marshall's decision:
In Brown v. Maryland, Chief Justice Marshall remarked on the applicability of the Import-Export Clause to interstate commerce, remarking that "we suppose the principles laid down in this case, to apply equally to importations from a sister State."25 U.S. at 449; see also Bittker & Denning at 526–527. In 1860, Chief Justice Taney, wrote the Supreme Court's opinion in Almy v. California, which found a tax on a bill of lading for gold dust exported from California to New York violated the Import Export Clause.Almy v. California, 65 U.S. 169 (1860). "We think this case cannot be distinguished from that of Brown v. Maryland,"65 U.S. at 173. he wrote, concluding that "the state tax in question is a duty upon the export of gold and silver, and consequently repugnant to the [Import-Export Clause]."65 U.S. at 175. In 1869, however, the Supreme Court determined that the Import-Export Clause applied only to foreign trade and not trade between the states.See Woodruff v. Parham, 75 U.S. 123 (1869).
In Low v. Austin, 80 U.S. 29 (1872), the Supreme Court was given the question of "whether imported merchandise, upon which the duties and charges at the custom-house have been paid, is subject to State taxation, whilst remaining in the original cases, unbroken and unsold, in the hands of the importer."Low v. Austin, 80 U.S. 29, 32 (1872). The court, drawing on Brown and the opinion of Chief Justice Taney in the License Cases, 46 U.S. 504 (1847), decided that:
This doctrine, which became known as the "original package doctrine", would define the interpretation of the Import-Export Clause for over a century until the U.S. Supreme Court redefined its analysis of the Import-Export Clause in Michelin Tire Corp. v. Wages, 423 U.S. 276 (1976).See Bittker at 530–532. In Michelin, the U.S. Supreme Court launched a sua sponte investigation of the meaning and purpose of the Import-Export Clause, summarizing it thusly:
The Michelin Court made a lengthy and thorough analysis of the Brown opinion and how it was misread in Low v. Austin,423 U.S. at 294–301. which "[held] that the Court in Brown included nondiscriminatory ad valorem property taxes among prohibited 'imposts' or 'duties.'"423 U.S. at 282.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 25
 Peterswald v Bartley - seminal case of the High Court of Australia that analyzed Brown v. Maryland when interpreting "duties of excise" in a provision of Australia's Constitution similar to the Import-Export Clause
References
External links
Category:1827 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
Category:Legal history of Maryland
Category:1827 in Maryland
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
"""

From "Brown v. Mississippi" ==> """
Brown v. Mississippi, 297 U.S. 278 (1936), was a United States Supreme Court case that ruled that a defendant's involuntary confession that is extracted by the use of force on the part of law enforcement cannot be entered as evidence and violates the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Facts of the case
Raymond Stewart, a white planter, was murdered in Kemper County, Mississippi on March 30, 1934. Arthur Ellington, Ed Brown, and Henry Shields, three black tenant farmers, were arrested for his murder. At the trial, the prosecution's principal evidence was the defendants' confessions to police officers. During the trial, however, prosecution witnesses freely admitted that the defendants confessed only after being subjected to brutal whippings by the officers:
"... defendants were made to strip and they were laid over chairs and their backs were cut to pieces with a leather strap with buckles on it, and they were likewise made by the said deputy definitely to understand that the whipping would be continued unless and until they confessed, and not only confessed, but confessed in every matter of detail as demanded by those present; and in this manner the defendants confessed the crime, and, as the whippings progressed and were repeated, they changed or adjusted their confession in all particulars of detail so as to conform to the demands of their torturers. When the confessions had been obtained in the exact form and contents as desired by the mob, they left with the parting admonition and warning that, if the defendants changed their story at any time in any respect from that last stated, the perpetrators of the outrage would administer the same or equally effective treatment." 
One defendant had also been subjected to being strung up by his neck from a tree in addition to the whippings. The confessions were nevertheless admitted into evidence, and were the only evidence used in the subsequent one-day trial. The defendants were convicted by a jury and sentenced to be hanged. The convictions were affirmed by the Mississippi Supreme Court on appeal. In Chief Justice Virgil Alexis Griffith's dissent, he wrote "the transcript reads more like pages torn from some medieval account than a record made within the confines of a modern civilization."
Judgment
In a unanimous decision, the Court reversed the convictions of the defendants. It held that a defendant's confession that was extracted by police violence cannot be entered as evidence and violates the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Aftermath
Upon remand from the United States Supreme Court, the three defendants pleaded nolo contendere to manslaughter rather than risk a retrial. They were however sentenced to six months, two and one-half years, and seven and one-half years in prison, respectively.Neil R. McMillen, Dark Journey: Black Mississippians in the Age of Jim Crow, at 200 (University of Illinois Press 1990)
The prosecutor at the trial level, John Stennis, later served forty-two years as a United States Senator, including two years as President pro tempore. He ran for office in Mississippi thirteen times and never lost.
See also
Confession (legal)
Chambers v. Florida (1940)
List of criminal competencies
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 297
Miranda v. Arizona (1966)
Scottsboro Boys
References
Further reading
External links
Category:Police brutality in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:1936 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:Incorporation case law
Category:False confessions
Category:Torture in the United States
Category:Kemper County, Mississippi
"""

From "Brown v. New Jersey" ==> """
Brown v. New Jersey, 175 U.S. 172 (1899), is a United States Supreme Court case which held that the use of a struck jury did not violate the Fourteenth Amendment.
Background
On October 5, 1898, James Brown was found guilty of murder in the court of oyer and terminer in Hudson County, New Jersey. He appealed to the New Jersey Court of Errors and Appeals, which affirmed the verdict. The case was remanded to the trial court, and Brown was sentenced to death by hanging. Brown was tried and sentenced under a state statute which provided for a struck jury and limited the defendant to five peremptory challenges. If tried by an ordinary jury, the state allowed for twenty peremptory challenges. The decision to use a struck jury was under the discretion of the court. Brown petitioned the Supreme Court to strike down the law as violative of the due process and equal protection clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment in the US.
The Supreme Court's decision
Justice David J. Brewer delivered the opinion of the Court. Brewer concluded that the state had wide latitude in prescribing the rules of court procedure:
Brewer held that the due process clause had not been violated since the use of struck juries could be traced to the common law. Nor did the statute deny to the plaintiff equal protection of the law since it provided for an equal number of peremptory challenges in all cases tried by a struck jury.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 175
External links
Category:1899 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:Hudson County, New Jersey
Category:United States jury case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Brown v. Plata" ==> """
Brown v. Plata, 563 U.S. 493 (2011), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States holding that a court-mandated population limit was necessary to remedy a violation of prisoners’ Eighth Amendment constitutional rights. Justice Kennedy filed the majority opinion of the 5 to 4 decision,.  affirming a decision by a three judge panel of the United States District Court for the Eastern and Northern Districts of California which had ordered California to reduce its prison population to 137.5% of design capacity within two years.
Justice Scalia filed a dissent that was joined by Justice Thomas. A separate dissent was filed by Justice Alito that was joined by Chief Justice Roberts.
 History 
 Coleman v. Brown 
Coleman v. Brown http://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/PC-CA-0002-0035.pdf  (Previously Coleman v. Wilson) (E.D. Cal.), is a federal class action civil rights lawsuit under the Civil Rights Act of 1871, Eighth and Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, and the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 alleging unconstitutional mental health care by the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR).
The case was filed on April 23, 1990, and tried before a United States magistrate judge. In June 1994 the magistrate judge found that defendants’ delivery of mental health care to class members violated the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
On September 13, 1995, the court upheld the magistrate judge's factual findings regarding mental health care screening, insufficient number of staff, incompetence of staff, delays in access to care, medication management and involuntary medication. The court also issued a permanent injunction and ordered that a special master be appointed to monitor compliance with the court-ordered injunctive relief. The special master submitted 16 interim reports, with later reports "reflect[ing] a troubling reversal in the progress of the remedial efforts of the preceding decade".
 Plata v. Brown  
Plata v. Brown (N.D. Cal.), is a federal class action civil rights lawsuit alleging that the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation's (CDCR) medical services are inadequate and violate the Eighth Amendment, the Americans with Disabilities Act, and section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.
The case was filed on April 5, 2001, and re-filed with an amended complaint on August 20, 2001. The plaintiffs claimed a number of deficiencies related to inadequate medical care including, but not limited to: inadequate medical screening of incoming prisoners; delays in or failure to provide access to medical care; untimely responses to medical emergencies; the interference of custodial staff with the provision of medical care; insufficient numbers of competent medical staff; incomplete medical records; a "lack of quality control procedures,"; a lack of protocols to deal with chronic illnesses; and the failure of the administrative grievance system to provide timely or adequate responses to complaints concerning medical care. The claims alleged that patients being treated by the CDCR received inadequate medical care that resulted in the deaths of 34 inmate-patients.
The plaintiffs and defendants negotiated a stipulation for injunctive relief, which the court approved by court order on June 13, 2002, requiring defendants to provide "only the minimum level of medical care required under the Eighth Amendment."
However, three years after approving the stipulation as an order of the court, the court conducted an evidentiary hearing that revealed the continued existence of appalling conditions arising from defendants’ failure to provide adequate medical care to California inmates. As a result, the court ruled in June 2005 and issued an order on October 3, 2005, putting the CDCR's medical health care delivery system in receivership. The receivership became effect in April 2006.
 Plata v. Brown/Coleman v. Brown three-judge court 
In 2006, the plaintiffs in the Coleman and Plata cases filed motions to convene a three-judge court to limit the prison population.Order for population reduction plan, three-judge court convened by the Chief Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit hearing Plata v. Schwarzenegger and Coleman v. Schwarzenegger , a statute created by the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act and further amended by the Prison Litigation Reform Act, sets forth remedies with respect to prison conditions. On October 4, 2006, Governor Schwarzenegger issued Proclamation 4278, declaring a state of emergency with regard to the prisons. During the pending motions, the Little Hoover Commission released its report titled "Solving California's Corrections Crisis: Time Is Running Out" and the CDCR Expert Panel on Adult Offender Recidivism Reduction Programming released its report, both advocating a reduction in prison overcrowding. On July 23, 2007, both the Plata and Coleman courts granted the plaintiff's motions and recommended that the cases be assigned to the same three-judge court. The Chief Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit agreed and, on July 26, 2007, convened the instant three-judge district court pursuant to .
The Three-Judge Court initially consisted of Judge Thelton Henderson, Judge Lawrence Karlton, and Judge Stephen Reinhardt. Judge Karlton passed away and then Judge Kimberly Mueller joined the Three-Judge Court on September 1, 2014. On August 14, 2017 Judge Jon Tigar took the place of Judge Henderson. After Judge Reinhardt's death, Judge Kim Wardlaw took his place on April 4, 2018.ORDER designating and assigning the Honorable Kim McLane Wardlaw, Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, to take the place of Judge Reinhardt. Signed by Chief Judge Sidney R. Thomas on April 4, 2018. (Filed on 4/4/2018) (Entered: 04/04/2018).
 Release order 
On August 4, 2009, the three-judge court ordered that the defendants submit a plan within 45 days detailing "a population reduction plan that will in no more than two years reduce the population of the CDCR's adult institutions to 137.5% of their combined design capacity." The decarceration plan would require California to cut 40,000 inmates out of its prison population of 150,000 when the verdict was issued. In an order described by The New York Times as "scathing", the panel indicated that the state had failed to follow through on previous orders to improve conditions and that the cuts were needed to deal with overcrowding and poor health care that was causing an unnecessary death each week on average. The panel recommended achieving the cuts by reducing imprisonment of nonviolent offenders and technical parole violators.
The state submitted a plan on September 18, 2009, but the plan failed to meet requirements set by the release order. On October 21, 2009, the court rejected the plan, and gave the government until November 12 to submit a corrected plan or it would order the attorneys for the plaintiffs to submit a plan and order it implemented. The state submitted a revised plan on November 12, 2009, and the plan was accepted and entered as an order of the court on January 12, 2010.Order to reduce prison population , three-judge court convened by the Chief Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit hearing Plata v. Schwarzenegger and Coleman v. Schwarzenegger
 United States Supreme Court Decision 
California appealed the order to the Supreme Court on January 19, 2010,Jurisdictional statement, California Attorney General et al. and the Court postponed jurisdictional questions relating to the appeal on June 14, 2010. It was argued on November 30, 2010.
Opinion of the Court
A five justice majority of the Court affirmed the prisoner release order.  Sacramento native Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote for the Court, first chronicling the troubled 11 years California prisons operated near 200% of design capacity.  Kennedy then offers a parade of horribles, including 54 prisoners may share a single toilet, suicidal prisoners have been locked for nearly 24 hours in telephone booth sized cages, and that a preventable death occurs once every five to six days.  Because “Prisoners retain the essence of human dignity inherent in all persons”, the courts have a responsibility to remedy violations of the Eighth Amendment's prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment.
Kennedy notes that the Prison Litigation Reform Act of 1996 (PLRA) only allows a three-judge court to order a limit on prison population.  A three-judge court can only be convened after less intrusive orders have failed and the State has been given a reasonable time to comply with prior orders.  Because over 12 years have passed since the initial Coleman order, Kennedy rejects California's argument that it has not been given reasonable time to comply.  Kennedy likewise finds less intrusive orders have failed because over 70 orders have already been issued and the Plata Receiver had stated that a solution other than reducing overcrowding would “all but bankrupt the State of California".Brown v. Plata, 131 S. Ct. 1910, 1931 (2011).
The PLRA's requirement that crowding is the primary cause of the violation is met because, according to Kennedy, deference should be given to the three-judge court's findings.  Adequate staffing is unfeasible because prisons had a 54% vacancy rate for psychiatrists and they already “would hire any doctor who had ‘a license, a pulse and a pair of shoes’.”131 S. Ct. at 1927.  Kennedy then catalogs the many ways overcrowding causes problems, noting that orderly trial management requires some deadline to discovery, and that the PLRA merely requires overcrowding to be the primary, not the only, cause of the constitutional violation.
Kennedy rejects California's argument that out of state prison transfers are an available alternative relief to prisoner reductions because out of state transfers are a prisoner reduction under the PLRA.  Furthermore, Kennedy rejects the availability of alternative solutions because “California's Legislature has not been willing or able to allocate the resources necessary to meet this crisis”.131 S. Ct. at 1939.
The PLRA requires prospective relief to be narrowly drawn, extend no further than is necessary to correct the violation, and be the least intrusive means of correcting the violation.  The “positive effect” of releasing healthy prisoners who are not members of the class actions is still narrowly tailored because, according to Kennedy, the scope of the remedy must be proportional to the scope of the violation.  Placing a population limit on the entire state prison system instead of the plaintiffs’ prisons is less intrusive because it allows the State flexibility to shift prisoners between prisons.  Additionally, Kennedy writes that the prisoner release order is not overbroad because the State will be allowed to ask the three-judge court to modify the order, someday.
Kennedy finds the three-judge court met the PLRA requirement that substantial weight must be given to public safety.  The “difficult predictive judgments” prospective relief requires means that courts “can and should” rely on expert testimony.131 S. Ct. at 1942.  Noting that there were nearly 10 days of trial on the public safety issue, Kennedy agrees with the three-judge court that releasing criminals from prison “could even improve public safety” because the prisons are making people worse.
Finally, Kennedy finds the three-judge court did not err with establishing the two-year deadline.  While the two-year deadline may not be feasible, Kennedy notes that California has already made progress in reducing overcrowding and that it asked the court to reverse, not extend, the order.  As such, Kennedy feels that the three-judge court should give “serious consideration” to any future requests to extend the deadline.
As an appendix to the opinion Kennedy includes photographs of California prison conditions, such as the suicide cages.
Dissents
Justice Scalia's oral dissent
Justice Antonin Scalia disagreed with the Court majority so strongly that he spent over nine minutes after the Opinion Announcement reading his dissent from the bench.  Scalia believes that “the only viable claims are those by prisoners who have themselves been denied needed medical treatment.  Since the classes certified here are improper, it follows the remedy decreed is also illegal.”
 Justice Scalia's written dissent 
In his written dissent Scalia, joined by Justice Clarence Thomas,  elaborates that a constitutionally inadequate prison hospital system cannot authorize the District Court to release healthy prisoners.  Because only prisoners who have already been denied medical care have a legal claim, and only those prisoners meet the "bedrock rule" that all class action members' claims are individually viable, the courts cannot "most generously reward" any healthy prisoners.131 S. Ct. at 1952 (Scalia J., dissenting).  Scalia thinks it is absurd that "fine physical specimens who have developed intimidating muscles pumping iron in the prison gym" will be ordered released to alleviate prison hospital crowding.
Scalia further rejects the "theory of systemic unconstitutionality".  Since judges' factfinding is traditionally for past or present facts, Scalia thinks it is proper only for elected policy officials to make "broad empirical predictions".131 S. C.t at 1953 (Scalia, J., dissenting), citing   Because this "structural injunction" made such predictions about the future, Scalia writes "the policy preferences of three District Judges now govern the operation of California's penal system."131 S. Ct. at 1955 (Scalia, J., dissenting).
While Scalia acknowledges that the PLRA explicitly contemplates prospective prisoner release orders, he feels that this reading of the statute should be construed so as to not "veer significantly from the historical role" of the courts.
Scalia also feels "the Court's respect for state sovereignty has vanished in the case where it most matters."  Accusing the majority of affirming "the functional equivalent of 46,000 writs of habeas corpus, based on its paean to courts", Scalia ridicules the 9th Circuit for having its habeas relief reversed four times that Term alone, three of which involved Judge Reinhardt.131 S. Ct. at 1956 (Scalia, J., dissenting) citing Harrington v. Richter, 131 S.Ct. 770 (2011)(reversing en banc opinion by Reinhardt), Cullen v. Pinholster, 131 S.Ct. 1388 (2011)(reversing Reinhardt in en banc majority); Felkner v. Jackson, 131 S.Ct. 1305, 179 L.Ed.2d 374 (2011) (per curiam)(reversing unpublished memorandum); Swarthout v. Cooke, 131 S.Ct. 859, 178 L.Ed.2d 732 (2011) (per curiam)(reversing opinion by Reinhardt).
Finally, Scalia castigates Kennedy for what he calls the "bizarre coda" emphasizing that the order can be modified latter.  Lampooning Kennedy for stating the obvious, Scalia speculates that the majority is attempting to rein in some headstrong judges and that "a warning, if successful, would achieve the benefit of a marginal reduction in the inevitable murders, robberies, and rapes to be committed by the released inmates.  But it would achieve that at the expense of intellectual bankruptcy".
Justice Alito dissents
Justice Samuel Alito, joined by Chief Justice John Roberts, dissented separately.  Alito believes the prison capacity ratio imposed by the three-judge court will order "the premature release of approximately 46,000 criminals-the equivalent of three Army divisions."
As such, Alito first objects that "with the safety of the people of California in the balance the record on this issue should not have been closed."  Because "prospective relief must be tailored to present and future, not past, conditions" Alito feels the court needed to extend its factfinding beyond when it closed discovery.
Second, Alito rejects that the prisoner relief order extends no further than is necessary.  He notes that California could have simply released some of the class action plaintiffs, that is, the medically and mentally ill prisoners.  It "exemplifies what went wrong in this case", for Alito, that the judge rejecting this solution responded he would not "say yes, and the hell with everybody else."131 S. Ct. at 1965 (Alito, J., dissenting).
Finally, Alito does not believe the three-judge court met the PLRA requirement to give substantial weight to any adverse impact on public safety.  Reciting crime statistics from Philadelphia from the 1990s, Alito deduces that released criminals will commit crimes.131 S. Ct. at 1966, fn. 9, citing Hearing on Prison Reform before the Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 104th Cong., 1st Sess., 49 (1995) (statement of Lynne Abraham, District Attorney of Philadelphia).  Alito warns "I fear that today's decision, like prior prisoner release orders, will lead to a grim roster of victims."
Implications of Brown v. Plata
 2011 Public Safety Realignment Initiative (AB 109) 
Instead of releasing state prison inmates, California simply moved them to county jails.  After the case was argued but before Court issued its opinion the California legislature passed the 2011 Public Safety Realignment initiative, or AB 109.Joan Petersilia & Francis T. Cullen, Liberal But Not Stupid: Meeting the Promise of Downsizing Prisons, 2 Stanford Journal of Criminal Law and Policy 1 (2015).  State officials felt it was inefficient  that the state was subject to a 46,000 prisoner reduction order while the county jails contained 10,000 empty beds.  As such, the legislation restructured California's penal system mostly by shifting prison inmates, which are subject to the court order and an expense to the state, to county jails, which are not subject to the court order and are an expense of the counties.Rebecca Sullivan Silbert, THINKING CRITICALLY ABOUT REALIGNMENT IN CALIFORNIA, Chief Justice Earl Warren Institute on Law and Social Policy (February 2012).  Almost 500 felonies were redefined by the legislature so that they could only be served in county jail and the state provided that "non-non-nons", that is non-serious, non-violent, and non-sexual offenders, will always serve their time in county jail.Lisa T. Quan, Sara Abarbanel & Debbie Mukamal, Reallocation of Responsibility: Changes to the Correctional System in California Post-Realignment, Stanford Criminal Justice Center (January 2014).
From 2010 to 2012 California's prison population was reduced by 18% while its jail population increased by 12%.  Additionally, the state run probation system dropped by 46% while the county run parole population increased by 34%.  All told, prison realignment resulted in the largest drop in California's prisoner population since Governor Ronald Reagan released 34% of inmates.
 Population reduction 
California met the initial court imposed benchmarks.  The state released a white paper on "The Future of California Corrections" known as “The Blueprint” which planned on seeking the kind of order modification Justice Kennedy had anticipated.  Governor Jerry Brown then announced that the prison crisis had been resolved, terminated his emergency powers, and asked to modify the court order.  The three-judge court refused any modification, threatening to hold the governor in contempt of court. Judge Reinhardt even appended to his opinion a table of state laws, including appropriation limits, that were now "waived" so that the governor could obey his order.
California applied for a stay of the order from the Supreme Court.  The Supreme Court denied the stay without comment.  However, Justice Alito would have granted the stay and Justice Scalia even wrote a dissent, joined by Justice Thomas.  Scalia largely quotes his dissent to the Court's earlier opinion, noting that he had correctly predicted that the three-judge court would be unwilling to modify its order.  He derides that, "The bluff has been called, and the Court has nary a pair to lay on the table."Brown v. Plata, 134 S. Ct. 1 (U.S. 2013).
Nevertheless, California failed to meet the three-judge court's deadline and needed to be granted another extension until February 2016.  The California electorate further reduced defined felonies by passing California Proposition 47 (2014).
The state must still submit monthly updates to the Three Judge Court regarding population reduction and other efforts to implement the decision. As of the last update on May 9, 2018, the prison population was at 134.7% of its design capacity. 114,618 inmates are in state institutions, while 3,553 inmates are in out of state facilities as of May 9, 2018. The final update of 2017 reported 114,813 inmates in state institutions, with 4,315 in out of state facilities.
 Cost reduction 
In the first few years after the decision, California prison costs declined. Governor Brown framed efforts to implement Brown v. Plata as a way to decrease costs. While the prison budget initially declined after the decision, the prison budget then increased beginning in 2013.
Some state officials maintain that costs have increased because of medical care enhancements (including a new medical facility and additional funding for medication) ordered by Brown v. Plata. However, others maintain that cost increases are due to increased spending on personnel. The state changed how they calculate the appropriate number of personnel. Previously, the state would hire one new prison guard per six new inmates; now, the state staffs each prison based on their size and layout.
 Mental health care improvements 
Implementation of mental health care facilities improvements are still ongoing.  The Program Guide, which is the remedial implementation plan for Coleman v. Brown, mandated the following: "1) Any inmate referred to a Mental Health Crisis Bed must be transferred within 24 hours of referral; 2) Any inmate referred to any acute inpatient mental health placement be transferred within ten days of referral, if accepted by Department of State Hospitals; 3) Any inmate referred to any intermediate health care placement be transferred within 30 days of referral, if accepted by the Department of State Hospitals."Order on Coleman v. Brown, Case 2:90-cv-00520-KJM-DB, Document 5610 (Apr. 19 2017). On April 19, 2017, Judge Kimberly Mueller held that the state was not in compliance with the Program Guide timelines for transfers to mental health care facilities. Judge Mueller ruled that if the state was not in compliance by May 15, 2017, she would enforce her order with civil contempt proceedings or monetary sanctions.
On February 21, 2018, the state appealed this order to the Ninth Circuit, claiming that the District Court "abused its discretion because perfect compliance with the Program Guide is not relief that is necessary to correct a systemic Eighth Amendment violation" and that if "the April 19 Order also mandated perfect compliance with the 24-Hour MHCB transfer timeline, then such a ruling also fails to comport with the Eighth Amendment and PLRA."Defendants-Appellants' Opening Brief, Coleman v. Brown, (2018) (No. 17-16080). The plaintiffs/appellees filed their reply brief on May 25, 2018.Plaintiffs-Appellees' Answering Brief, Coleman v. Brown, (2018) (No. 17-16080).
 Subsequent cases 
Brown v. Plata has faced some negative and some positive treatment in the courts.
 Peyton v. Brown (C.D. Cal.), which held: "Plata's remedial decree did not create a substantive right in an individual to bring a civil rights action seeking release." The court cited Preiser v. Rodriguez, which held: "[W]hen a state prisoner is challenging the very fact or duration of his physical imprisonment, and the relief he seeks is a determination that he is entitled to immediate release or a speedier release from that imprisonment, his sole federal remedy is a writ of habeas corpus."
 Thomas v. Alameda County (N.D. Cal) further discussed whether Brown v. Plata created a substantive right. There, the plaintiff was in custody before trial and in his complaint relied on Brown v. Plata to make a prison overcrowding claim. The court stated that Brown v. Plata "by itself does not provide any substantive right on which plaintiff can rely, and his claim of general prison overcrowding based on Plata fails."
 Peralta v. Dillard (9th Cir.), also defined Brown v. Plata. There, an inmate sued California's state medical officer, dental officer and staff dentist under §1983. The court referenced Brown v. Plata because it showed the following: 1) prisoners cannot sue states for money damages, but can sue them for injunctions; 2) "even for prisoners not yet injured by constitutionally deficient conditions, history counsels skepticism about the utility of injunctive relief."
 Public opinion 
According to a national poll of registered voters taken by Fairleigh Dickinson University's PublicMind in the spring of 2011, just 25% of voters agreed that prisoners would need to be let go if prisons were badly overcrowded and prisoners’ health conditions were poor, while 63% said, “even though conditions are bad, the court cannot order criminals to be released.”  Dr. Peter J. Woolley, Director of PublicMind added, “It's no surprise that the public holds its own interests in much higher regard than health and safety of prisoners or even prison guards”.
Nevertheless, important differences emerged among various segments of the population: men were more sympathetic than women to prisoner release. One in five women (19%) agreed that some prisoners should be released, compared to a third of men (32%).  In addition, voters under the age of 30 split on the question of release (42%-43%), while older voters were against allowing courts to order prisoner release by a margin of 2-to-1 or more. In terms of ideology, 74% of conservatives were against the idea of court-ordered releases compared to the 48% of liberals. Finally, white voters by 3-to-1 said the courts should not order prisoner releases to remedy overcrowding and health problems, while black voters split on the question, 50%-41%.
Responding to the poll, Bruce Peabody, professor of political science at Fairleigh Dickinson University said the Court's ruling was “somewhat surprising.” He added “While our current Supreme Court has a mixed record with respect to recognizing various rights of those accused of crimes, it has generally declined to give extensive constitutional protections to those already behind bars… the Court has gone against the wishes of eighteen states who asked for more deference on the issue, and [as a result] it has extended rights to a group – prisoners- who have historically not received much judicial protection.” Fairleigh Dickinson University's PublicMind, (2011, May 23). “U.S. Voters Weigh in on Brown v. Plata, Case involving Prison Overcrowding” [Press Release] May 23, 2011. Retrieved from http://publicmind.fdu.edu/2011/brownvplata/
 Selected scholarship 
A number of legal academic studies and articles have focused on this case, both in the years before the Supreme Court decision and in the years since the Supreme Court decision. Below is a list of selected scholarship.
 Anastasia Cooper, The Ongoing Correctional Chaos in Criminalizing Mental Illness: The Realignment's Effects on California Jails, 24 Hasting's Women's L.J. 339 (2013).
 Bethany L. Edmondson, Trans-Lating the Eighth Amendment Standard: The First Circuit's Denial of a Transgender Prisoner's Constitutional Right to Medical Treatment, 51 Ga. L. Rev. 585 (2017).
 Laura Rovner, On Litigating Constitutional Challenges to the Federal Supermax: Improving Conditions and Shining a Light, 95 Denv. L. Rev. 457 (2018).
 Margo Schlanger, Civil Rights Injunctions Over Time: A Case Study of Jail and Prison Court Orders, 81 N.YU. L. Rev. 550 (2006).
 Margo Schlanger, Plata v. Brown and Realignment: Jails, Prisons, Courts and Politics, 48 Harv. C.R.-C.L.L. Rev. 165 (2013).
 Fredrick E. Vars, Shelby B. Calambokidis, From Hospitals to Prisons: A New Explanation, 102 Cornell L.Rev. Online 101 (2017).
 See also 
 Plata v. Schwarzenegger
 Coleman v. Schwarzenegger
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 563
 Eighth Amendment
 Public Safety Realignment Initiative
 References 
 Further reading 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Eighth Amendment case law
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Penal system in California
"""

From "Brown v. Socialist Workers '74 Campaign Committee" ==> """
Brown v. Socialist Workers '74 Campaign Committee, 459 U.S. 87 (1982), was a United States Supreme Court case that dealt with political speech, and whether a state could require a minor political party to disclose its membership, expenditures, and contributors.
At the time, most states required political parties to disclose their contributions and expenditures; in 1982, the Court ruled that the Socialist Workers Party, a minor party in Ohio, was not required to disclose its contributors or recipients, on the basis of retributive animus and harassment if party functionaries did so.
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1982 in United States case law
Category:Socialist Workers Party (United States)
"""

From "Brown v. Texas" ==> """
Brown v. Texas, 443 U.S. 47 (1979), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court determined that the defendant's arrest in El Paso, Texas, for a refusal to identify himself, after being seen and questioned in a high crime area, was not based on a reasonable suspicion of wrongdoing and thus violated the Fourth Amendment. It is an important case for Stop and Identify statutes in the United States.
The decision was written by Chief Justice Warren Burger and unanimously supported by the other justices. His summary of the factual elements of the case includes the following:
Two police officers, while cruising near noon in a patrol car, observed appellant and another man walking away from one another in an alley in an area with a high incidence of drug traffic. They stopped and asked appellant to identify himself and explain what he was doing. One officer testified that he stopped appellant because the situation "looked suspicious and we had never seen that subject in that area before." The officers did not claim to suspect appellant of any specific misconduct, nor did they have any reason to believe that he was armed. When appellant refused to identify himself, he was arrested for violation of a Texas statute which makes it a criminal act for a person to refuse to give his name and address to an officer "who has lawfully stopped him and requested the information.".
The finding held that:
The application of the Texas statute to detain appellant and require him to identify himself violated the Fourth Amendment because the officers lacked any reasonable suspicion to believe that appellant was engaged or had engaged in criminal conduct. Detaining appellant to require him to identify himself constituted a seizure of his person subject to the requirement of the Fourth Amendment that the seizure be "reasonable."
While the application of the relevant Texas law was held unconstitutional in the case, the constitutional status of the law itself was not addressed.
The statute in question, Tex. Penal Code § 38.02(a) has since been revised to only make it a crime to refuse to identify oneself after being lawfully arrested.Tex.Penal Code § 38.02 (Retrieved August 19, 2020)
See also
 Terry v. Ohio, 1968
 Hiibel v. Sixth Judicial District Court of Nevada, 2004
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1979 in United States case law
Category:1979 in Texas
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
"""

From "Brown v. United States" ==> """
Brown v. United States, 113 U.S. 568 (1885), was an appeal from the Court of Claims regarding one James Brown, the intestate of the appellant, who was a boatswain in the United States Navy. The petition in this case was filed against the United States by the administratrix of his estate in the Court of Claims to recover a balance of pay which she alleged was due to Brown at his death.Brown v. United States, .
The Court of Claims found the following facts:
The decedent Brown, was appointed a boatswain in the US Navy, January 4, 1862. On October 22, 1872, the Naval Retiring Board, before which he had been ordered by the Secretary of the Navy under the provisions of § 23 of the Act of August 3, 1861, 12 Stat. 291, reported that he was incapacitated from performing the duties of his office, and that there was no evidence that such incapacity was the result of any incident of the service. He was accordingly, upon the day last mentioned, by order of the President, retired on furlough pay. From October 22, 1872, to June 30, 1875, Brown received pay at the rate of $900 per annum, and from July 1, 1875, to June 6, 1879, at the rate of $500 per annum. On the day last named, he died.
The court also found that the Acts of August 3, 1861, 12 Stat. 290, and of December 21, 1861, 12 Stat. 329, were soon after their enactment construed by the President and Navy Department to include warrant officers, and under that construction it had been the uniform practice of the President to place warrant officers on the retired list, and large numbers of these officers had been so retired. No protest or objection was made by Brown during his lifetime, either to his retirement or rate of pay. The accounting officers of the Treasury had uniformly held that longevity pay to retired officers was not authorized by § 1593 of the Revised Statutes.
From these findings of fact the Court of Claims deduced, as a conclusion of law, that Brown was legally placed on the retired list, and had received the full amount of pay allowed him by law, and was not entitled to recover, and entered judgment dismissing the petition. The appeal of the petitioner brings that judgment under review.
The appellant asserted that the law applied only to commissioned officers, and not to warrant officers, to which latter class Brown belonged.
The question, however, was not a new one, and the findings showed that soon after the enactment of the act, the President and the Navy Department construed the section to include warrant as well as commissioned officers, and that they have since that time uniformly adhered to that construction, and that under its provisions, large numbers of warrant officers have been retired. This contemporaneous and uniform interpretation is entitled to weight in the construction of the law, and in a case of doubt ought to turn the scale.
The appellant next contended that the retirement of Brown was illegal because, at the time of his retirement, no officer could be placed on the retired list for disability not originating in the line of duty.
The theory behind this contention is this: the statute required that all officers retired for disability or incompetency not resulting from long and faithful service or wounds or injuries received in the line of duty or from sickness or exposure therein should be retired on furlough pay, and, as §§ 3, 5, and 19 of the Naval Appropriation Act of July 15, 1870, 16 Stat. 321, abolished the furlough pay list, the President was only authorized to retire Brown wholly from the service with one year's pay. The court thought it was clear that the sections of the statute referred to were not intended to abolish the furlough pay list. So far as they refer to retired officers, they apply to the retired list, and not the retired list on furlough pay. For thirty years, the legislation of Congress has divided retired naval officers into two classes. By § 2 of the Act of February 28, 1855, 10 Stat. 616, the officers on the retired, or, as it was then designated, reserved list were divided into those entitled to receive leave of absence pay and those entitled to receive furlough pay.
The distinction between the two classes of retired officers has been preserved down to the present time. By § 23 of the Act of August 3, 1861, 12 Stat. 290, 291, under which Brown retired, provided that officers incapacitated for active service from long service, wounds, etc., should be placed on the list of retired officers, but those incapacitated from other causes should be retired upon furlough pay. So, by § 2 of the Act approved July 28, 1866, 14 Stat. 345, it was provided that the rate of pay of officers of the navy on the retired list and not on duty nor retired on furlough pay, should be one-half the pay to which such officers would be entitled if on duty at sea.
This legislation has been reproduced in the Revised Statutes, where the distinction between officers on the retired list and officers on the retired list on furlough pay is preserved. Thus, §§ 1588 and 1592 prescribe one rate of pay for retired officers, and § 1593 a different rate for officers on the retired list on furlough pay, and § 1594 authorizes the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to transfer any officer of the navy on the retired list from the furlough to the retired pay list. It is plain, therefore, that section 5 of the Act of July 15, 1870, relied on by appellant and which is the only one which refers to the pay of retired officers, applies in both its terms and meaning only to the pay of officers on the retired list, and not to the compensation of officers retired on furlough pay, to which class Brown belonged, and did not abolish the furlough pay list. The order of the President retiring Brown on furlough pay was therefore made strictly in accordance with the provisions of the statute then and still in force.
It was next objected that the order of the President retiring Brown was illegal and void because the retiring board, having reported him incapacitated, did not find and report what was the cause of his incapacity, but only that there was no evidence that it was the result of any incident of the service. But as it is incumbent on the officer whose case comes before a retiring board to show, in order to secure a report which will entitle him to be placed on the retired list rather than on the retired list on furlough pay, that his incapacity was the result of some incident of the service, the report of the board that there was no evidence to support such a finding is to all intents and purposes a report that the incapacity was not the result of an incident of the service, and justifies an order retiring the officer on furlough pay.
The court's opinion was that the order of the President retiring Brown was authorized by law, and was regular and valid.
Appellant next insists that, conceding the retirement of Brown to be valid, he did not receive, after July 1, 1875, the pay to which he was entitled.
However, in the court's opinion, Brown was paid in his lifetime all that he was entitled to receive under the laws then in force. The judgment of the Court of Claims dismissing his petition was therefore right, and was affirmed.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
"""

From "Brown v. United States (1921)" ==> """
Brown v. United States, 256 U.S. 335 (1921), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that if a person is attacked, and that person reasonably believes that he is in immediate danger of death or grievous bodily injury, he has no duty to retreat and may stand his ground and, if he kills his attacker, he has not exceeded the bounds of lawful self-defense.
 Background 
Brown, the petitioner, and Hermes, the individual killed, had a previous history. Evidence indicated that Hermes had used a knife to assault Brown on two prior occasions and that Hermes threatened that the next time one of them would be taken away in a black box. Given this history, Brown took a handgun with him while supervising excavation work for a post office and put it nearby. Hermes arrived and, according to Brown, came at him with a knife. Brown retreated approximately twenty to twenty-five feet to where he left the pistol and, with Hermes striking at Brown, fired four shots, killing Hermes.Brown v. United States, .
A jury convicted Brown of second degree murder after being instructed by the court that, when considering self-defense, the individual assaulted has a duty to retreat as long as retreat is open to him and would not be dangerous to his person.
 Decision 
On appeal, the Supreme Court disagreed and reversed the lower court's conviction holding “that if a man reasonably believes that he is in immediate danger of death or grievous bodily harm from his assailant he may stand his ground and that if he kills him he has not exceed the bounds of lawful self-defense.” In writing the opinion, Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes stated that “Detached reflection cannot be demanded in the presence of an uplifted knife. Therefore, in this Court, at least, it is not a condition of immunity that one in that situation should pause to consider whether a reasonable man might not think it possible to fly with safety or to disable his assailant rather than to kill him.” 
In reviewing the lower court's decision, Justice Holmes noted that there was evidence that Brown fired his last shot after Hermes went down. Brown testified in the lower court that this was an accidental discharge. The Court determined that a person need not lose a self-defense claim if a last shot followed closely to the others during the heat of conflict and if a person believed that he was fighting for his life.
Justices Clarke and Pitney dissented without writing an opinion.
See also
 Stand-your-ground law
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1921 in United States case law
Category:Self-defense
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "Brown v. Van Braam" ==> """
Brown v. Van Braam, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 344 (1797), was a United States Supreme Court case holding that: "Under the practice of the courts of Rhode Island, as adopted by the judiciary act, (1 U. S. Stats, at Large, 73,) the entry of a default, after a plea of the general issue, no similar being on the record, does not operate a discontinuance, and a judgment on the default is valid. Under the same practice the court may assess the damages in an action of assumpsit on a foreign bill payable in pounds sterling. Interest on affirmance is to be calculated on the aggregate sum of principal and interest in the judgment below, to the time of affirmance, but no further.."Reports of decisions in the Supreme Court of the United States: with notes, and a digest, Volume 1 (Little, Brown, and Co., 1870) pg. 254 https://books.google.com/books?id=NEQPAAAAYAAJ
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 3
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Ellsworth Court
Category:1797 in United States case law
"""

From "Browning-Ferris Industries of Vermont, Inc. v. Kelco Disposal, Inc." ==> """
Browning-Ferris Industries v. Kelco Disposal, 492 U.S. 257 (1989), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the Eighth Amendment's prohibition of unreasonable fines does not apply to punitive-damage awards in civil cases when the United States is not a party.
 Prior history 
Browning-Ferris Industries (BFI) had been the dominant provider of roll-off trash collection services in the Burlington, Vermont market since it entered the roll-off market in 1976.  Joseph Kelley was a district manager for BFI until 1980, when he left to found his own company, Kelco Disposal.  By 1982, Kelco had garnered over 40% of the roll-off market; in that year, BFI began a campaign of predatory pricing, which continued for several months, with the intent of driving Kelco out of the business.  In 1985, BFI sold their Burlington operations to another company.
In 1984, Kelco filed suit in the United States District Court for the District of Vermont alleging that BFI had violated the Sherman Antitrust Act.  Kelco also claimed, as an alternative state-law cause of action, that BFI interfered with its contracts with its customers.  In the subsequent jury trial, BFI was found liable on both claims.  In a separate one-day trial on the damages, the jury settled on compensatory damages of $51,146, and punitive damages of $6 million.  The trial court then awarded Kelco treble damages and attorney's fees on the anti-trust claim, but awarded $6,066,082.74 on the alternative state tort claim, so further action proceeded on the basis of the higher award.
BFI appealed the judgment to the Second Circuit Court of Appeals, and raised the issue of the excessive fines clause.  The Second Circuit affirmed the trial court's decision on both liability and damages, finding for the sake of argument that the jury's punitive-damage award was not excessive whether or not the Eighth Amendment applied to this case.  The Supreme Court granted certiorari to consider the specific question of whether the excessive fines clause applies to civil cases involving purely private parties.Opinion of the court, 492 U.S. 257, 260ff.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 492
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Excessive Fines Clause case law
Category:1989 in United States case law
"""

From "Bruce v. Samuels" ==> """
Bruce v. Samuels, 577 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the Prison Litigation Reform Act of 1995 requires prisoners to pay twenty percent of their prior month's income for each case they file.Amy Howe, Opinion analysis: Court makes quick work of prisoner fees case,  (Jan. 12, 2016, 11:55 AM). The Court rejected the petitioner's argument that prisoners were only required to pay a maximum of twenty percent of their monthly income, even if they file multiple cases.
 Opinion of the Court 
Associate Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg authored a unanimous decision.Bruce v. Samuels, No. 14–844, 577 U. S. ____, slip op. at 8 (2016).
 References 
External links
 SCOTUSblog coverage
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:Penal system in the United States
"""

From "Bruesewitz v. Wyeth" ==> """
Bruesewitz v. Wyeth LLC, 562 U.S. 223 (2011), is a United States Supreme Court case that decided whether a section of the Vaccine Act of 1986 preempts all vaccine design defect claims against vaccine manufacturers.
Background
Hannah Bruesewitz, the daughter of the main petitioners in the case, received Wyeth's Tri-Immunol DTP vaccine as part of childhood immunizations. The Bruesewitzes claimed that Hannah's seizures and later developmental problems came from the vaccine. They filed suit in the "Vaccine Court", a special court within the United States Court of Federal Claims. Their petition was dismissed for failure to prove a link between the vaccine and Hannah's health problems.
They proceeded to sue in Pennsylvania state court. The case was removed to the local federal court, which held that the claim was preempted by a section of the National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act of 1986. The Third Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed.Bruesewitz v. Wyeth,  , Third Circuit affirms, (2008). A petition for a writ of certiorari was granted on March 8, 2010, bringing the case to the Supreme Court.
In briefings before the Court, both sides argued over the specific language of the statutory provision.
 Decision 
The case was decided on February 22, 2011. The Court, in a 6-2 opinion by Justice Antonin Scalia, held that the "plaintiffs design defect claims [were] expressly preempted by the Vaccine Act." Thus, the court affirmed laws that vaccine manufacturers are not liable for vaccine-induced injury or death if they are "accompanied by proper directions and warnings."
Justices Sonia Sotomayor and Ruth Bader Ginsburg dissented.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 562
 References 
 External links 
  SCOTUSBlog Case Page
  Complete Oral Argument Audio and Transcript
Category:Vaccination in the United States
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:Vaccination law
Category:Wyeth
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Brulotte v. Thys Co." ==> """
Brulotte v. Thys Co., 379 U.S. 29 (1964), was a Supreme Court of the United States decision holding that a contract calling for payment of patent royalties after the expiration of the licensed patent was misuse of the patent right and unenforceable under the Supremacy Clause, state contract law notwithstanding..  The decision was widely subjected to academic criticism but the Supreme Court has rejected that criticism and reaffirmed the Brulotte decision in Kimble v. Marvel Entertainment, LLC..
Background
thumb|250px|right|Patented hops-picking machine of Thys
Thys owned patents on hop-picking machinery. He sold a machine to Brulotte, a farmer in Washington, for $3000 and granted him a license to use the machine for a minimum royalty of $500 for each hop-picking season or $3.33 per 200 pounds of hops harvested by the machine, whichever was greater. The license had no termination date. Of the seven patents covering the machine, the last expired by 1957. Brulotte failed to pay the royalties and Thys sued him for breach of contract in Washington State court.379 U.S. at 29-30.
The trial court rendered judgment for Thys and the Supreme Court of Washington affirmed.62 Wash. 2d 284, 382 P.2d 271 (1963). The Supreme Court of Washington held that in the present case the period during which royalties were required, even though beyond the expiry of the patents, was only "a reasonable amount of time over which to spread the payments for the use of the patent[s]."62 Wash. 2d, at 291, 382 P. 2d, at 275.
Ruling of Supreme Court
The Supreme Court reversed (8-1) in an opinion written for the Court by Justice William O. Douglas. Justice John Marshall Harlan II dissented.
Majority opinion
right|thumb|150px|Justice William O. Douglas
Justice Douglas began the majority opinion by citing precedents holding that patent "rights become public property once the 17-year period expires."379 U.S. at 31. He then quoted Chief Justice Stone, speaking for the Court in Scott Paper Co. v. Marcalus Co.:
. . . any attempted reservation or continuation in the patentee or those claiming under him of the patent monopoly, after the patent expires, whatever the legal device employed, runs counter to the policy and purpose of the patent laws.Scott, 326 U.S. 249, 256 (1946).
The Court rejected the claim that the contract merely spread the payment for using the patent over a longer period. The payments were clearly proportioned to the extent of use after the patents expired: "The royalty payments due for the post-expiration period are by their terms for use during that period, and are not deferred payments for use during the pre-expiration period." Thys "was using the licenses to project its monopoly beyond the patent period." Because the license made no distinction between the pre- and post-expiration period, the contracts were "on their face a bald attempt to exact the same terms and conditions for the period after the patents have expired as they do for the monopoly period," contrary to patent policy. That made them unenforceable.379 U.S. at 32.
The Court therefore ruled:
n light of those considerations, we conclude that a patentee's use of a royalty agreement that projects beyond the expiration date of the patent is unlawful per se. If that device were available to patentees, the free market visualized for the post-expiration period would be subject to monopoly influences that have no proper place there.
. . . A patent empowers the owner to exact royalties as high as he can negotiate with the leverage of that monopoly. But to use that leverage to project those royalty payments beyond the life of the patent is analogous to an effort to enlarge the monopoly of the patent by tieing the sale or use of the patented article to the purchase or use of unpatented ones. The exaction of royalties for use of a machine after the patent has expired is an assertion of monopoly power in the post-expiration period when, as we have seen, the patent has entered the public domain. . . . [A]fter expiration of the last of the patents incorporated in the machines "the grant of patent monopoly was spent" and . . . an attempt to project it into another term by continuation of the licensing agreement is unenforceable.379 U.S. at 32-34
Dissent
Justice Harlan disagreed: " I think that more discriminating analysis than the Court has seen fit to give this case produces a different result."379 U.S. at 34. In his analysis, what Thys did was no more objectionable than restrictions on the machine rather than the patented idea that it embodied. "In fact Thys sells both a machine and the use of an idea. The company should be free to restrict the use of its machine."379 U.S. at 35.
Subsequent developments
Reaffirmance
Despite criticism of Brulotte (see next section), the Supreme Court reaffirmed the decision in Kimble v. Marvel in 2015.
Criticism
The decision was widely criticized by academics and economic theorists. In a subsequent opinion, 50 years later, nonetheless affirming Brulotte, the Supreme Court listed some of the criticism suggesting that the case should be overruled:Kimble v. Marvel, 561 U.S. —, - n.3 (2015).
 Scheiber v. Dolby Labs., Inc., 293 F. 3d 1014, 1017–1018 (CA7 2002) (Posner, J.) (Brulotte has been "severely, and as it seems to us, with all due respect, justly criticized . . . . However, we have no authority to overrule a Supreme Court decision no matter how dubiousits reasoning strikes us, or even how out of touch with the Supreme Court’s current thinking the decision seems")
 Ayres & Klemperer, Limiting Patentees’ Market Power Without Reducing Innovation Incentives: The Perverse Benefits of Uncertainty and Non-Injunctive Remedies, 97  985, 1027 (1999) ("Our analysis . . . suggests that Brulotte should be overruled").
Other criticism of Brulotte includes the following:
 Harold See and Frank M. Caprio, The Trouble with Brulotte: The Patent Royalty Term and Patent Monopoly Extension, 1990 Utah L. Rev. 813 (1990).
 Note, Patents: Supreme Court Holds Post-Expiration Royalty Agreements Unlawful Per Se, 1965  L.J. 836, 841 (1965) ("Thus, the ambiguity in Brulotte, so long as it remains unresolved, may greatly limit marketing available to [patentees].").
 Paul Goldstein, Federal System Ordering of the Copyright Interest, 69  49, 70 (1969) (" In the presence of only the most attenuated federal interest, and absent any generalized public concern, the Brulotte rule gives to the federal courts a broad and probably illegitimate supervisory power over state administration of private contracts.").
 Richard A. Posner. Transaction Costs and Antitrust Concerns in the Licensing of Intellectual Property, 4 J. Marshall Rev. Intell. Prop. L. 325, 332 (2005) ("Brulotte does not reflect the Supreme Court's current thinking about competition and monopoly, but it will continue to bind the lower courts until the Supreme Court decides to overrule it.").
Other commentators, however, have rejected adoption of an antitrust lens for analysis of patent misuse:
 Robin C. Feldman, The Insufficiency of Antitrust Analysis for Patent Misuse, 55  L.J. 399, 422 (2003) ("the antitrust rule of reason focuses on one particular issue: the impact on competition, rather than all possible equitable considerations" relevant to patent policy); id. at 448 ("A behavior that retards the progress of science would be of concern to patent policy" but antitrust tests are not attuned to this type of problem.")
 Marshall Leaffer, Patent Misuse and Innovation, 10 J.  L. 142, 148 (2010) ("patent misuse should transcend the contours of traditional antitrust law and should concern itself with policy of patent law and the effect on innovation").
References
External links
Category:United States misuse law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1964 in United States case law
"""

From "Brumfield v. Cain" ==> """
Brumfield v. Cain, 576 U.S. 305 (2015), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that because Brumfield satisfied 28 U.S.C. § 2254(d)(2)’s requirements,. he was entitled to have his Atkins v. Virginia. claim considered on the merits in federal court.
Background
Kevan Brumfield (born January 7, 1973) was sentenced to death for the January 7, 1993 murder of off-duty Baton Rouge police officer Betty Smothers. Brumfield and his accomplice, Henri Broadway (born September 7, 1970), shot and killed Officer Smothers while she was escorting the manager of a grocery store to the bank.. Smothers was the mother of Warrick Dunn, who later became a running back for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers and the Atlanta Falcons.
Brumfield had an IQ score of 75, had a fourth-grade reading level, had been treated at psychiatric hospitals as a child, had a learning disability, and had been placed in special education classes. The lower courts denied Brumfield an Atkins hearing and sentenced him to death.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Sonia Sotomayor delivered the opinion of the Court. She stated that the state's denial of Brumfield's request was based on an "unreasonable determination of the facts" in regards to his mental ability. In addition, the state disregarded Brumfield's adaptive skills, or rather the adaptive impairments that prevented Brumfield from being able to process information. By a 5–4 vote, the opinion of the lower court was vacated and the cause was remanded.
Justice Clarence Thomas filed a dissent, arguing that since the majority still agreed with the factual record that supported the state court's decision, they cannot rule that the decision was "unreasonable" just because they would have reached a different conclusion. Thomas also added a picture of Smothers in her police uniform in the appendix of his dissent.
Justice Samuel Alito joined Justice Thomas' dissent in part, and then filed a second dissent to simply state that Thomas' inclusion of Warrick Dunn's life story as a contrast to Brumfield's, while inspiring, is not an essential part of the legal analysis.
Subsequent developments
On July 20, 2016, Brumfield was resentenced to life in prison after he was ruled intellectually disabled and therefore ineligible for execution. Broadway remains on death row for his involvement in the murder, although it was Brumfield who actually fired the fatal shots which killed Smothers, Broadway had been the one to wound the grocery store manager. The getaway driver, West Paul, was sentenced to twenty-five years for his role in the murder. Paul was returned to jail in 2017 after he was booked on charges related to shoplifting. Prior to his return to jail he had only recently been released for his part in the murder of Smothers.
See also
 Warrick Dunn
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 576
 List of United States Supreme Court decisions on capital punishment
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:History of Baton Rouge, Louisiana
Category:Capital punishment in Louisiana
Category:United States death penalty case law
Category:United States disability case law
"""

From "Brushaber v. Union Pacific Railroad Co." ==> """
Brushaber v. Union Pacific Railroad Co., 240 U.S. 1 (1916), was a landmark United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld the validity of a tax statute called the Revenue Act of 1913, also known as the Tariff Act, Ch. 16, 38 Stat. 166 (October 3, 1913), enacted pursuant to Article I, section 8, clause 1 of, and the Sixteenth Amendment to, the United States Constitution, allowing a federal income tax. The Sixteenth Amendment had been ratified earlier in 1913. The Revenue Act of 1913 imposed income taxes that were not apportioned among the states according to each state's population.
Background
Prior to 1895, all income taxes had been considered indirect taxes (not required to be apportioned among the states according to the population of each state). In the controversial 1895 case of Pollock v. Farmers' Loan & Trust Co., however, the Court had overturned longstanding precedent and ruled that while a tax on income from labor was an excise, or indirect tax (which was not required to be apportioned), a tax on income derived from property such as interest, dividends, or rents was or should be treated as a direct tax.
Facts in the Brushaber case
The plaintiff in this case, Frank R. Brushaber, was a shareholder in the defendant Union Pacific Railroad company. The Sixteenth Amendment had recently been passed, and the U.S. Congress had enacted legislation pursuant to the amendment assessing taxes to the wealthiest of income earners, including the railroad company in this case. Brushaber brought a lawsuit against the railroad company for an injunction to stop the company from paying the tax. Brushaber's contention was that statute enacting the tax violated the Fifth Amendment's prohibition on the government taking property without due process of law and that the statute also violated due process by exempting certain kinds of income. He also argued because the tax was not apportioned among the states according to population, it was unconstitutional. The U.S. government filed a brief supporting the validity of the tax.
Holdings
In an 8–0 decision (Justice James Clark McReynolds did not participate in the decision), the Court held, in an opinion written by Chief Justice Edward Douglass White, that the Sixteenth Amendment removes the requirement that income taxes be apportioned among the states according to population (Article I, Section 9, clause 4 of the U.S. Constitution). The Revenue Act of 1913, imposing income taxes that are not apportioned among the states according to each state's population, is constitutional. The Court stated: "...there can be no dispute that there was power by virtue of the Amendment during that period to levy the tax, without apportionment, and so far as the limitations of the Constitution in other respects are concerned, the contention is not open...."Brushaber v. Union Pacific Railroad Co., 240 U.S. 1, at 20 (1916) ("Brushaber").
The Court also held that the Revenue Act does not violate the Fifth Amendment's prohibition against the government taking property without due process of law. The Court stated: "So far as the due process clause of the 5th Amendment is relied upon [by Mr. Frank Brushaber], it suffices to say that there is no basis for such reliance, since it is equally well settled that such clause is not a limitation upon the taxing power conferred upon Congress by the Constitution...."Brushaber, 240 U.S. 1, at 24 (1916).
The Court further held that the Revenue Act does not violate the uniformity clause of Article I, Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution. The Court stated: "So far as these numerous and minute, not to say in many respects hypercritical, contentions [by Mr. Frank Brushaber] are based upon an assumed violation of the uniformity clause, their want of legal merit is at once apparent, since it is settled that that clause exacts only a geographical uniformity, and there is not a semblance of ground in any of the propositions [by Mr. Brushaber] for assuming that a violation of such uniformity is complained of."Brushaber, 240 U.S. 1, at 24 (1916).
Discussion
In Brushaber the Court noted that even before the Sixteenth Amendment was passed, the Congress had authority to tax income. If a particular income tax was a direct tax or was treated as a direct tax in the constitutional sense, that tax could be imposed (after Pollock but before the passage of the Amendment) only by apportionment among the states, according to their census populations.
In Brushaber, the Court held that the Sixteenth Amendment eliminated the requirement of apportionment as it relates to "taxes on incomes, from whatever source derived."
Subsequent interpretation
Tax law professor Boris Bittker and his co-authors have stated:
As construed by the Supreme Court in the Brushaber case, the power of Congress to tax income derives from Article I, Section 8, Clause 1, of the original Constitution rather than from the Sixteenth Amendment; the latter simply eliminated the requirement (Article I, section 9, clause 4 of the US Constitution) that an income tax, to the extent that it is a direct tax, must be apportioned among the states.Boris I. Bittker, Martin J. McMahon, Jr. & Lawrence A. Zelenak, Federal Income Taxation of Individuals, ch. 1, paragr. 1.01[1][a], Research Institute of America (2d ed. 2005), as retrieved from 2002 WL 1454829 (W. G. & L.).
No income tax enacted by the US Congress (either before or after the Sixteenth Amendment) has ever been apportioned among the states by population. All income taxes enacted after the Amendment have been treated as excises (they have been imposed with geographic uniformity but have not been required to be apportioned).
Since the income tax may be imposed on income from whatever source and without regard to any apportionment requirement (by virtue of the wording of the 16th Amendment), an income tax cannot be treated as a direct tax (as income taxes on income from property were so treated in the Pollock case). Essentially, all income taxes after the Sixteenth Amendment are again treated as indirect taxes. Subsequent lower court cases have interpreted the Brushaber decision ("the confusion is not inherent, but rather arises from the conclusion ... this erroneous assumption") and the Sixteenth Amendment as standing for the rule that the Amendment allows a direct tax on "wages, salaries, commissions, etc. without apportionment."Parker v. Commissioner, 724 F.2d 469, 84-1 U.S. Tax Cas. (CCH) paragr. 9209 (5th Cir. 1984) (closing parenthesis in original has been omitted). For other court decisions upholding the taxability of wages, salaries, etc., on various grounds, see United States v. Connor, 898 F.2d 942, 90-1 U.S. Tax Cas. (CCH) paragr. 50,166 (3d Cir. 1990); Perkins v. Commissioner, 746 F.2d 1187, 84-2 U.S. Tax Cas. (CCH) paragr. 9898 (6th Cir. 1984); White v. United States, 2005-1 U.S. Tax Cas. (CCH) paragr. 50,289 (6th Cir. 2004), cert. denied, ____ U.S. ____ (2005); Granzow v. Commissioner, 739 F.2d 265, 84-2 U.S. Tax Cas. (CCH) paragr. 9660 (7th Cir. 1984); Waters v. Commissioner, 764 F.2d 1389, 85-2 U.S. Tax Cas. (CCH) paragr. 9512 (11th Cir. 1985); United States v. Buras, 633 F.2d 1356, 81-1 U.S. Tax Cas. (CCH) paragr. 9126 (9th Cir. 1980).
Geographical uniformity
The Court in Brushaber noted that income taxes inherently belonged in the "category" of indirect tax (or excise). The court stated that incomes taxes are indirect excise taxes by reinforcing the Pollock decision:
As this conclusion but enforced a regulation as to the mode of exercising power under particular circumstances, it did not in any way dispute the all-embracing taxing authority possessed by Congress, including necessarily therein the power to impose income taxes if only they conformed to the constitutional regulations which were applicable to them. Moreover, in addition, the conclusion reached in the Pollock Case did not in any degree involve holding that income taxes generically and necessarily came within the class of direct taxes on property, but, on the contrary, recognized the fact that taxation on income was in its nature an excise...
Indeed, that had been the understanding with respect to all income taxes until the Pollock decision. The Sixteenth Amendment removed the need imposed by the Pollock decision to determine whether an income tax in any particular case was required to be apportioned, as the Congress could again (after 1913) tax income from any source without having to apportion the tax according to population.
Property taxes and capitations
Nothing in the Sixteenth Amendment or in Brushaber (and the other cases interpreting the tax provisions of the U.S. Constitution) changes the general rule that direct taxes are still required to be apportioned among the states by population. For example, if the US Congress were to enact a national property tax (a property tax or other tax by reason of its ownership) or a national capitation (a poll tax or head tax), such taxes would be required to be apportioned.
See also
Union Pacific R. Co. v. Cheyenne (1885)
Kansas Pacific R. Co. v. Dunmeyer (1885)
Union Pacific Railway Company v. Botsford (1891)
Union Pacific Railroad v. Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers (2009)
Notes
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States Sixteenth Amendment case law
Category:Taxing and Spending Clause case law
Category:1916 in United States case law
Category:Union Pacific Railroad
Category:Railway litigation in 1916
"""

From "Bruton v. United States" ==> """
Bruton v. United States, 391 U.S. 123 (1968), is a 1968 United States Supreme Court ruling in which the Court held that a defendant was deprived of his rights under the Confrontation Clause if a confession by his codefendant was introduced in their joint trial, regardless of whether the jury received instructions only to consider it against the confessor. This has become known as the Bruton rule. The case  overruled Delli Paoli v. United States (1957).	
Reasoning
As the basis for its holding, the Supreme Court stated that "There are some contexts in which the risk that the jury will not, or cannot, follow instructions is so great, and the consequences of failure so vital to the defendant, that the practical and human limitations of the jury system cannot be ignored. Such a context is presented here, where the powerfully incriminating extrajudicial statements of a codefendant, who stands accused side-by-side with the defendant, are deliberately spread before the jury in a joint trial. Not only are the incriminations devastating to the defendant but their credibility is inevitably suspect . . . . The unreliability of such evidence is intolerably compounded when the alleged accomplice, as here, does not testify and cannot be tested by cross-examination."
See also
Cruz v. New York (1987)
References
External links
Category:1968 in United States case law
Category:Confrontation Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Bryan v. Itasca County" ==> """
Bryan v. Itasca County, 426 U.S. 373 (1976), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a state did not have the right to assess a tax on the property of a Native American (Indian) living on tribal land absent a specific Congressional grant of authority to do so.
The case arose when a Minnesota county taxed an Indian's mobile home located on the reservation. The Court ruled that the state did not have the authority to impose such a tax or, more generally, to regulate behavior on the reservation. Bryan has become a landmark case that has led to Indian gaming on reservations and altered the economic status of almost every Indian tribe. Later decisions, citing Bryan, ruled that Public Law 280 allows states to enact prohibitions, or crimes, that would apply on reservations, but could not impose regulations on conduct that was otherwise allowed. The case has also called into question the ability of the states to impose any sort of regulations on tribal reservations, such as labor standards and certain traffic regulations.Bryan v. Itasca County, . 
Background
thumb|left|200px|alt=map of Chippewa land in Minnesota|Chippewa tribal lands in Minnesota
Background information
Generally, no state has the authority to tax an Indian tribe or an individual Indian living on a reservation without authorization from Congress.Cases & Codes: U.S. Constitution (annotated): Art. I, Annotations p. 35, FindLaw (Aug. 4, 2010).Congressional Research Service Annotated Constitution, art. I, Legal Information Institute (Aug. 4, 2010).  This is based primarily on the Commerce Clause of the Constitution, which states, "Congress shall have Power ... To regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States, and with the Indian Tribes."U.S. Const. art. I, § 8, cl. 3. This doctrine is based on Worcester v. Georgia, Worcester v. Georgia, . which stated that Indian tribes are considered to be dependent sovereign nations which deal directly with the federal government, and that states have no authority to regulate or control the tribes. Congress can authorize the states to have some control over the tribes. Minnesota is a Public Law 280 state, one where Congress has granted the state total criminal and limited civil jurisdiction on tribal land and reservations.Pub. L. No. 83-280,  (codified as amended at  and ).
History
Russell Bryan was an enrolled member of the White Earth Band of Ojibwe, which is a component band of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe. He married Helen Charwood in 1957. Helen was an enrolled member of the Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe, which was also a part of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe.Kevin K. Washburn, The Legacy of Bryan v. Itasca County: How an Erroneous $ 147 County Tax Notice Helped Bring Tribes $ 200 Billion in Indian Gaming Revenue  (2008). They raised their children on reservation land and lived in a mobile home which they purchased in 1971. The mobile home was located on the Greater Leech Lake Indian Reservation near Squaw Lake in Itasca County, Minnesota. Bryan's mobile home, had it not been on the reservation, would have been subject to taxes from Itasca County. In June 1972, Itasca County notified Bryan that the mobile home was subject to US$147.95 in taxes.Kevin K. Washburn, Bryan v. Itasca County: Changing the stakes for Minnesota Indians, in  (Kate Roberts ed., 2007). The Bryans could not afford to pay the tax, and contacted the Leech Lake Reservation Legal Services Project (Legal Services) for help, noting that the mobile home was on Indian land.
Lower courts
On behalf of Bryan, Legal Services attorney Patrick Moriarty then sued the state and Itasca County in the District Court of Itasca County, seeking declaratory relief and an injunction which would prevent the state and county from collecting taxes from Indians on tribal land. This was filed as a class action suit. There was no dispute as to the facts of the case, so the matter was submitted as a question of law to Judge James F. Murphy. In 1973, the district court held that the state and county were authorized to collect such taxes under Public Law 280. Murphy noted that while the Chippewa had at one time been a sovereign Indian nation, their members were now citizens of Minnesota and received benefits from the state such as county services, the court system, and other like services.
At about the same time as the district court made its decision, Legal Services hired a new director, Gerald "Jerry" Seck. Seck was not well versed on Indian law, so he contacted the Native American Rights Fund (NARF). With their help, Bryan appealed to the Minnesota Supreme Court. The Minnesota Chippewa tribe and the United States both filed amicus curae briefs with the court that supported Bryan's position, and NARF attorneys appeared on his behalf. In March 1975, the Minnesota Supreme Court affirmed the decision of the trial court by a unanimous decision, holding that Public Law 280 showed Congressional intent to allow such taxation.. The Minnesota Supreme Court based its decision primarily on Omaha Tribe of Indians v. Peters, 382 F.Supp. 421 (D. Neb. 1974).Omaha Tribe of Indians v. Peters, 382 F. Supp. 421 (D. Neb. 1974), vacated by Omaha Tribe of Indians v. Peters, . Bryan appealed this decision, and the United States Supreme Court granted certiorari.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|left|200px|alt=Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. portrait|Justice William Brennan, author of the unanimous opinion
Arguments
By the time the appeal was prepared, Seck had left Legal Services but was still the attorney of record.  The tribe paid to fly him to Washington, D.C. to prepare the brief with Dan Israel of NARF and Bernie Becker, the tribe's attorney who would argue the case before the Supreme Court. At oral arguments on April 20, 1976, Becker pointed out that Public Law 280 gave the state jurisdiction over criminal matters and civil "causes of actions" – a legal term for lawsuits. Since Congress had also passed other Indian laws at the same time, such as the various Indian Termination Acts, which specifically authorized states to collect taxes from Indians, its silence in this area meant Congress did not intend to do so with Public Law 280. Becker brought up the leading article on Public Law 280, by UCLA law professor Carole Goldberg, that argued that the law was established to address the problem of crime on reservations. He also noted that tribes which had adequate law-and-order processes, such as the Red Lake Band of Chippewa, were excluded from state jurisdiction in Minnesota. Arguing for the State of Minnesota was C. H. Luther of the State Attorney General's office. Luther argued four points for the tax being valid: a) the language of the statute; b) the legislative history of Public Law 280; c) prior judicial opinions; and d) public policy. Luther conceded that if the trailer was a fixed house or real property, it would be exempt from taxation. Luther also stated that other taxes – such as gasoline, sales, income and other taxes of general applicability – would apply to Indians.
Unanimous opinion
Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. delivered the unanimous opinion of the court on June 14, 1976. Brennan stated that Public Law 280 was not designed to eliminate all restrictions on the states as they dealt with Indian tribes. Brennan noted that under the Supreme Court's prior decisions of Mescalero Apache Tribe v. Jones, Mescalero Apache Tribe v. Jones, . and McClanahan v. Arizona State Tax Comm'n, ,McClanahan v. Arizona State Tax Comm'n, . states had no authority to tax Indians "absent Congressional consent." Since Itasca County was claiming Public Law 280 granted that consent, Brennan evaluated the statute in regards to the taxation of Indians.
Brennan noted that the Minnesota Supreme Court had found that the statute did grant the right to tax personal property as an inherent power, even though the law did not specifically mention the power to tax. He rejected this argument, noting that the primary purpose of the law was to provide for "state criminal jurisdiction over offenses committed by or against Indians on the reservations." Nothing in the legislative history of the law provided support for Itasca County's interpretation. Brennan also noted that the several tribal termination acts which were considered at the same time specifically discussed the taxation of Indians, while Public Law 280 was silent.
Brennan then noted that the principles of statutory construction as regards to Indians were very specific. Any differences in possible interpretation must be resolved in favor of the tribe or the Indian. Since Minnesota's interpretation did not meet any of these tests regarding either the consent of Congress to tax or of statutory construction, Brennan stated that the Supreme Court would not follow the state's reasoning, and reversed the lower court's decision.
Subsequent developments
thumb|right|300px|alt=Lucky Dog casino entrance|A tribal casino
When the decision was announced, it was reported as a substantial victory for Indians by both the local and national press.Justices Bar State's Taxation of Reservation Indians, , Jun. 15, 1976 at 19.State Forbidden to Tax on Reservations, , Jun. 15, 1976 at 1A.Court Limits Taxing on Reservations, , Jun. 15, 1976 at 14. Bryan is a landmark case,  (2002). on the taxation of Indians and tribal sovereignty, having been cited over 380 times as of July 2010. The case has had a significant impact on Indian gaming with its broad holding that Public Law 280 did not confer "general state civil regulatory control over Indian reservations." This ruling in a challenge to a tax bill of under $200 had the effect of enabling Indian tribes nationwide to earn over $200 billion in gaming revenue as of 2007.,  (2003). The first cases influenced by Bryan involved bingo, which many states allowed, but regulated. The cases which were decided all cited Bryan in holding that the various states had no legal grounds to regulate games on tribal land.Kevin D. Arnold, The Indian Gaming Regulatory Act and the Constitution: the Eleventh Amendment's impact on Indian gaming and entrepreneurship,  (1995). Many analysts point to the Bryan case as being the grounds upon which California v. Cabazon Band of Mission Indians California v. Cabazon Band of Mission Indians, . was decided. The Supreme Court noted that California was not able to impose civil regulations against an Indian tribe on tribal land.,  (2007). In that case, the court noted that California not only allowed gaming, but promoted its own state lottery. Therefore, the prohibition against gaming was regulatory in nature, not criminal, notwithstanding the fact that the games were open to non-Indians as well as Indians.Keith David Bilezerian, Ante Up or Fold: States Attempt to Play Their Hand While Indian Casinos Cash In,  (1995). After the decision, Congress passed the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act to provide for a system of regulation of the Indian gaming industry.Larry D. Strate & Ann M. Mayo, Federal Control of Indian Lands v. State Control of Gaming - Cabazon Bingo and the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act  (1990).
The case is often cited to support the concept which first "coalesced" in the 1968 case, Menominee Tribe of Indians v. United States, ,Menominee Tribe of Indians v. United States, . that tribal rights would not be abrogated without an explicit intent of Congress to do so. It has been opined by a number of legal scholars that tribes would not be subject to state labor laws.William G. Rice, Employment in Indian Country: Considerations Respecting Tribal Regulation of the Employer-Employee Relationship,  (1996).Kaighn Smith, Jr., Labor and Employment Laws in Indian Country: Tribal self-determination and judicial restraint,  (2008). In some instances, Bryan and Cabazon have been viewed as not allowing the state jurisdiction over the traffic violations of non-member Indians on another tribe's reservation.Emmerson H. Ward, Sovereignty Revisited: The Dilemma with State Jurisdiction Over Nonmember Indians in State v. R.M.H., 617 N.W.2d 55 (Minn. 2000),  (2001). Bryan is extensively discussed in both major legal textbooks on Native American law,  (4th ed. 2003).,  (5th ed. 2005). and in numerous other high school and college texts.
References
External links
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Native American tax case law
Category:Itasca County, Minnesota
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:Minnesota Chippewa Tribe
Category:Native American history of Minnesota
"""

From "Bryan v. Kennett" ==> """
Bryan v. Kennett, 113 U.S. 179 (1885), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that, under the treaty providing for the Louisiana Purchase, the United States would recognize property interests granted by the previous sovereign governments prior to the Purchase, even if the grant had been inchoate or incomplete. 
The case involved a disputed title to land in the U.S. state of Missouri, which had previously been under the control of Spain and France before being acquired by the United States. In the late 1700s, the government of Spain had made a possibly incomplete grant of the land to a U.S. citizen, Moses Austin. Spain then lost control of the land to France in 1800, who in turn sold it to the United States. A question later arose as to whether Austin had received sufficient property rights from Spain to allow him to mortgage his land in 1818, or whether necessary rights had somehow passed back to the United States government, making the mortgage invalid and voiding subsequent land transfers that occurred pursuant to Austin's defaulting on the mortgage. Under the Court's holding, the incomplete grant to Austin was valid and sufficient to permit the mortgage.Bryan v. Kennett, 113 U.S. 179 (1885). Retrieved 2016-01-04 via Justia.com.
Bryan v. Kennett is sometimes referenced as the Supreme Court's "ratification" of the Louisiana Purchase. However, the Court had already discussed and confirmed the legality of the Louisiana Purchase much earlier in American Insurance Co. v. Canter, 1 Peters (26 U.S.) 511 (1828).
Background
During the 1790s, Moses Austin, a former dry goods merchant who had married into an affluent iron mining family, had been one of the operators of a lead mine in southwestern Virginia and become known as the "Lead King". However, the business failed and Austin decided to leave the United States in order to avoid imprisonment for debt. He relocated to upper Spanish Louisiana, an area then controlled by Spain (which later became the U.S. state of Missouri), due to rich lead deposits in the region. Austin arranged with the Spanish government to receive a large tract of land in return for his swearing allegiance to the Spanish Crown and agreeing to settle some families in the area.
In 1797, the Spanish governor directed that Austin be placed in possession of land "one league square" (approximately 4,428 acres). Austin subsequently took possession of the land, moved his family onto it and built a house, blacksmith shop, and other improvements. In 1799, Spanish officials conducted a survey of the land and in 1802, the Spanish governor at New Orleans granted Austin the surveyed land. However, in the meantime Spain had returned Louisiana to France by operation of the Third Treaty of San Ildefonso in 1800, although Louisiana remained nominally under Spanish control until 1803, just before France sold it to the United States in the Louisiana Purchase. The land granted to Austin by the Spanish governor was therefore owned by France at the time of the 1802 grant and came under the jurisdiction of the United States in 1803.
Austin founded the Bank of St. Louis and was its principal stockholder. In 1818, he mortgaged his land to the bank for $15,000, but the bank failed in the Panic of 1819, causing Austin to lose his entire fortune and resulting in judgments being entered against him for approximately $14,500. Austin's land was subsequently seized and sold via sheriff's sale to pay his creditors. Following the sheriff's sale, Austin's land changed hands several more times and ended up in the possession of John Deane by 1835. However, Austin, perhaps in an effort to protect some of his assets, had also conveyed the land himself in 1820 to his son-in-law James Bryan and other grantees. Austin died in 1821, and Bryan in 1822.
In 1835, Deane brought a quiet title action in equity in Missouri against the heirs of James Bryan, who by then were living in Texas and failed to appear. Deane was awarded the right, title and interest to the land. Deane and his successors in title continued to occupy the land.
Almost 40 years later, on February 14, 1874, an Act of Congress was approved stating that "the United States hereby release whatever title they have" regarding Austin's former land (now located in Washington County, Missouri) "to the heirs, legal representatives, or assigns of said Moses Austin, according to their respective interests therein, provided however that this act shall not affect nor impair the title which any settler or other person may have acquired adverse to the title of said Moses Austin to any portion of said land." Bryan's heirs now brought an action for ejectment of Deane's successors in title, alleging (among other things) that Austin had not received complete title to his land from the Spanish government and thus he could not have mortgaged the land, which reverted to the possession of the United States and then passed to Bryan's heirs by operation of the Act of Congress.
Deane's successors in title, who were currently in possession of the land, contended that they and those from whom they claimed the land had been in "open, continuous adverse possession" of the disputed land for more than thirty years prior to the start of the current action, and had paid taxes due on the land; the plaintiffs and those from whom they claimed had not been in possession for any period of time exceeding thirty years or paid taxes. They further contended that equitable title came from the United States starting in 1803, that the United States had made no attempt to claim the land itself, and that the previous holding in the 1836 equity suit by John Deane estopped the plaintiffs from now trying to claim the land.
Opinion of the Court
In an opinion by Justice John M. Harlan, the Supreme Court held that Spain's grant to Austin, even if incomplete, was recognized by the United States, thus supporting the claim of Deane's successors in title, who took possession of the land due to Austin's mortgage and subsequent default. In so holding, the Court reaffirmed its position, as set forth in previous cases, that "in that treaty by which Louisiana was acquired, the United States stipulated that the inhabitants of the ceded territory should be protected in the free enjoyment of their property; that the term 'property,' as applied to lands comprehends every species of title, inchoate or complete, and embraces rights which lie in contract, executory as well as executed, and that in this respect the relation of the inhabitants to their government was not changed, the new government taking the place of that which had passed away."
The Court further clarified that the United States government intended to broadly recognize the claims of property owners to property they were granted or otherwise had a presumed right based on the actions of Spain or France prior to the Louisiana Purchase, without requiring that the property owner also have taken all the necessary steps to legally complete the grant. The Court noted that at the time of the Purchase, there were very few "complete grants", that "nineteen-twentieths" of the grants were incomplete and that  "[m]ost of the inhabitants were too poor to defray the expenses attending the completion of their titles, but they had faith in their government" that the title would be recognized. In making this ruling on the property issue, the Court cited its previous opinions in Strother v. Lucas, 31 U.S. 763 (1832), Soulard v. United States, 29 U.S. 511 (1830), and Landes v. Brant, 51 U.S. 348 (1850) in support. The Court also noted that the Act of Congress was stated to also apply to "legal representatives or assigns" of Austin and not just to his heirs.
The Court also held that the plaintiffs were estopped from asserting in the current "collateral proceeding" any interest in the property by the 1836 decision on Deane's bill of equity, because the court making that decision had jurisdiction, the decision was conclusive, and had not been reversed or modified on appeal, or otherwise set aside or annulled.
The Court concluded its opinion by stating that "the sole object of [the Act of Congress] ... was to assure those who thus acquired possession, whether by contract or by operation of law, that they would not be disturbed by any assertion of claim upon the part of the United States. It originated with the representatives in Congress from Missouri, whose avowed purpose was to protect the interests of their immediate constituents. The necessity of this act arose from a then recent opinion of the Commissioner of the General Land Office that the legal title to the land within the Austin claim was still in the United States. In order to quiet the fears of those 'who have been in possession for half a century, claiming the land adversely against everybody, as well as the United States,' the act of 1874 was passed. It had no other object."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Louisiana Purchase
Category:Washington County, Missouri
"""

From "Buchanan v. Warley" ==> """
Buchanan v. Warley, 245 U.S. 60 (1917), is a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States addressed civil government-instituted racial segregation in residential areas. The Court held unanimously that a Louisville, Kentucky city ordinance prohibiting the sale of real property to blacks in white-majority neighborhoods or buildings and vice versa violated the Fourteenth Amendment's protections for freedom of contract. The ruling of the Kentucky Court of Appeals was thus reversed.
Prior state court rulings had overturned racial zoning ordinances on grounds of the "takings clause" because of their failures to grandfather land that had been owned prior to enactment. The Court, in Buchanan, ruled that the motive for the Louisville ordinance, separation of races for purported reasons, was an inappropriate exercise of police power, and its insufficient purpose also made it unconstitutional.
Background
The city of Louisville had an ordinance that forbade any black individuals to own or occupy any buildings in an area in which a greater number of white persons resided and vice versa. In 1915, William Warley, the prospective black buyer and an attorney for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), made an offer to Charles H. Buchanan for his property in a predominantly white neighborhood. 
He based his offer on the following condition:
It is understood that I am purchasing the above property for the purpose of having erected thereon a house which I propose to make my residence, and it is a distinct part of this agreement that I shall not be required to accept a deed to the above property or to pay for said property unless I have the right under the laws of the State of Kentucky and the City of Louisville to occupy said property as a residence.
Buchanan, a white man, accepted the offer. When Warley did not complete the transaction, Buchanan brought an action in the Chancery Court of Louisville to force him to complete the purchase. Warley argued that Louisville's ordinance prevented him from occupying the property, so it was of less value to him. Buchanan sued on the grounds that the ordinance was unconstitutional, and he should receive full payment.
Decision
The Supreme Court unanimously agreed with Buchanan:
"The effect of the ordinance under consideration was not merely to regulate a business or the like, but was to destroy the right of the individual to acquire, enjoy, and dispose of his property. Being of this character, it was void as being opposed to the due process clause of the constitution." Reversing the Appeals Court decision, the Supreme Court ruled that the ordinance surpassed the legitimate grounds of police power, as it interfered with individuals' rights of property. In addition, the court noted that the ordinance neither regulated the race of servants who might be employed in certain areas nor counted them as members of the household. The ruling did not address the right of owners or developers to restrict housing based on private agreements, meaning private housing restrictions against race were legally enforceable.
Justice Holmes wrote a draft opinion which suggested the case was "manufactured" by the seller and buyer. He withdrew the dissent and voted with the majority.
See also
 Civil rights movement (1896–1954)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 245
References
Further reading
Bernstein, David E. Rehabilitating Lochner: Defending Individual Rights against Progressive Reform. Chapter 5. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011. 
External links
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:1917 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:History of Louisville, Kentucky
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:United States racial desegregation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Zoning in the United States
"""

From "Buck v. Bell" ==> """
Buck v. Bell, 274 U.S. 200 (1927), is a decision of the United States Supreme Court, written by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., in which the Court ruled that a state statute permitting compulsory sterilization of the unfit, including the intellectually disabled, "for the protection and health of the state" did not violate the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution..  Despite the changing attitudes in the coming decades regarding sterilization, the Supreme Court has never expressly overturned Buck v. Bell. ("In the eight decades since Buck, the Court has never overruled it."). It is widely believed to have been  weakened by Skinner v. Oklahoma, 316 U.S. 535 (1942), which involved compulsory sterilization of male habitual criminals (and came to a contrary result). Legal scholar and Holmes biographer G. Edward White, in fact, wrote, "the Supreme Court has distinguished the case [Buck v. Bell] out of existence".White, G. Edward, Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes: Law and the Inner Self, New York: Oxford University Press, 1993, p. 407. In addition, federal statutes, including the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, provide protections for people with disabilities, defined as both physical and mental impairments. 
Buck v. Bell is often cited as one of the worst Supreme Court rulings.
Background
The concept of eugenics was propounded in 1883 by Francis Galton, who also coined the name. The idea first became popular in the United States and had found proponents in Europe by the start of the 20th century; 42 of the 58 research papers presented at the First International Congress of Eugenics, held in London in 1912, were from American scientists.Pandora's Lab: Seven stories of Science gone wrong Indiana passed the first eugenics sterilization statute in 1907, but it was legally flawed. To remedy that situation, Harry Laughlin, of the Eugenics Record Office (ERO) at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory,  designed a model eugenic law that was reviewed by legal experts. In 1924, the Commonwealth of Virginia adopted a statute authorizing the compulsory sterilization of the intellectually disabled for the purpose of eugenics, a statute closely based on Laughlin's model.
thumb|Carrie Buck (left) at the Virginia State Colony for Epileptics and Feebleminded along with her birth mother Emma Buck in 1924
Looking to determine if the new law would survive a legal challenge, on September 10, 1924, Albert Sidney Priddy, superintendent Virginia State Colony for Epileptics and Feebleminded of the Virginia State Colony for Epileptics and Feebleminded, filed a petition with his board of directors to sterilize Carrie Buck. She was an 18-year-old patient at his institution who he claimed had a mental age of 9. Priddy maintained that Buck represented a genetic threat to society. According to him, Buck's 52-year-old mother possessed a mental age of 8, had a record of prostitution and immorality, and had three children without good knowledge of their paternity. Buck, one of those children, had been adopted and attended school for five years, reaching the level of sixth grade. However, according to Priddy, Buck eventually proved to be "incorrigible" and gave birth to an illegitimate child. Her adoptive family had her committed to the State Colony as "feeble-minded", feeling they were no longer capable of caring for her. It was later claimed that Buck's pregnancy was not caused by any "immorality" on her own part. In the summer of 1923, while her adoptive mother was away "on account of some illness," her adoptive mother's nephew allegedly raped Buck, and her later commitment has been described as an attempt by the family to save their reputation. Alt URL
Case
While the litigation was making its way through the court system, Priddy died and his successor, John Hendren Bell, took up the case. The board of directors issued an order for the sterilization of Buck, and her guardian appealed the case to the Circuit Court of Amherst County, which sustained the decision of the Board. The case then moved to the Supreme Court of Appeals of Virginia.
The appellate court sustained the sterilization law as compliant with both the state and federal constitutions, and it then went to the United States Supreme Court. Buck and her guardian contended that the due process clause guarantees all adults the right to procreate which was being violated. They also made the argument that the Equal Protection Clause in the 14th Amendment was being violated since not all similarly situated people were being treated the same. The sterilization law was only for the "feeble-minded" at certain state institutions and made no mention of other state institutions or those who were not in an institution.
On May 2, 1927, in an 8–1 decision, the Court accepted that Buck, her mother and her daughter were "feeble-minded" and "promiscuous,"The court's majority opinion states that the court accepted the diagnoses of the Virginia medical personnel, not looking into whether they were correct: "Carrie Buck is a feeble-minded white woman who was committed to the State Colony above mentioned in due form. She is the daughter of a feeble-minded mother in the same institution, and the mother of an illegitimate feeble-minded child." 274 U.S. at 205 and that it was in the state's interest to have her sterilized. The ruling legitimized Virginia's sterilization procedures until they were repealed in 1974.
right|thumb|Justice Holmes in the year of his appointment to the United States Supreme Court
The ruling was written by Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr.  In support of his argument that the interest of "public welfare" outweighed the interest of individuals in their bodily integrity, he argued:
Holmes concluded his argument by citing Jacobson v. Massachusetts as a precedent for the decision, stating "Three generations of imbeciles are enough". The sole dissenter in the court, Justice Pierce Butler, a devout Catholic, "Silent Protest: A Catholic Justice Dissents in Buck v. Bell" did not write a dissenting opinion.
Carrie Buck was operated upon, receiving a compulsory salpingectomy (a form of tubal ligation). She was later paroled from the institution as a domestic worker to a family in Bland, Virginia. She was an avid reader until her death in 1983. Her daughter Vivian had been pronounced "feeble minded" after a cursory examination by ERO field worker Dr. Arthur Estabrook. According to his report, Vivian "showed backwardness", thus the "three generations" of the majority opinion. It is worth noting that the child did very well in school for the two years that she attended (she died of complications from measles in 1932), even being listed on her school's honor roll in April 1931.
Historian Paul A. Lombardo argued in 1985 that Buck was not "feeble-minded" at all, but that she had been put away to hide her rape, perpetrated by the nephew of her adoptive mother.  He also asserted that Buck's lawyer, Irving Whitehead, poorly argued her case, failed to call important witnesses, and was remarked by commentators to often not know what side he was on. It is now thought that this was not because of incompetence, but deliberate. Whitehead had close connections to the counsel for the institution and to Priddy.  Whitehead was a member of the governing board of the state institution in which Buck resided, had personally authorized Priddy's sterilization requests, and was a strong supporter of eugenic sterilization.
Effect of the ruling
left|thumb|150px|John H. Bell was the superintendent at the Virginia State Colony for Epileptics and Feebleminded
The effect of Buck v. Bell was to legitimize eugenic sterilization laws in the United States as a whole. While many states already had sterilization laws on their books, their use was erratic and effects practically non-existent in every state except for California. After Buck v. Bell, dozens of states added new sterilization statutes, or updated their constitutionally non-functional ones already enacted, with statutes which more closely mirrored the Virginia statute upheld by the Court.Quinn, Peter (February/March 2003). "Race Cleansing in America  American Heritage. Retrieved 7-27-2010.
The Virginia statute that Buck v. Bell upheld was designed in part by the eugenicist Harry H. Laughlin, superintendent of Charles Benedict Davenport's Eugenics Record Office in Cold Spring Harbor, New York. Laughlin had, a few years previously, conducted studies on the enforcement of sterilization legislation throughout the country and had concluded that the reason for their lack of use was primarily that the physicians who would order the sterilizations were afraid of prosecution by patients upon whom they operated. Laughlin saw the need to create a "Model Law" Harvard website that could withstand constitutional scrutiny, clearing the way for future sterilization operations. The Nazi jurists designing the German Law for the Prevention of Hereditarily Diseased Offspring based it largely on Laughlin's "Model Law", although development of that law preceded Laughlin's. Nazi Germany held Laughlin in such high regard that they arranged for him to receive an honorary doctorate from Heidelberg University in 1936. At the Subsequent Nuremberg trials after World War II, counsel for SS functionary Otto Hofmann explicitly cited Holmes's opinion in Buck v. Bell in his defense.
Sterilization rates under eugenic laws in the United States climbed from 1927 until Skinner v. Oklahoma, 316 U.S. 535 (1942). While Skinner v. Oklahoma did not specifically overturn Buck v. Bell, it created enough of a legal quandary to discourage many sterilizations. By 1963, sterilization laws were almost wholly out of use, though some remained officially on the books for many years. Language referring to eugenics was removed from Virginia's sterilization law, and the current law, passed in 1988 and amended in 2013, authorizes only the voluntary sterilization of those 18 and older, after the patient has given written consent and the doctor has informed the patient of the consequences as well as alternative methods of contraception.
The story of Carrie Buck's sterilization and the court case was made into a television drama in 1994, Against Her Will: The Carrie Buck Story. It was also referred to in 1934's sensational film Tomorrow's Children, and was covered in the October 2018 American Experience documentary "The Eugenics Crusade".
Although this opinion and eugenics remain widely condemned, the decision in the case has not been formally overturned. Buck v. Bell was cited as a precedent by the opinion of the court (part VIII) in Roe v. Wade, but not in support of abortion rights. To the contrary, Justice Blackmun quoted it to justify that the constitutional right to abortion is not unlimited. ("The privacy right involved, therefore, cannot be said to be absolute. In fact, it is not clear to us that the claim asserted by some amici that one has an unlimited right to do with one's body as one pleases bears a close relationship to the right of privacy previously articulated in the Court's decisions. The Court has refused to recognize an unlimited right of this kind in the past.") Blackmun claimed that the right to privacy was strong enough to prevent the state from protecting unborn life in the womb, but not strong enough to prevent a woman being sterilized against her will.
In the 1996 case of Fieger v. Thomas, the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit both recognized and criticized Buck v. Bell by writing, "as Justice Holmes pointed out in the only part of Buck v. Bell that remains unrepudiated, a claim of a violation of the Equal Protection Clause based upon selective enforcement 'is the usual last resort of constitutional arguments. In 2001, the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit cited Buck v. Bell to protect the constitutional rights of a woman coerced into sterilization without procedural due process. The court stated that error and abuse will result if the state does not follow the procedural requirements, established by Buck v. Bell, for performing an involuntary sterilization.
Derek Warden has shown how the decision in Buck v. Bell has been affected by the Americans with Disabilities Act.
See also
Eugenics in the United States
Virginia Sterilization Act of 1924
Racial Integrity Act of 1924
Stump v. Sparkman (1978)
Poe v. Lynchburg Training School and Hospital (1981)
Sex-related court cases in the United States
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 274
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
References
Notes
Citations
Further reading
.
 Cullen-DuPont, Kathryn. Encyclopedia of Women's History in America (Infobase Publishing, 2009) pp 37–38
.
 Smith, J. David. The Sterilization of Carrie Buck (New Horizon Press, 1989)
External links
 An account of the case from the Dolan DNA Learning Center
 Buck v. Bell (Case File #31681), archives.gov
"Eugenics."  Claude Moore Health Sciences Library, University of Virginia
"Buck v. Bell (1927)" by N. Antonios and C. Raup at the Embryo Project Encyclopedia 
Buck v. Bell at Encyclopedia Virginia
Category:Eugenics in the United States
Category:Intellectual disability
Category:Mental health case law in the United States
Category:Psychiatry controversies
Category:United States disability case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States reproductive rights case law
Category:Science and law
Category:1927 in United States case law
Category:Sterilization (medicine)
Category:Amherst County, Virginia
Category:Healthcare in Virginia
Category:Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.
Category:Compulsory sterilization
"""

From "Buck v. Davis" ==> """
Buck v. Davis, 580 U.S. ___ (2017), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court reversed the death sentence of the defendant Duane Buck after the defendant's attorney introduced evidence that suggested the defendant would be more likely to commit violent acts in the future because he was black.. 
Opinion of the Court
In a 6-2 opinion written by Chief Justice John Roberts, the Court held that the defendant was denied effective assistance of counsel under Strickland v. Washington.The Supreme Court, 2016 Term — Leading Cases, 131 Harv. L. Rev. 263 (2017).Buck, slip op. at 15-20 (citing Strickland v. Washington, ). Chief Justice Roberts' ruling rejected the District Court's argument that the discussion of race at trial was de minimis and therefore not prejudicial.Buck, slip op. at 19. Rather, Chief Justice Roberts wrote: "when a jury hears expert testimony that expressly makes a defendant’s race directly pertinent on the question of life or death, the impact of that evidence cannot be measured simply by how much air time it received at trial or how many pages it occupies in the record. Some toxins can be deadly in small doses."Buck, slip op. at 19-20.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
 Case page at SCOTUSblog
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2017 in United States case law
"""

From "Buck v. Gallagher" ==> """
Buck v. Gallagher, 307 U.S. 95 (1939), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court had two main holdings. First, ASCAP members have a common and undivided interest in the right to license in association through the Society free of the state statute. Second, the lower court should have allowed ASCAP members the opportunity to price the cost of complying with the statute and the value of the copyrights affected by it.
 References 
External links
Category:1939 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
"""

From "Buck v. Jewell-LaSalle Realty Co." ==> """
Buck v. Jewell-LaSalle Realty Co., 283 U.S. 191 (1931), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held a hotel operator which provided headphones connected to a centrally controlled radio receiver was guilty of copyright infringement, because "reception of a radio broadcast and its translation into audible sound is not a mere audition of the original program. It is essentially a reproduction."
 References 
External links
Category:1931 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
"""

From "Buckeye Check Cashing, Inc. v. Cardegna" ==> """
Buckeye Check Cashing, Inc. v. Cardegna, 546 U.S. 440 (2006), is a United States Supreme Court case concerning contract law and arbitration. The case arose from a class action filed in Florida against a payday lender alleging the loan agreements the plaintiffs had signed were unenforceable because they essentially charged a higher interest rate than that permitted under Florida law.
The lending agreements called for all disputes between the borrower and lender to be settled in arbitration. The original plaintiffs argued that the entire contract, including the arbitration clause, was invalid because it violated the law. When it was appealed to the High Court, Justice Antonin Scalia wrote for a majority of seven that the Federal Arbitration Act, as previously interpreted by the Court, settled a question that had long been debated by legal scholars and lower-court judges. The opinion distinguished void and voidable contracts, requiring that in the latter an arbitrator rule on all issues including the legality of the contract unless the arbitration clause was itself challenged..  The only dissenter was Clarence Thomas, who restated his belief that the Arbitration Act does not supersede state law.
Background of the case
In 1978, the court's Marquette Bank decision, which held that under the National Banking Act of 1863 states could not enforce their anti-usury laws against nationally chartered banks based in other states, opened the door to increased credit card spending by Americans. Other forms of consumer credit, such as title and payday loans, became available for those who could not get even the most restrictive credit cards available. Social activists criticized the banks and companies that engaged in those practices, calling them predatory lenders who targeted the poor with promises of no credit check and easy money that only came at extremely high interest rates, profiting when the loans were extended long beyond the original short term.King, Uriah, Parrish, Leslie and Tanik, Ozlem;  ; November 30, 2006; retrieved September 29, 2008.
Most such lenders had their customers sign credit agreements that included arbitration clauses specifying that all disputes were to be resolved through that process rather than litigation. Arbitration in turn was criticized as a business-friendly forum which furthered the exploitation of consumers most in need of money.Public Citizen,  , September 2007, retrieved October 13, 2008., Lawsuits over these contracts, however, were increasingly dismissed by lower courts that followed the Supreme Court's  Prima Paint Corp. v. Flood & Conklin Mfg. Co.Prima Paint Corp. v. Flood & Conklin Mfg. Co., . case, which created the separability doctrine, under which all issues in contracts with arbitration clauses, save the clause itself, were to be decided by the arbitrator and not a court, under the 1925 Federal Arbitration Act. In Southland Corp. v. Keating,Southland Corp. v. Keating, . the Court held the FAA, and thus the separability doctrine, applicable to contracts executed under state law as well.
Litigation history
In 1999, John Cardegna, a Palm Beach County 9-1-1 operator, took out a  $337.50 payday loan from a local branch of The Check Cashing Store, a subsidiary of Buckeye Check Cashing, Inc., a Dublin, Ohio-based company (now Checksmart). Later he took out another loan, for $150. Unable to repay either from his paychecks, he kept rolling over his loan by paying the fee to do so. Eventually these came to over $1,000, and with the help of an activist lawyers' group, Trial Lawyers for Public Justice (TLPJ), he filed a class action alleging that the fees he was charged were effectively interest payments at a 1,300% annual rate, well over Florida's legal limit of 45%. The class would eventually be certified to include all the store's customers prior to September 30, 2001, reflecting a change in Florida law which allowed the fees.
The company moved to have the case dismissed and compel arbitration. When that was denied, it petitioned the Florida Fourth District Court of Appeal which ruled that arbitration was required because the entire contract had been challenged, not the severable arbitration clause. But then that decision was appealed to the Florida Supreme Court, which reversed on the grounds that the contract was illegal ab initio and thus the arbitration clause was unenforceable. It read Prima Paint to distinguish between void contracts that could never have legal standing, such as the one at issue, and voidable contracts where that result could come to pass later as a result of dispute resolution but where the contract was legal on its face. One justice of that court, Raoul Cantero, dissented, saying that the majority was ignoring the actual language of the FAA.
Buckeye petitioned the Supreme Court for certiorari, and it was granted in 2005. Since several of the appeals circuits had ruled in favor of arbitration in similar cases, but the Alabama Supreme Court had agreed with its Florida counterpart, the case was closely watched by the arbitration industry and consumer advocates.
Before the Court
Briefs
Christopher Landau of the Washington firm Kirkland & Ellis, a former clerk to justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas, argued for Buckeye Check; Paul Bland of TLPJ represented Cardegna. Many banking and business groups filed amici briefs on the company's behalf.
Landau's brief reiterated much of the argument Florida's Justice Cantero had made in his dissent: that it did not matter whether the claim was that the contract had been fraudulently induced as in Prima Paint or that it was illegal on its face, as it was here. "Whether the underlying contract is good, bad or indifferent is of no legitimate concern to the court," he wrote. "If the parties agreed to arbitrate their dispute, and do not challenge either the arbitration agreement itself or their assent to the underlying contract, that is the end of the matter as far as the court is concerned." Otherwise, arbitration clauses were pointless as anyone could avoid them by filing a suit challenging the contract.Landau, Christopher;  , 18, retrieved September 2, 2008. Bland argued that an illegal contract cannot exist, much less be enforced in any way:
 He also reminded the justices of the heavy presumption against pre-empting state law,Bland, 9-12. particularly in the area of contract formation, and that Prima Paint did not apply to the sections of the FAA under issue.Bland, 13-19.
In a reply brief Landau insisted again that the court's previous jurisprudence made it quite clear that the arbitration clause could only be negated if separately challenged. He accused the respondents of having a covert agenda to overturn the controlling cases. "The reason that Prima Paint and Southland have stood the test of time is no mystery: those decisions are eminently sensible.", he concluded.Landau,  , 2, retrieved September 3, 2008.
Another amicus brief was filed by Theis Research, a California company with a certiorari petition then before the Court in a similar caseTheis Research Inc. v. Brown & Bain, 240 F.3d 795 (9th Cir. 2001). it had brought against a law firm that had failed to disclose a potential conflict of interest prior to patent litigation in which it represented Theis. While differing on some procedural points with Bland's brief, Theis lawyer Paul Johnson likewise urged the court to rule in Cardegna's favor lest the Arbitration Act become "a Trojan Horse to assault the citadel of police powers vested in the states".Johnson, Paul;  , 1, Retrieved September 3, 2008.
Oral argument
At oral argument, Justices Sandra Day O'Connor (one of two dissenters in Southland) and John Roberts seemed receptive to Bland's argument that no clause of a contract illegal under state law, including an arbitration clause, can be enforced. "The state itself makes a decision that certain contracts can't be entered into", O'Connor said. Ruth Bader Ginsburg likewise was not convinced that Prima Paint, which had arisen from a suit filed in federal court, applied to states as well. Roberts and John Paul Stevens also saw the potential for conflict of interest in an arbitrator ruling on the legality of the contract. "The arbitrator always has an interest in finding that the contract is valid and arbitrable because that's his source of business — arbitrating disputes", said the latter.
On the other side, Anthony Kennedy felt that Prima Paint and subsequent decisions had "certainly displaced the states and state law from this area [to] a very substantial extent". It was up to the Court to resolve confusion similar to that created in the instant case, he added. Antonin Scalia worried that ruling in Cardegna's favor would open the floodgates of litigation. "All you have to do is open the door and you will have litigation in court," Ginsburg agreed, "and then the court will decide what the arbitrator would otherwise decide."
Decision
thumb|Antonin Scalia
Less than two months after oral argument, the justices ruled 7-1 for Buckeye. O'Connor had retired and been replaced by Samuel Alito, who as he had not seated for oral argument took no part in the decision.
Antonin Scalia wrote for the majority. The Florida Supreme Court's distinction between void and voidable contracts was, as Cantero had said, irrelevant under Prima Paint and Southland. The relevant section of the FAA was indeed applicable to the case, he said, since it required that contracts with arbitration clauses be treated like all others, and that its definition of "contract" included those that would or could later be voided since it explicitly mentioned such contracts that might later be revoked.Buckeye Check Cashing, 546 U.S. at 443.
Clarence Thomas was the lone dissenter. He wrote a single paragraph citing his three earlier dissents in similar cases and restated his belief that the FAA does not pre-empt state law.Buckeye Check Cashing, 546 U.S. at 447 (Thomas, J., dissenting).
Aftermath
After the case was remanded to the Florida courts in which it had originated, the parties eventually settled. In 2008 the company agreed to pay $7 million into a fund. Of that amount, $2.1 million went to pay the plaintiffs' lawyers. The members of the class, potentially 70,000 in number, divided the rest.
Legacy
The case established a precedent and was seen as expanding the scope of earlier court rulings applying the FAA to the states. The Court itself relied on it in a later opinion, and legal scholars have discussed its impact and implications.
Subsequent jurisprudence
Two years later, the Court heard Preston v. Ferrer,. the case brought by the former manager of Alex Ferrer (television's Judge Alex) against him. Ferrer had moved to bypass arbitration, arguing both that Preston was not licensed by California to work as a talent agent and thus could not legally contract with him for such services, and that that state's Talent Agencies Act required that all such disputes be considered by the state labor commissioner's office first. He argued that this distinguished the case from Buckeye Check.
This time it was Justice Ginsburg who wrote for the 8-1 majority that the FAA compelled arbitration even when state law vested dispute resolution authority in a specific state regulatory body. Again, Thomas wrote a short dissent reiterating his position and this time including Buckeye Check among his prior opinions to this effect.
Criticism and commentary
Proponents of arbitration and other means of alternative dispute resolution have seen in the decision a reassuring reaffirmation of the separability principle that cleared up whether it covered a challenge to the legality of the underlying contract. "While seemingly a mere reiteration of Prima Paint's holding," the International Institute for Conflict Prevention and Resolution (IICPR) wrote, "the Buckeye decision both clarifies and expands an arbitrator's jurisdiction by adding potentially void contracts to an arbitrator’s domain and by unequivocally extending the severability and validity principles into state court."McLaughlin, Joseph T.; Scanlon, Kathleen M. and Clare, James;  , retrieved September 4, 2008 The decision left open the question of whether it was still for the courts to decide if a contract had been properly formed, however, and some lower courts had denied motions to compel arbitration when that was the issue. Lawyers from the international arbitration department at White & Case praised the decision for making U.S. law "consistent with current international arbitration case law and doctrine", under which separability has a stronger foundation than it does in the U.S. "[It] avoids damage to the reputation of the United States as a 'safe'
host of international arbitration."McDougall, Andrew de Lotbiniére and Ioannou, Leon;   , Mealey's International Arbitration Report; March 2006; retrieved September 4, 2008.
Those who approached from a consumer-rights standpoint were not as solicitous. Texas arbitration expert Alan Scott Rau called Scalia's phrasing "sloppy and unguarded", noting it failed to recognize that some challenges to a contract that the law reserves for courts, such as capacity and forgery, necessarily include the arbitration clause.Rau, Alan Scott; Alan Scott  "Separability" in the United States Supreme Court, 2006 Stockholm Int'l Arb. Rev. 1, cited at Ware, Stephen; , 8 Nevada Law Journal 107, 117, 2007. Stephen Ware of Kansas calls on Congress to repeal the separability doctrine and require that courts be permitted to compel arbitration only after they have heard and rejected any challenges to the validity of the contract itself: "The separability doctrine separates arbitration law from an important part of contract law — the defenses to enforcement — and thus fails to provide the right to litigate with the protection of those defenses."Ware, 121.,
"[T]he Buckeye decision forces the lower courts to either continue the search for a workable rule or accept the
undermining of the moral foundations of contract law," says Timothy Hall of the University of Louisville's Louis D. Brandeis School of Law.Hall, Timothy S.; , draft; February 15, 2007; 6. "Scalia’s opinion in Buckeye is an astonishing attempt to  ... [institute] ... an explicit federal policy imposing arbitration and rejecting judicial resolution of many legal issues."Hall, 17. He, too, notes the fundamental contradiction posed by allowing defenses to contract formation to remain adjudicable by courts. Before and after the decision, most state court cases he looked at challenging contracts on those defenses have been very receptive to arguments, particular unconscionability. 
He suggests ways both legislative and judicial bodies could remedy this situation.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 546
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States arbitration case law
Category:United States class action case law
Category:United States banking case law
Category:2006 in United States case law
"""

From "Bucklew v. Precythe" ==> """
Bucklew v. Precythe, 587 U.S. ___ (2019), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding the standards for challenging methods of capital punishment under the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution. In a 5–4 decision, the Court held that when a convict sentenced to death challenges the State's method of execution due to claims of excessive pain, the convict must show that other alternative methods of execution exist and clearly demonstrate they would cause less pain than the state-determined one.. The Court's opinion emphasized the precedential force of its prior decisions in Baze v. Rees and Glossip v. Gross.
Background
In March 1996, Russell Earl Bucklew (May 16, 1968 – October 1, 2019) murdered Michael Sanders, with whom his former girlfriend Stephanie Ray took shelter after the breakup of their relationship, then kidnapped and raped Ray. He was sentenced to death by the state of Missouri in May 1997, and failed to have the conviction overturned in legal challenges which had completed by 2006. During this period, Missouri, as well as several other states, changed its protocol for death sentences by lethal injection to a combination of drugs. Missouri itself had to clear this change through the courts, so from 2006 through 2010, only two inmates were executed.
Bucklew and other convicts with death sentences across the country attempted to legally challenge states' refusal to use other protocols besides lethal injection through the courts, arguing that this was a violation of their Eighth Amendment rights. This ultimately resulted in Baze v. Rees, decided by the Supreme Court in 2008, where it was determined that lethal injection by drugs was constitutional and did not violate the Eighth Amendment. Further, Baze established a test for future challenges to methods of execution under the Eighth Amendment, in that inmates must show that a "feasible, readily implemented" alternative procedure that would "significantly reduce a substantial risk of severe pain". With the decision in Baze, the Supreme Court invalidated the other ongoing challenges, including that of Bucklew, and ordered states who had already gained approval for lethal injection to resume executions.
However, Missouri was forced to put its death penalties on hold, as one of the companies providing one of the injected drugs, sodium thiopental, had been pressured by anti-death penalty advocates and its dwindling supplies to stop selling the drug for such purposes. By 2012, Missouri had altered its process to a single drug, first to propofol and later to pentobarbital, and in 2014, began scheduling lethal injections, including for Bucklew. Bucklew sought a new lawsuit on challenging the use of the new drug for lethal injection on the basis that due his own personal health, suffering from cavernous hemangioma, that the injection could cause vascular tumors that would not allow the drug to properly circulate, and thus could experience tremendous pain before the drug shut down his systems. Bucklew asserted both facial and as-applied challenges. While the district court denied his challenge, the Supreme Court agreed to put the execution on hold to allow his appeals to be heard. In the Eighth Circuit, the court rejected Bucklew's facial challenge, as well as turned down his as-applied challenge as given but allowed Bucklew's case to be reheard if he could demonstrate that there was a feasible alternative, as per Baze. Prior to the rehearing, the Supreme Court concluded in Glossip v. Gross in 2015 that affirmed the Baze requirement that an Eighth Amendment challenge to capital punishment puts the onus on inmates to show that there exists an alternative that is "feasible, readily implemented, and in fact significantly reduces a substantial risk of severe pain."
When Bucklew returned to court in 2015 he had amended his claim with the suggestion that lethal gas was a viable alternative to lethal injection, and later identified nitrogen as a viable alternative (e.g. via inert gas asphyxiation). This gave enough possibility of a triable remedy that allowed the case to proceed to an additional discovery phase. Bucklew had brought in an expert witness in anesthesiology who had affirmed that even after the injection Bucklew would still have brain function and could experience pain, based on a study done with horses.  Eventually both the district and Eighth Circuit rejected these claims. The Supreme Court intervened a second time, in early 2018, while Justice Anthony Kennedy had still been serving, to put Bucklew's case on hold and evaluate his case.
Decision
The Court issued its opinion on April 1, 2019. In a 5–4 decision falling along ideological lines, the Court upheld the Eighth Circuit's decision, affirming that Baze and Glossip provided the proper tests, and the evidence presented by Bucklew was not sufficient for either a facial or as-applied challenge to the Eighth Amendment. Justice Neil Gorsuch wrote the majority opinion, joined by the other four conservative Justices. Gorsuch wrote that the Eighth Amendment "forbids 'cruel and unusual' methods of capital punishment but does not guarantee a prisoner a painless death"; while a constitutionally-valid death sentencing like hanging would require a moment of intense pain, the Eighth Amendment would forbid methods like being drawn and quartered that "intensified the death sentence by 'superadding' terror, pain or disgrace." Gorsuch criticized the choice of death by inert gas asphyxiation, as it was neither a method prescribed by Missouri, and while it was an authorized method in three other states, no one has been put to death by the method to date. Gorsuch also wrote that Bucklew, by this point, had spent twenty years on death row, and there is reasonable expectation by states to complete death sentences in a timely manner. Gorsuch argued that inmates that were seeking alternative methods under the Baze/Glossip test in good faith should readily be able to show evidence for their case, and considered that Bucklew's continuing challenges were stalling tactics. Both Thomas and Kavanaugh wrote concurring opinions. Thomas argued that under the Eighth Amendment, the Court only had to show that Missouri's choice of death sentence was not purposely designed to inflict additional pain on the inmate.
The dissenting opinion was written by Justice Stephen Breyer, joined by the other three liberal justices on the bench. Breyer argued that Bucklew had sufficiently demonstrated that death by lethal injection could cause unnecessary intense pain and an "excruciating and grotesque" execution due to his conditions, and in his as-applied challenge, that death by nitrogen gas met the standards for Baze and Glossip. While Missouri did not use this method, it was authorized (though never previously implemented) in three other states. Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote a separate opinion, urging that there is no reason to rush execution sentences, particularly to avoid having any judicial mistakes harm the impact of the Constitution.
Execution
On June 25, 2019, the Missouri Supreme Court scheduled an execution date of October 1 for Bucklew.
Missouri Governor Mike Parson denied clemency for Bucklew on the morning of his planned execution, and he was executed as scheduled on October 1, 2019. He was pronounced dead at 6:23 p.m. CDT, eight minutes after being administered a lethal dose of pentobarbital.
There were no reported complications with the execution.  Corrections staff took precautions with Bucklew such as elevating the head of the gurney to prevent his choking on blood if a tumor were to burst and sedating him with Valium before the execution.
See also
 List of people executed in Missouri
 List of people executed in the United States in 2019
References
External links
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:Capital punishment in Missouri
"""

From "Buckley v. American Constitutional Law Foundation, Inc." ==> """
Buckley v. American Constitutional Law Foundation, Inc., 525 U.S. 182 (1999), was a United States Supreme Court case that dealt with the authority of states to regulate the electoral process, and the point at which state regulations of the electoral process violate the First Amendment freedoms.. 
 Background 
Article V, section 1 of the Constitution of the state of Colorado allows its citizens to place particular initiatives and referendums on the electoral ballot, thus directly creating new laws. Notable initiatives and referendums include the Colorado state capital referendum, in 1881; the Poundstone Amendment in 1974, about county annexations, which originated as an initiative; and the Gallagher Amendment on property taxes, in 1982.
Under Meyer v. Grant, decided by the Supreme Court in 1988, proponents of an initiative are allowed to hire others to circulate that initiative. By law, a circulator is any "person who presents to other persons for possible signature a petition to place a measure on the ballot by initiative or referendum", whether paid or not.  Nevertheless, the power to hire circulators is subject to restrictions; under state law, proponents and circulators are subject to a number of requirements: for example, all proponents and circulators are required to be residents of Colorado, citizens of the United States, and at least eighteen years of age.
In 1993, under the laws of the time, circulators were also required to be registered voters of Colorado, and at least eighteen years old. Circulation times for initiatives and referendums were limited to only six months; and circulators were required to sign affidavits that showed their names and addresses, including their country of residence. Furthermore, all circulators had to identify whether they were being paid to circulate the petition though an identification card, which also displayed their names, and the telephone number of their employer (if they were being paid). Finally, proponent-employers also had to report, on a monthly basis, their names, the names and addresses of paid circulators, circulators' monthly salary and debt totals, and the name of each proposed ballot measure; likewise, when an initiative was filed with the Secretary of State of Colorado, a report was required from the proponents, detailing the amount of money paid per signature, the total payment to circulators, and the personal information (including name, address, and county of voter registration) of any paid circulators.
 Facts of the case 
In 1994, several petitioners banded together to form the American Constitutional Law Foundation (ACLF), a non-profit dedicated to direct democracy, challenging six restrictions: the age requirement, the registered voter requirement, the time limit, the affidavit requirement, the identification badge requirement, and the reporting requirements (both monthly and at time of filing).
The ACLF alleged that, taken together, the requirements restricted freedom of speech, in violation of the First Amendment, and filed suit against the Secretary of State of Colorado at the time, Natalie Meyer, in the United States District Court for the District of Colorado.
Chief Judge Matsch of the district court agreed with them, declaring several provisions and restrictions "invalid because they are in violation of the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution". In particular, the restrictions relating to identification cards were struck down, along with parts of the reporting requirement; nevertheless, the age and affidavit requirements were upheld, as was the six-month time limit.
Both the ACLF and the Secretary of State appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit: the Foundation requesting that additional portions of the law be struck down, while Meyer argued that the law be reinstated. In 1997, the Court of Appeals affirmed in part and reversed in part: upholding the age and affidavit requirements, along with the time limit, but striking down the registered voter requirement, and parts of the badge and disclosure requirements.
By the time the appeal reached the Supreme Court, in 1998, the Secretary of State was Victoria Buckley, having won election in 1994.
Thus, Victoria Buckley appealed the case to the Supreme Court, requesting that the high court review the registration, badge, and disclosure requirements.
 Oral arguments 
Gale Norton, as the Attorney General of Colorado, argued the case for the appellant, stating that the State, under the strict scrutiny standard, had a compelling interest in preventing forgery, fraud, and misconduct; as well as in ensuring the integrity and the reliability of the legislative process, similar to the commitment of state legislators and state judges. Additionally, Norton argued that asking persons to sign an initiative was akin to performing an electoral function.
Arguments for the respondents centered around the scope of core political speech, as noted in Meyer v. Grant, and how the requirements differed between initiatives and other petition drives, such as nomination petitions. Other lines of questioning involved possible monetary inducement, known evidence of fraudulent signatures, and the details of the expenditures.
 Opinion of the Court 
In a 6–3 decision, the Court affirmed the opinion of the Tenth Circuit, holding that the name, badge, and disclosure requirements were unlawful. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, writing for the majority, noted that states that allow ballot initiatives have the right to protect the integrity of the initiative process, but the First Amendment required the Court to be vigilant against "undue hindrances to political conversations and the exchange of ideas."
 Majority opinion 
In the view of the majority, the registered voter requirement was too severe a burden on speech, and Buckley's argument about the ease of registration could not stand: some persons who would otherwise join a ballot initiative view not registering to vote as a form of protest and a rejection of an unresponsive political process. Instead, the affidavit requirement was enough, as it required the addresses of circulators, including their counties of residence.
The Court further noted that, given the controversial nature of some initiatives and petitions, identification badges opened circulators up to '"heat of the moment" harassment', as they were worn when presenting a petition. Indeed, the "badge requirement compels personal name identification at the precise moment when the circulator's interest in anonymity is greatest" — like in McIntyre v. Ohio Elections Commission (1995), the state must allow anonymous political speech, at least at the immediate point of contact between circulators and Colorado residents. Again, the majority proceeded to deem the affidavit requirement sufficient for purposes of identification, and prevention of misconduct, as the required affidavits were "separated from the moment the circulator speaks" and not immediately accessible by any member of the public.
Third, the reporting and disclosure requirements, already "trimmed" by the Tenth Circuit, were further restricted: the benefit of revealing the names of paid circulators and the amount they were paid was not demonstrated, and created too great a difference between paid circulators and their volunteer counterparts, failing exacting scrutiny. As such, those requirements were struck down. The final report, at the time of filing, would still note the amount paid per petition signature, as well as the names of proponents and their ballot measures, akin to the mandatory disclosure requirements in Buckley v. Valeo (1976). (The names of the circulators could be indirectly gleaned from the affidavit requirement.)
Ultimately, the majority opinion held that there were "less problematic measures" that allowed Colorado to satisfy its interest in protecting the initiative process, but that "the restrictions in question significantly inhibit communication with voters about proposed political change, and are not warranted by the state interests (administrative efficiency, fraud detection, informing voters) alleged to justify those restrictions."
 Thomas's concurrence 
Justice Thomas concurred in the judgment only, stating that when the issue at hand was core political speech, precedent required that each requirement "must be evaluated under strict scrutiny."
In his view, the badge requirement directly regulated the content of speech, and was too overly broad to satisfy narrow tailoring. In addition, the compelling government interest at hand, the prevention of fraud and misconduct, had not been sufficiently shown to exist as a real problem.
Second, the registration requirement operated much like Colorado's ban on paid circulators — which the Court had struck down in Meyer v. Grant (1988), ten years before. Though neither directly regulated speech, both still limited the number of potential speakers, and thus, the size of the audience that circulators might reach. Furthermore, the compelling interest, ensuring that circulators are voters, was defeated by the fact that many Colorado residents were not voters, and that a residency requirement would be far more narrowly tailored and serve the government interest better.
Finally, he argued, even if Colorado had a compelling interest in identifying circulators, the reporting requirement did not serve that purpose: it only required the names of paid circulators, not all circulators.
All in all, Justice Thomas "would apply strict scrutiny to each of the challenged restrictions, and would affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeals as to each of the three provisions before" the Court.
 Rehnquist's dissent 
Chief Justice Rehnquist dissented from the majority.
 See also 
Meyer v. Grant
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1999 in United States case law
Category:Colorado ballot measures
"""

From "Buckley v. Valeo" ==> """
Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1 (1976), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court on campaign finance. A majority of justices held that, as provided by section 608 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, limits on election expenditures are unconstitutional. In a per curiam (by the Court) opinion, they ruled that expenditure limits contravene the First Amendment provision on freedom of speech because a restriction on spending for political communication necessarily reduces the quantity of expression. It limited disclosure provisions and limited the Federal Election Commission's power. Justice Byron White dissented in part and wrote that Congress had legitimately recognized unlimited election spending "as a mortal danger against which effective preventive and curative steps must be taken".
Buckley v. Valeo was extended by the U.S. Supreme Court in further cases, including in the five to four decision of First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti in 1978. and Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission in 2010. The latter held that corporations may spend from their general treasuries during elections. In 2014, McCutcheon v. Federal Election Commission held that aggregate limits on political giving by an individual are unconstitutional.572 U.S. ___ (2014)
By some measures, Buckley is the longest opinion ever issued by the Supreme Court.
Facts
Congress had made previous attempts to regulate campaign finance. It passed the Tillman Act of 1907, and then the Taft–Hartley Act in 1947. Neither was well enforced.
Then, in 1974, Congress passed significant amendments to the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (FECA), creating the most comprehensive effort by the federal government to date to regulate federal campaign contributions and spending. President Gerald Ford signed the bill into law on October 15. The key parts of the amended law did the following:
limited contributions to candidates for federal office (2 USC §441a)
required the disclosure of political contributions (2 USC §434),
provided for the public financing of presidential elections (IRC Subtitle H),
limited expenditures by candidates and associated committees,
limited independent expenditures to $1,000 (formerly 18 U.S.C. §608e),
limited candidate expenditures from personal funds (formerly 18 U.S.C. §608a),
created and fixed the method of appointing members to the Federal Election Commission (FEC) (formerly 2 U.S.C. §437c(a) (1)(A–C)). Eight members of the commission were to be chosen as follows: the Secretary of the Senate and the Clerk of the House of Representatives were ex officio members of the Commission without a right to vote; two members would be appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate upon recommendations of the majority and minority leaders of the Senate; two would be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives upon recommendations of the majority and minority leaders of the House, and two would be appointed by the President. The six voting members would then need to be confirmed by the majority of both Houses of Congress. In addition, there was a requirement that each of the three appointing authorities was forbidden to choose both of their appointees from the same political party.
The lawsuit was filed in the District Court for the District of Columbia, on January 2, 1975, by U.S. Senator James L. Buckley (a member of the Conservative Party of New York State), former U.S. Senator and 1968 presidential candidate Eugene McCarthy (a Democrat from Minnesota), the New York Civil Liberties Union, the American Conservative Union, the Peace & Freedom Party, the Libertarian Party, and numerous other plaintiffs. The named defendant in the caption was Francis R. Valeo, the Secretary of the Senate, an ex officio member of the FEC who represented the U.S. federal government. The trial court denied plaintiffs' request for declaratory and injunctive relief. Plaintiffs then appealed to the Court of Appeals and finally to the Supreme Court.
The plaintiffs argued that the legislation violated the 1st and 5th Amendment rights to freedom of expression and due process, respectively.
Judgment
In a per curiam opinion, the Supreme Court held that several key provisions of the Campaign Finance Act, § 608(a), which limited expenditure by political campaigns, are unconstitutional and contrary to the First Amendment. The major holdings were as follows:
 The Court upheld limits on contributions to candidates.
 The Court upheld limitations on volunteers' incidental expenses. 
 The Court upheld the aggregate limit on an individual's total contributions to all candidates and committees in a calendar year. 
 The Court struck down limits on expenditures by candidates.
 The Court struck down limits on independent expenditures (i.e., expenditures by other groups or individuals than candidates and political parties).
 The Court upheld mandatory disclosure and reporting provisions, but it narrowed the types of speech to which they could apply.
 The Court upheld a system of voluntary government funding of campaigns, including limits on spending by candidates who choose to accept government subsidies.
 The Court struck down the system by which members of Congress directly appointed Federal Election Commission commissioners.
The Court's opinion begins by stating certain "General Principles", and then dealing with individual parts of the law in turn.
General principles 
 First, the Court cited the importance of the First Amendment issues at stake: "The Act's contribution and expenditure limitations operate in an area of the most fundamental First Amendment activities. Discussion of public issues and debate on the qualifications of candidates are integral to the operation of the system of government established by our Constitution. The First Amendment affords the broadest protection to such political expression in order 'to assure (the) unfettered interchange of ideas for the bringing about of political and social changes desired by the people.'" The Court stated that these issues include "political association as well as political expression."
 The Court rejected the idea that limits on campaign contributions and spending merely limited conduct: "[T]his Court has never suggested that the dependence of a communication on the expenditure of money operates itself to ... reduce the exacting scrutiny required by the First Amendment." The opinion cited New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, and it noted that sending a telegram to a public official—a clearly protected activity—costs money.
 Further, even if considered "conduct", the Court found that "it is beyond dispute that the interest in regulating the alleged 'conduct' of giving or spending money 'arises in some measure because the communication allegedly integral to the conduct is itself thought to be harmful.'"
 The restrictions were not justified under the "times, places, and manner" clause giving the government the authority to regulate elections: The restrictions were "direct quantity restrictions on political communication and association by persons, groups, candidates, and political parties."
 The Court affirmed a First Amendment interest in spending money to facilitate campaign speech, writing, "A restriction on the amount of money a person or group can spend on political communication during a campaign necessarily reduces the quantity of expression by restricting the number of issues discussed, the depth of their exploration, and the size of the audience reached." Further, the law's "$1,000 ceiling on spending 'relative to a clearly identified candidate,' would appear to exclude all citizens and groups except candidates, political parties, and the institutional press from any significant use of the most effective modes of communication." (citations omitted). 
 However, "limitation[s] upon the amount that any one person or group may contribute to a candidate or political committee entails only a marginal restriction upon the contributor's ability to engage in free communication", because such persons or groups are free to communicate directly with voters. Nevertheless, "[g]iven the important role of contributions in financing political campaigns, contribution restrictions could have a severe impact on political dialogue if the limitations prevented candidates and political committees from amassing the resources necessary for effective advocacy."
 "The Act's contribution and expenditure limitations also impinge on protected associational freedoms. Making a contribution, like joining a political party, serves to affiliate a person with a candidate."
 Finally, the Court concluded this section by stating, "In sum, although the Act's contribution and expenditure limitations both implicate fundamental First Amendment interests, its expenditure ceilings impose significantly more severe restrictions on protected freedoms of political expression and association than do its limitations on financial contributions."
Contribution limits
 The Court held that restrictions on "large campaign contributions" are justified by the state's interest in "the prevention of corruption and the appearance of corruption spawned by the real or imagined coercive influence of large financial contributions on candidates' positions and on their actions if elected to office." The Court further defined "corruption" to mean "large contributions ... given to secure a political quid pro quo from current and potential office holders."
 The Court rejected the plaintiffs' claim that all "contribution limitations must be invalidated because bribery laws and narrowly drawn disclosure requirements constitute a less restrictive means of dealing with 'proven and suspected quid pro quo arrangements.'"
 Thus the Court upheld the limits on contributions to candidates and their campaign committees, and to parties and political action committees, in the Act.
Expenditure limits
 The Court first reiterated that "[t]he Act's expenditure ceilings impose direct and substantial restraints on the quantity of political speech." It reviewed the sweeping scope of the law, noting, "The plain effect of [the Act] is to prohibit all individuals, who are neither candidates nor owners of institutional press facilities, and all groups, except political parties and campaign organizations, from voicing their views 'relative to a clearly identified candidate' through means that entail aggregate expenditures of more than $1,000 during a calendar year. The provision, for example, would make it a federal criminal offense for a person or association to place a single one-quarter page advertisement 'relative to a clearly identified candidate' in a major metropolitan newspaper."
 The Court held that the "key operative language of the provision ... [—]"any expenditure ... relative to a clearly identified candidate"—was unconstitutionally vague, for it "fails to clearly mark the boundary between permissible and impermissible speech, unless other portions of [the Act] make sufficiently explicit the range of expenditures covered by the limitation. The section prohibits 'any expenditure ... relative to a clearly identified candidate during a calendar year which, when added to all other expenditures ... advocating the election or defeat of such candidate, exceeds, $1,000.' (Emphasis added.) This context clearly permits, if indeed it does not require, the phrase "relative to" a candidate to be read to mean 'advocating the election or defeat of' a candidate." The Court elaborated in a footnote that "[t]his construction would restrict the application of [the law] to communications containing express words of advocacy of election or defeat, such as 'vote for,' 'elect,' 'support,' 'cast your ballot for,' 'Smith for Congress,' 'vote against,' 'defeat,' 'reject.'"
 Even after narrowing the scope of the provision, however, the Court found that limits on expenditures are unconstitutional. "We find that the governmental interest in preventing corruption and the appearance of corruption is inadequate to justify s 608(e)(1)'s ceiling on independent expenditures... First, assuming, arguendo, that large independent expenditures pose the same dangers of actual or apparent quid pro quo arrangements as do large contributions, Sec. 608(e)(1) does not provide an answer that sufficiently relates to the elimination of those dangers. Unlike the contribution limitations' total ban on the giving of large amounts of money to candidates, Sec. 608(e)(1) prevents only some large expenditures. So long as persons and groups eschew expenditures that in express terms advocate the election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate, they are free to spend as much as they want to promote the candidate and his views. The exacting interpretation of the statutory language necessary to avoid unconstitutional vagueness thus undermines the limitation's effectiveness as a loophole-closing provision by facilitating circumvention by those seeking to exert improper influence upon a candidate or office-holder."
 "Second, quite apart from the shortcomings ... in preventing any abuses generated by large independent expenditures, the independent advocacy restricted by the provision does not presently appear to pose dangers of real or apparent corruption comparable to those identified with large campaign contributions ... The absence of prearrangement and coordination of an expenditure with the candidate or his agent not only undermines the value of the expenditure to the candidate but also alleviates the danger that expenditures will be given as a quid pro quo for improper commitments from the candidate. Rather than preventing circumvention of the contribution limitations, Sec. 608(e)(1) severely restricts all independent advocacy despite its substantially diminished potential for abuse."
 The Court rejected the notion that a "governmental interest in equalizing the relative ability of individuals and groups to influence the outcome of elections serves to justify the limitation on express advocacy of the election or defeat of candidates imposed by Sec. 608(e)(1)'s expenditure ceiling ... [T]he concept that government may restrict the speech of some elements of our society in order to enhance the relative voice of others is wholly foreign to the First Amendment, which was designed 'to secure "the widest possible dissemination of information from diverse and antagonistic sources,"' and '"to assure unfettered interchange of ideas for the bringing about of political and social changes desired by the people."'"
 Thus, the Court struck down limits on both candidate and independent spending as unconstitutional.
Reporting and disclosure requirements
 The Court recognized that reporting and disclosure requirements infringe on First Amendment rights. "[W]e have repeatedly found that compelled disclosure, in itself, can seriously infringe on privacy of association and belief guaranteed by the First Amendment."
 However, the Court held that the government has a vital interest in "provid[ing] the electorate with information 'as to where political campaign money comes from and how it is spent by the candidate' in order to aid the voters in evaluating those who seek federal office", a vital interest in allowing "voters to place each candidate in the political spectrum more precisely than is often possible solely on the basis of party labels and campaign speeches." These interests are a result of the fact that "the sources of a candidate's financial support also alert the voter to the interests to which a candidate is most likely to be responsive and thus facilitate predictions of future performance in office." Further, "disclosure requirements deter actual corruption and avoid the appearance of corruption by exposing large contributions and expenditures to the light of publicity." Finally, "recordkeeping, reporting, and disclosure requirements are an essential means of gathering the data necessary to detect violations of the contribution limitations described above."
 However, the Court again found the statute's reach, as written, to be unconstitutionally overbroad. It thus ruled that the Act's disclosure requirements apply to "individuals and groups that are not candidates or political committees only in the following circumstances: (1) when they make contributions earmarked for political purposes or authorized or requested by a candidate or his agent, to some person other than a candidate or political committee, and (2) when they make expenditures for communications that expressly advocate the election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate."
Public funding of campaigns
 The Court ruled that the government can directly subsidize political campaigns, but that it cannot require candidates to forego private fundraising if they choose the subsidy instead.
 The Court held that the government can condition receipt of the campaign subsidy on a candidate's voluntary agreement to limit his or her total spending.
Make-up of FEC
 The Court held that the method for appointments to the Federal Election Commission was an unconstitutional violation of separation of powers.nb Associate Justice Harry Blackmun's papers indicate that Associate Justice William Rehnquist drafted the separation-of-powers portion of the per curiam opinion. The Court opined that these powers could properly be exercised by an "Officer of the United States" (validly appointed under Article II, Section 2, clause 2 of the Constitution) but held that the Commissioners could not exercise this significant authority because they were not "appointed". Id. at 137. Burger and Rehnquist agreed that limits on expenditure are unconstitutional, but dissented otherwise, stating that they would have held much larger parts of the Act to be unconstitutional.
Dissents
Only eight Justices heard the case. The opinion was a per curiam opinion, that is, not authored by a single justice, but an opinion for the Court. Several justices dissented from portions of the opinion.
Justice White would have upheld all the restrictions on both contributions and expenditures, striking down only the FEC's appointment process. He said the following.424 US 1, 260-5 (1976)
thumb|Justice White (above) would have upheld the law's limits on expenditures and contributions.
Concededly, neither the limitations on contributions nor those on expenditures directly or indirectly purport to control the content of political speech by candidates or by their supporters or detractors. What the Act regulates is giving and spending money, acts that have First Amendment significance not because they are themselves communicative with respect to the qualifications of the candidate, but because money may be used to defray the expenses of speaking or otherwise communicating about the merits or demerits of federal candidates for election. The act of giving money to political candidates, however, may have illegal or other undesirable consequences: it may be used to secure the express or tacit understanding that the giver will enjoy political favor if the candidate is elected. Both Congress and this Court's cases have recognized this as a mortal danger against which effective preventive and curative steps must be taken.
[...]
I also disagree with the Court's judgment that § 608(a), which limits the amount of money that a candidate or his family may spend on his campaign, violates the Constitution. Although it is true that this provision does not promote any interest in preventing the corruption of candidates, the provision does, nevertheless, serve salutary purposes related to the integrity of federal campaigns. By limiting the importance of personal wealth, § 608(a) helps to assure that only individuals with a modicum of support from others will be viable candidates. This in turn would tend to discourage any notion that the outcome of elections is primarily a function of money. Similarly, § 608(a) tends to equalize access to the political arena, encouraging the less wealthy, unable to bankroll their own campaigns, to run for political office.
Since the contribution and expenditure limitations are neutral as to the content of speech and are not motivated by fear of the consequences of the political speech of particular candidates or of political speech in general, this case depends on whether the nonspeech interests of the Federal Government in regulating the use of money in political campaigns are sufficiently urgent to justify the incidental effects that the limitations visit upon the First Amendment interests of candidates and their supporters.
Justice Marshall dissented on the point of limiting personal contributions and expenditures by a candidate to his or her own campaign – he would have upheld that provision, which was stricken by the Court.424 US 1, 288 (1976)
One of the points on which all Members of the Court agree is that money is essential for effective communication in a political campaign. It would appear to follow that the candidate with a substantial personal fortune at his disposal is off to a significant "headstart." Of course, the less wealthy candidate can potentially overcome the disparity in resources through contributions from others. But ability to generate contributions may itself depend upon a showing of a financial base for the campaign or some demonstration of preexisting support, which, in turn, is facilitated by expenditures of substantial personal sums. Thus, the wealthy candidate's immediate access to a substantial personal fortune may give him an initial advantage that his less wealthy opponent can never overcome. And even if the advantage can be overcome, the perception that personal wealth wins elections may not only discourage potential candidates without significant personal wealth from entering the political arena, but also undermine public confidence in the integrity of the electoral process.
Justice Rehnquist dissented on the application of the public funding provisions to minor parties, believing that it was unconstitutional as applied to them.
Justice Blackmun would have held that contribution limits are unconstitutional.
Chief Justice Burger would have held that contribution limits are unconstitutional, that the government financing provisions are unconstitutional, and that disclosure of small contributions to campaigns is unconstitutional.
Justice Stevens arrived on the Court after argument so he did not participate in the decision. However, he said later that he 'always thought that Byron [White] got it right'. Stevens would go on to write the dissent in Citizens United and called for a constitutional amendment to overturn the Court's campaign finance decisions. 
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 424
Bowman v United Kingdom [1998] ECHR 4, (1998) 26 EHRR 1
Harper v. Canada (Attorney General) [2004] SCR 827
Notes
References
External links
Category:Federal Election Commission litigation
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States elections case law
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States separation of powers case law
"""

From "Buckman Co. v. Plaintiffs' Legal Committee" ==> """
Buckman Co. v. Plaintiffs Legal Comm., 531 U.S. 341 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case decided in 2001. The case concerned whether the FDCA (Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act), a federal statute, pre-empted a state-law fraud-on-the-FDA claim. Although finding it on different grounds, the Court decided to reject the lawsuit attempt.
Background
The Plaintiffs' Legal Committee represented plaintiffs who claimed injuries resulting from the use of bone screws on their spines. They sued Buckman Company, alleging they made fraudulent representations to the FDA. They further argued that "but for" the false representations, the injuries would not have occurred.  
The District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania heard these claims and decided to dismiss the "fraud-on-the-FDA" sections of the complaint on the ground that it was pre-empted by federal law. A divided panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit reversed, arguing that there was no express pre-emption.
Buckman Company appealed to the Supreme Court which heard the case in December 2000.
Opinion of the Court
Chief Justice William Rehnquist wrote the decision of the Supreme Court, reversing the Third Circuit. He concluded that there was express pre-emption because holding these claims under state law would "inevitably conflict" with the FDA's duty to police fraud. Additionally, to allow such suits could potentially chill information provided to the FDA, a concern the Court thought would hamper the FDA's evaluation of applications.
Justice John Paul Stevens  wrote a concurring opinion in the judgement of the Court, which Justice Clarence Thomas joined. Thus, they agreed with reversing the Third Circuit, but on different grounds. Stevens said the lawsuit could not proceed because the plaintiffs could not rebut the fact that the FDA did not remove the allegedly defective products from the market. Therefore, there was no "but for" causation in the first instance.
See also
 Food and Drug Administration
 Federalism
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2001 in United States case law
"""

From "Buford v. United States" ==> """
Buford v. United States, 532 U.S. 59 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case decided in 2001. The case concerned whether federal appellate courts should give deferential or de novo review of certain Sentencing Guideline determinations made by a trial judge.
Background
The United States Sentencing Guidelines are the series of rules which guide a federal trial judge in issuing a sentence to a convicted individual. In Buford, the trial judge had to determine whether certain prior convictions relating to drug-crime arrests should be considered 'related' or 'consolidated'. The judge ruled they should not (and thus count as five individual priors) and the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed. The appellate court did not re-review the facts (de novo review), instead only reviewing certain legal aspects of the determination. Buford appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court on the grounds that the appellate court should have re-reviewed the determinations of the trial judge rather than defer to him.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Breyer delivered the unanimous Opinion of the Court. He began by stating that the question in the case is "a narrow one" that is simply based on the standard of review for appellate courts when reviewing this specific technical determination made by District Courts.532 U.S. 59 at 61 Although it was a simple issue, seven circuit courts of appeal had differed on the standard to take.532 U.S. 59 at 63 Breyer, turning to the actual question of the standard of review, argued for a deferential framing. "The district court", he wrote, "is in a better position than the appellate court to decide whether a particular set of individual circumstances demonstrates 'functional consolidation'". Because the Seventh Circuit had given deference instead of de novo (completely new) review of the lower court's determinations, the decision was affirmed. Buford's sentence remained the same.
See also
 Due Process
 Criminal Procedure
 Court of Appeal
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States sentencing case law
"""

From "Building & Construction Trades Council v. Associated Builders & Contractors of Massachusetts/Rhode Island, Inc." ==> """
Building & Construction Trades Council v. Associated Builders & Contractors of Massachusetts/Rhode Island, Inc., 507 U.S. 218 (1993), is a US labor law case, concerning the scope of federal preemption against state law for labor rights.
Facts
A corporation claimed that it should not have to abide by a contract it signed with a state government body, to abide by terms of a collective agreement because it was preempted by the National Labor Relations Act of 1935. The Massachusetts Water Resources Authority, a state government body, was ordered to clean up pollution of Boston Harbor after it failed to prevent sewage flowing in. It commissioned Kaiser Engineers, Inc. for the cleanup, and made it agree that it would assure labor stability, and abide by a collective agreement with the Building and Construction Trades Council. Kaiser Inc and the employer lobby then claimed that this agreement was pre-empted under the National Labor Relations Act. The District Court rejected the claim. The Court of Appeals allowed the claim, saying that the labor agreement, as a condition of carrying out work, was an intrusion into the bargaining process and not the sort of peripheral regulation permissible under San Diego Building Trades Council v. Garmon.. and Machinists v. Wisconsin Employment Relations Comm'n.. The MWRA appealed.
Judgment
The Supreme Court held state governments may use their funds to procure corporations to do work that are union or labor friendly. Blackmun J gave the judgment of the Court.
The NLRA contains no express pre-emption provision. Therefore, in accordance with settled pre-emption principles, we should not find MWRA's bid specification pre-empted "'". . . unless it conflicts with federal law or would frustrate the federal scheme, or unless [we] discern from the totality of the circumstances that Congress sought to occupy the field to the exclusion of the States."'" ...  We are reluctant to infer pre-emption....
[...]
When we say that the NLRA pre-empts state law, we mean that the NLRA prevents a State from regulating within a protected zone, whether it be a zone protected and reserved for market freedom, see Machinists, or for NLRB jurisdiction, see Garmon. A State does not regulate, however, simply by acting within one of these protected areas. When a State owns and manages property, for example, it must interact with private participants in the marketplace. In so doing, the State is not subject to pre-emption by the NLRA, because pre-emption doctrines apply only to state regulation.
Our decisions in this area support the distinction between government as regulator and government as proprietor. We have held consistently that the NLRA was intended to supplant state labor regulation, not all legitimate state activity that affects labor. In Machinists, for example, we referred to Congress' pre-emptive intent to "leave some activities unregulated," 427 U.S., at 144, 96 S.Ct., at 2555 (emphasis added), and held that the activities at issue—workers deciding together to refuse overtime work—were not "regulable by States." Id., at 149, 96 S.Ct., at 2557 (emphasis added). In Golden State I, we held that the reason Los Angeles could not condition renewal of a taxicab franchise upon settlement of a labor dispute was that "Machinists pre-emption . . . precludes state and municipal regulation 'concerning conduct that Congress intended to be unregulated.' " 475 U.S., at 614, 106 S.Ct., at 1398 (emphasis added) (quoting Metropolitan Life Ins. Co. v. Massachusetts, 471 U.S., at 749, 105 S.Ct., at 2394). We refused to permit the city's exercise of its regulatory power of license nonrenewal to restrict Golden State's right to use lawful economic weapons in its dispute with its union. See 475 U.S., at 615-619, 106 S.Ct., at 1398-1401. As petitioners point out, a very different case would have been presented had the city of Los Angeles purchased taxi services from Golden State in order to transport city employees. Brief for Petitioners 35. In that situation, if the strike had produced serious interruptions in the services the city had purchased, the city would not necessarily have been pre-empted from advising Golden State that it would hire another company if the labor dispute were not resolved and services resumed by a specific deadline.
[...]
The conceptual distinction between regulator and purchaser exists to a limited extent in the private sphere as well. A private actor, for example, can participate in a boycott of a supplier on the basis of a labor policy concern rather than a profit motive. See id., at 290, 106 S.Ct., at 1063. The private actor under such circumstances would be attempting to "regulate" the suppliers and would not be acting as a typical proprietor. The fact that a private actor may "regulate" does not mean, of course, that the private actor may be "pre-empted" by the NLRA; the Supremacy Clause does not require pre-emption of private conduct. Private actors therefore may "regulate" as they please, as long as their conduct does not violate the law. As the above passage in Gould makes clear, however, States have a qualitatively different role to play from private parties. Id., at 290, 106 S.Ct., at 1063. When the State acts as regulator, it performs a role that is characteristically a governmental rather than a private role, boycotts notwithstanding. Moreover, as regulator of private conduct, the State is more powerful than private parties. These distinctions are far less significant when the State acts as a market participant with no interest in setting policy.
[...]
Permitting the States to participate freely in the marketplace is not only consistent with NLRA pre-emption principles generally but also, in this case, promotes the legislative goals that animated the passage of the §§ 8(e) and 8(f) exceptions for the construction industry. In 1959, Congress amended the NLRA to add § 8(f) and modify § 8(e). Section 8(f) explicitly permits employers in the construction industry—but no other employers—to enter into prehire agreements. Prehire agreements are collective-bargaining agreements providing for union recognition, compulsory union dues or equivalents, and mandatory use of union hiring halls, prior to the hiring of any employees.
[...]
It is undisputed that the Agreement between Kaiser and BCTC is a valid labor contract under §§ 8(e) and (f). As noted above, those sections explicitly authorize this type of contract between a union and an employer like Kaiser, which is engaged primarily in the construction industry, covering employees engaged in that industry.
[...]
In the instant case, MWRA acted on the advice of a manager hired to organize performance of a clean-up job over which, under Massachusetts law, MWRA is the proprietor. There is no question but that MWRA was attempting to ensure an efficient project that would be completed as quickly and effectively as possible at the lowest cost. As petitioners note, moreover, Brief for Petitioners 26, the challenged action in this case was specifically tailored to one particular job, the Boston Harbor clean-up project. There is therefore no basis on which to distinguish the incentives at work here from those that operate elsewhere in the construction industry, incentives that this Court has recognized as legitimate. See Woelke & Romero Framing Co. v. NLRB, 456 U.S., at 662, and n. 14, 102 S.Ct., at 2081, and n. 14.
We hold today that Bid Specification 13.1 is not government regulation and that it is therefore subject to neither Garmon nor Machinists pre-emption. Bid Specification 13.1 constitutes proprietary conduct on the part of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, which legally has enforced a valid project labor agreement. As Chief Judge Breyer aptly noted in his dissent in the Court of Appeals, "when the MWRA, acting in the role of purchaser of construction services, acts just like a private contractor would act, and conditions its purchasing upon the very sort of labor agreement that Congress explicitly authorized and expected frequently to find, it does not 'regulate' the workings of the market forces that Congress expected to find; it exemplifies them." 935 F.2d, at 361...
See also
United States labor law
References
External links
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1993 in United States case law
"""

From "Bullard v. Blue Hills Bank" ==> """
Bullard v. Blue Hills Bank, 575 U.S. 496 (2015), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the court held that an order from a bankruptcy court denying a debtor's confirmation of a proposed repayment cannot be immediately appealed, as it is not a final order. The decision, in favor of Blue Hills Bank, was unanimous.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2015 in United States case law
"""

From "Bullcoming v. New Mexico" ==> """
Bullcoming v. New Mexico, 564 U.S. 647 (2011), is a significant 6th Amendment Confrontation Clause case decided by the United States Supreme Court. On June 23, 2011, the Supreme Court considered the issue whether a defendant's Confrontation Clause rights extend to a non-testifying laboratory analyst whose supervisor testifies as to test results that the analyst transcribed from a machine. In a five to four decision authored by Justice Ginsburg, the Court held that the second surrogate analyst could not testify about the testimonial statements in the forensic report of the certifying analyst under the Confrontation Clause..
The case follows a line of decisions, including Crawford v. Washington (2004) and Davis v. Washington (2006), that altered the Court's interpretation of the Confrontation Clause guarantee and clarified its application only to "testimonial" statements.
Background
Donald Bullcoming of New Mexico was arrested on suspicion of driving while intoxicated. He was sentenced to two years in prison for a felony aggravated DWI/DUI. At the trial, the State used a blood alcohol test that was taken under a search warrant after Bullcoming refused to take a breathalyzer test. At his trial, the prosecution presented a lab report indicating that his blood-alcohol levels were elevated. But rather than calling the technician who had prepared and signed the report, prosecutors called a colleague who had not observed or reviewed the analysis.
Issue
Whether the Confrontation Clause permits the prosecution to introduce testimonial statements of a nontestifying forensic analyst through the in-court testimony of a supervisor or other person who did not perform or observe the laboratory analysis described in the statements.
Procedural history
On February 12, 2010, the New Mexico Supreme Court issued its written decision, cited at 147 N.M. 487, 226 P.3d 1.  On March 2, 2011, the oral argument before the United States Supreme Court took place, during which Jeffrey L. Fisher argued on behalf of the Petitioner and Gary King argued on behalf of the Respondent.  The United States Supreme Court issued its written decision on June 23, 2011.
Decision of the Supreme Court
In a 5 to 4 decision in favor of Bullcoming, Justice Ginsburg wrote the majority opinion for the Court. The US Supreme Court ruled that the Sixth Amendment gives a criminal defendant the right "to be confronted with the witnesses against him," and that "surrogate testimony" is not good enough.
See also
Melendez-Diaz v. Massachusetts (2009)
References
Further reading
External links
 Bullcoming v. New Mexico Resource Page  Containing background information and links to key materials on the case.
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:Confrontation Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Legal history of New Mexico
"""

From "Bumper v. North Carolina" ==> """
Bumper v. North Carolina, 391 U.S. 543 (1968), was a U.S. Supreme Court case in which a search was struck down as illegal because the police falsely claimed they had a search warrant.. This was tantamount to telling the subject that she had no choice but to consent.https://olemiss.edu/depts/ncjrl/pdf/Law%20Enforcement%20Materials/Other%20Search%20and%20Seizure%20Issues%20Likely%20to%20Arise%20in%20Digital%20Child%20Porn%20Cases%20-%20Consent%20Searches.pdf  Justice Potter Stewart delivered the decision for the 7-2 majority.https://www.oyez.org/cases/1967/1016 
 References 
External links
Category:1968 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
"""

From "Bunting v. Oregon" ==> """
Bunting v. Oregon, 243 U.S. 426 (1917), is a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States upheld a ten-hour work day, which was accepted for both men and women,. but the state minimum-wage laws were not changed until 20 years later.
Future Supreme Court justice Felix Frankfurter, along with future Oregon Supreme Court justices George M. Brown and John O. Bailey, represented Oregon on the appeal. W. Lair Thompson and former Senator for Oregon Charles W. Fulton represented Bunting.
Background
A 1913 state law prescribed a ten-hour day for men and women and expanded the law regulating women's hours, which had been upheld in Muller v. Oregon. It also required businesses to pay time-and-a-half wages for overtime up to three hours a day. Oregon asserted that the law was an appropriate exercise of its police powers. Bunting failed to comply with the state's overtime regulations.
The question was whether the state could interfere with a citizen's right to form a contract, which is protected by the Fourteenth Amendment.
Decision
The decision of the Oregon Supreme Court was upheld. The state acted within the scope of its police powers and had the authority to regulate the health, the safety, and the welfare of workers in Oregon.
Justice McKenna dismissed Bunting's contention that the law did nothing to preserve the health of employees. It was also found that the law did not provide an unfair advantage to certain types of employers in the labor market since it regulated the hours of service for workers, not the wages that they earned. Under the Oregon law, workers and their employers were still free to implement a wage scheme agreeable to both.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 243
 References 
Sources
External links
Category:History of women's rights in the United States
Category:Legal history of Oregon
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:Working time
Category:1917 in United States case law
Category:History of women in Oregon
"""

From "Burch v. Louisiana" ==> """
Burch v. Louisiana, 441 U.S. 130 (1979), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court that invalidated a Louisiana statute allowing a conviction upon a nonunanimous verdict from a jury of six for a petty offense..   The statute allowed for conviction if only five jurors agreed, and this was held to be a violation of the Sixth Amendment.
Background
Burch was found guilty of showing obscene films by a nonunanimous six-member jury in the state of Louisiana. The court imposed a suspended prison sentence of two consecutive seven- month terms and fined him $1,000.
Question Before the Court
Does a conviction by a nonunanimous six-member jury in a state criminal trial for a nonpetty offense violate Burch's Sixth Amendment right to trial by jury as applied to the states through the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment?
Decision of the Court
Justice Rehnquist cited  Ballew v. Georgia,. noting that only two other states in the country allowed for a non-unanimous decision from a non-six person jury in a non-petty offense. This "near uniform judgment of the Nation" gave the Court a "useful guide" in determining constitutionally allowable in jury practices.
References
External links
Category:United States Sixth Amendment jury case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1979 in United States case law
"""

From "Burdick v. United States" ==> """
Burdick v. United States, 236 U.S. 79 (1915), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that:
 A pardoned person must introduce the pardon into court proceedings, otherwise the pardon must be disregarded by the court.
 To do that, the pardoned person must accept the pardon. If a pardon is rejected, it cannot be forced upon its subject.
A pardon is an act of grace, proceeding from the power entrusted with the execution of the laws, which exempts the individual on whom it is bestowed from the punishment the law inflicts for a crime he has committed. It is the private though official act of the executive magistrate, delivered to the individual for whose benefit it is intended ... A private deed, not communicated to him, whatever may be its character, whether a pardon or release, is totally unknown and cannot be acted on. (internal quotation marks omitted).
United States v. Wilson (1833) established that it is possible to reject a (conditional) pardon, even for a capital sentence. Burdick affirmed that the same principle extends to unconditional pardons.
 Background 
The New York Tribune had reported that a person with political connections was smuggling jewels into the United States in order to avoid paying duties. The Wilson administration knew that the leaked information had to have come from the Customs Service, and suspected that it had been obtained by bribery. A federal grand jury subpoenaed testimony from Burdick, the city editor, and from shipping news editor William L. Curtin. Burdick and Curtin both took the Fifth and refused to reveal the source of the information. In 1914, Woodrow Wilson issued a blanket pardon to the men in a maneuver to force them to testify, because the Fifth Amendment does not apply if the person is immune from prosecution. They refused to accept the pardon or testify. Burdick was fined $500 and jailed until he complied.
 Decision 
Justice Joseph McKenna delivered the opinion of the Court in favor of Burdick. The Court ruled Burdick was entitled to reject the pardon for a number of reasons, including the implicit admission of guilt and possibly objectionable terms contained in a conditional pardon. As Burdick was entitled to reject the pardon, he was also entitled to assert his right against self-incrimination under the Fifth Amendment.
Although the Supreme Court's opinion stated that a pardon carries "an imputation of guilt and acceptance of a confession of it," this was part of the Court's dictum for the case.John D. Feerick, Pardoning Power of Article II of the Constitution (continued), The , 47 N.Y. St. B.J. 42 (1975) Available at: http://ir.lawnet.fordham.edu/faculty_scholarship/380  Whether the acceptance of a pardon constitutes an admission of guilt by the recipient is disputed. In Lorance v. Commandant, USDB (2021) the 10th Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that "there is no confession and Lorance does not otherwise lose his right to petition for habeas corpus relief for his court-martial conviction and sentence. The case was remanded for further action not inconsistent with the court’s opinion.""Accepting a pardon is accepting guilt?" Available at https://www.court-martial-ucmj.com/amp/accepting-a-pardon-is-accepting-guilt/ (accessed 20 October 2022)
 Later use 
After President Gerald Ford left the White House in 1977, close friends said that the President privately justified his pardon of Richard Nixon by carrying in his wallet a portion of the text of the Burdick decision, which stated that a pardon carries an imputation of guilt and that acceptance carries a confession of guilt. Ford made reference to the Burdick decision in his post-pardon written statement furnished to the Judiciary Committee of the United States House of Representatives on October 17, 1974.Gerald R. Ford: "Statement and Responses to Questions From Members of the House Judiciary Committee Concerning the Pardon of Richard Nixon," October 17, 1974. Online by Gerhard Peters and John T. Woolley, The American Presidency Project. http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=4471 However, the reference related only to the portion of Burdick that supported the proposition that the Constitution does not limit the pardon power to cases of convicted offenders or even indicted offenders.236 U.S. 79
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 236
 References 
External links
Category:1915 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States clemency case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:Pardons
"""

From "Burford v. Sun Oil Co." ==> """
Burford v. Sun Oil Co., 319 U.S. 315 (1943), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court created a new doctrine of abstention.
Facts
The Railroad Commission of Texas granted defendant Burford an order which gave him a right to drill four oil wells on a small plot of land on the East Texas Oil Field.  Plaintiff Sun Oil Co. sued Burford in United States District Court for the Western District of Texas, asserting both federal question jurisdiction and diversity jurisdiction, and alleging that the Commission's order denied them Due Process of law under the Fourteenth Amendment.
The Commission was charged by Texas state law with the administration of oil and gas regulations, including production quotas for each field and well.  Quotas were set in conjunction with other oil- and gas-producing states.  Part of its duties was regulating the spacing of the individual oil wells.  Because of the complex geology of oil fields and multiple division of surface rights, one user's oil drilling activity can affect the production of others, which meant that both public and private interests were at stake.  Underground water and gas pressure needed to be monitored in order to maintain steady oil production and prevent waste.
Because the rule governing the spacing of wells over the oil field, known as “Rule 37”, generated a large amount of litigation among many competing landowners and potential drillers, the Texas Legislature had developed a special system of judicial review for such cases.  Commission orders could be appealed to the state district court in Travis County, Texas, and could then be reviewed by the Texas Court of Civil Appeals, and then to the Texas Supreme Court, which had final authority over questions of state law.
The district court of Travis County was given exclusive jurisdiction over appeals of Commission orders, allowing them to specialize in such matters and promoting cooperation between the court and the Commission.  There already existed conflicting statutory interpretations between the state and federal courts in this matter, so the district court chose to abstain in deference to the state and dismiss the case.  The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit reversed the District Court's dismissal.
Plurality opinion
Justice Black, writing for the plurality, reversed the judgment of the Fifth Circuit and upheld the District Court's dismissal of the matter.  The central issue to the plaintiff's claim was the “reasonableness” of the Commission's order according to state law, which Black agreed was a different standard than constitutional due process.  Black compared the situation in this case to that in Railroad Commission v. Pullman Co., arguing that this was a matter of interpretation of state law which needed to be handled authoritatively by the state court system, and that state court review was adequate, especially in light of the fact that questions of federal law could still be reviewed by the U.S. Supreme Court via writ of certiorari from the Texas Supreme Court.
Holding
Under the doctrine of Burford abstention, a federal court sitting in diversity jurisdiction may abstain from hearing the case where the state courts likely have greater expertise in a particularly complex and a unique area of state law which is of special significance to the state, where there is comprehensive state administrative/regulatory procedure, and where the federal issues cannot be decided without delving into state law.
Concurrence
Justice Douglas, concurring, implied that the Court's ruling did not go far enough.  He noted that
the opinion of the Court as I read it does not hold or even fairly imply that 'the enforcement of state rights created by state legislation and affecting state policies is limited to the state courts.' Any such holding would result in a drastic inroad on diversity jurisdiction-a limitation which I agree might be desirable but which Congress, not this Court, should make. The holding in these cases, however, goes to no such length.
319 U.S. at 335.
Here, he is essentially criticizing the reach of the federal courts’ diversity jurisdiction into matters of state law.  He pointed out that even though the Court's opinion views the Commission and the Texas court system “working partners” in administering the law, the courts are in reality sitting in judgment of the Commission's decisions.  This is a role which a U.S. District Court would be unwise to play, for it would interfere with the State's administration of its own laws and create serious issues of federalism and create conflicting legal precedent.
Dissent
Justice Frankfurter dissented, defending the concept of diversity jurisdiction as a method of providing an impartial forum for disputes between parties from different states, and criticizing the majority for denying the parties their day in federal court.  He noted that the question of whether to limit or abolish diversity jurisdiction is a question for Congress, and not the courts.  He distinguished Railroad Commission v. Pullman Co. on the grounds that in that case, the state law question could have displaced the federal issue entirely, and that the Texas Supreme Court had already defined the terms of the statute and the scope of judicial review thereunder.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 319
 External links 
Category:1943 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States abstention case law
Category:Diversity jurisdiction case law
Category:Sunoco LP
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:Railroad Commission of Texas
"""

From "Burger King Corp. v. Rudzewicz" ==> """
Burger King v. Rudzewicz, 471 U.S. 462 (1985), is a notable case in United States civil procedure that came before the Supreme Court of the United States addressing personal jurisdiction..
 Background 
John Rudzewicz was a citizen and resident of the state of Michigan and was the senior partner in a Detroit accounting firm. He was approached by Brian MacShara, the son of a business acquaintance, who suggested that they open a Burger King franchise together. The parties eventually reached an agreement whereby Rudzewicz provided the necessary capital and MacShara assumed the responsibility of managing the restaurant. The partners agreed to share profits equally.
Rudzewicz and MacShara applied jointly to Burger King's district office in Birmingham, Michigan in the fall of 1978. The application was forwarded to Burger King's office in Miami, Florida and the parties reached a preliminary agreement to take the franchise for an existing Burger King location in the Drayton Plains area of Waterford Charter Township, Michigan in February 1979. MacShara attended the prescribed management courses at Burger King University in Miami in order to learn to operate a Burger King franchise. The partners purchased $165,000 in restaurant equipment from Davmor Industries, a Burger King corporate division located in Miami.
Under the franchise agreement, Rudzewicz and MacShara were to remit their franchise fees and royalties to Burger King's Florida headquarters. Due to an economic downturn, the defendants were unable to make their monthly payments to Burger King, prompting the Florida-based corporation to file a lawsuit in Florida for breach of contract and infringement of Burger King's trademarks and service marks through the defendants' unauthorized operation as a Burger King restaurant after the defendants received notice to vacate the premises.
 Burger King's lawsuit 
Burger King brought a diversity action pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1332(a). against the defendants in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Florida in May 1981. Burger King also invoked the Court's original jurisdiction over disputes arising under federal trademark law pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1338(a). The District Court held that Florida had jurisdiction because of a statute that allowed the state to extend jurisdiction to anyone breaching a contract within the state.  The United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit reversed the  court's decision, finding that even though the defendants had minimum contacts with Florida, to exercise jurisdiction over the defendants would be fundamentally unfair and thus violate the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Burger King then appealed to the Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court concluded that the defendants purposefully availed themselves of the protections of the forum state (Florida) and were, therefore, subject to jurisdiction there. The Court reasoned that the defendants had a "substantial and continuing" relationship with Burger King in Florida and that due process would not be violated because the defendants should have reasonably anticipated being summoned into court in Florida for breach of contract.
Justice Brennan's general "Reasonableness" or "Fairness" test was evolved into Justice O'Connor's five-factor test of reasonableness announced two years later in Asahi Metal Industry Co. v. Superior Court, 480 U.S. 102 (1987).
 Dissent 
Justice Stevens dissented in an opinion joined by Justice White. Stevens observed that Rudzewicz had never been to Florida and had no business established in Florida. In Stevens' view, Rudzewicz could not have anticipated being summoned into court in Florida, and it violated the due process clause to require a small businessman in Michigan to defend himself against litigation in Florida.
See also
 Burger King Corporation v Hungry Jack's
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 471
References
External links
 Burger King Corp. v. Rudzewicz Case Brief available at Lawnix.com
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States personal jurisdiction case law
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:Burger King
Category:Legal history of Michigan
Category:Waterford Township, Michigan
Category:Restaurants in Michigan
"""

From "Burgess v. United States" ==> """
Burgess v. United States, 553 U.S. 124 (2008), was a United States Supreme Court case concerning the interpretation of the words "federal drug offense" in the Controlled Substances Act..
Background
Keith Lavon Burgess was convicted in a South Carolina state court for cocaine possession.Burgess, 553 U.S. at 127 (citing S. C. Code Ann. § 44–53–370(c) and (d)(1) (2002 and Supp. 2007)). Although the maximum sentence under state law was two years, South Carolina classified the offense as a misdemeanor, rather than a felony.Burgess, 553 U.S. at 127 (citing § 44–53–370(d)(1)). At a later proceeding, Burgess pleaded guilty for conspiracy to possess with intent to distribute 50 grams or more of cocaine in Federal Court.Burgess, 553 U.S. at 127. At his sentencing, the judge applied to Burgess the "prior conviction" statute, which required a minimum twenty-year sentence for anyone with a prior "felony drug conviction."Burgess, 553 U.S. at 128 ("The court granted the motion and sentenced Burgess to 156 months' imprisonment followed by ten years' supervised release."). In Burgess' appeal to the Court he maintained that since South Carolina considered his first offense a misdemeanor, the "prior felony drug conviction" did not apply.Burgess, 553 U.S. at 128.
Opinion of the Court
In a unanimous opinion written by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, the Supreme Court rejected Burgess' appeal, holding that "felony" refers to any offense that is punishable for more than a year even if another jurisdiction classifies the offense as a misdemeanor.Burgess, 553 U.S. at 134, 136.
See also
 Lopez v. Gonzales: state felony conviction that would be a federal misdemeanor
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2008 in United States case law
Category:United States controlled substances case law
"""

From "Burks v. United States" ==> """
Burks v. United States, 437 U.S. 1 (1978), is a United States Supreme Court decision.  that clarified both the scope of the protection against double jeopardy provided by the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution and the limits of an appellate court's discretion to fashion a remedy under section 2106 of Title 28 to the United States Code.. It established the constitutional rule that where an appellate court reverses a criminal conviction on the ground that the prosecution failed to present sufficient evidence, the failure of a plaintiff or prosecutor to present enough convincing evidence to support their case. to prove the defendant's guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, the Double Jeopardy Clause shields the defendant from a second prosecution for the same offense. Notwithstanding the power that appellate courts have under section 2106 to "remand the cause and direct the entry of such appropriate judgment, decree, or order, or require such further proceedings to be had as may be just under the circumstances," a court that reverses a conviction for insufficiency of the evidence may not allow the lower court a choice on remand between acquitting the defendant and ordering a new trial. The "only 'just' remedy" in this situation, the Court held, is to order an acquittal.
 Facts and Procedural History 
David Wayne Burks, the petitioner in this case, pled not guilty "by reason of insanity" to a charge of armed bank robbery under 18 U.S.C. § 2113(d)..Brief for the Petitioner, Burks v. United States, 1997 WL 189177, at *3 (1977).
To support this insanity defense at his jury trial in the Middle District of Tennessee, Burks called as expert witnesses two psychiatrists and a psychologist. Although they diagnosed him differently, they all testified that the defendant "suffered from a mental illness at the time of the robbery, which rendered him substantially incapable of conforming his conduct to the requirements of the law."
To rebut Burks' evidence of insanity, the federal prosecutor called two expert witnesses and lay witnesses. One of the expert witnesses opined that Burks had a "character disorder," but was not mentally ill. Although the other expert agreed that a character disorder afflicted Burks, he "gave a rather ambiguous answer to the question of whether Burks had been capable of conforming his conduct to the law." The Government's lay witnesses, including police officers and a cab driver whose taxi was taken at gun point by Burks,  testified that Burks "seemed sane" at the time.Burks, 437 U.S. at 3. Another lay witness, Burks' work supervisor, testified that Burks had once told him "a bizarre story of a room with cameras all around '. . . and blowing somebody's brains out and having a picture of it.'"
After each side presented its case, the defendant moved the court for a judgment of acquittal,See Fed. R. Crim. P. 29. arguing that the Government's evidence was insufficient to prove his guilt. The district court denied the motion and submitted the case to the jury, which found the defendant guilty. He received a twenty-year sentence. At that point, Burks moved for a new trial,See Fed. R. Crim. P. 33. renewing his insufficiency-of-the-evidence argument. Again, the district court denied his motion.
Burks appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit seeking a reversal of his conviction. He conceded that he had held up the bank, but maintained that he was insane when he did so and that the Government had failed to prove otherwise.Burks, 547 F.2d at 971. The Sixth Circuit agreed that the Government's evidence was insufficient to prove Burks' sanity (and, accordingly, his criminal responsibility) beyond a reasonable doubt. Having made this threshold determination, the Sixth Circuit reasoned that "[s]ince Burks made a motion for a new trial," it had "discretion in determining the course to direct on remand" under 28 U.S.C. § 2106. It, then, instructed the district court to choose between two alternatives on remand: either entering a directed verdict of acquittal or ordering a new trial.Burks, 437 U.S. at 4.
To guide the lower court in this decision, the Sixth Circuit advised it to consider whether the Government could present additional evidence sufficient to justify a new trial, but also gave the court discretion to acquit the defendant if the equities—or fairness—demanded that result:
Both the Government and the defendant filed petitions for rehearingSee Fed. R. App. P. 40. in the Sixth Circuit, which were denied. The Supreme Court granted Burks' petition for a writ of certiorari, taking jurisdiction of the case under 28 U.S.C. § 1254(1)..Brief for the Petitioner, Burks v. United States, 1997 WL 189177, at *1-2 (1977).
 Relevant Constitutional Provision 
The Double Jeopardy Clause of the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides: "No person shall be . . . subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb . . . ."
Among other things, "[t]he Double Jeopardy Clause forbids a second trial for the purpose of affording the prosecution another opportunity to supply evidence which it failed to muster in the first proceeding."Burks, 437 U.S. at 11. The Clause does so to "protect an individual from being subjected to the hazards of trial and possible conviction more than once for an alleged offense.". An acquittal triggers this protection. As the Court recently explained: '[T]he law attaches particular significance to an acquittal,' United States v. Scott,. so a merits-related ruling concludes proceedings absolutely.Scott, 437 U.S. at 91. This is because '[t]o permit a second trial after an acquittal, however mistaken the acquittal may have been, would present an unacceptably high risk that the Government, with its vastly superior resources, might wear down the defendant so that ‘even though innocent he may be found guilty,’.Scott, 437 U.S. at 91 (quoting ). And retrial following an acquittal would upset a defendant's expectation of repose, for it would subject him to additional 'embarrassment, expense and ordeal' while 'compelling him to live in a continuing state of anxiety and insecurity.'"Green, 355 U.S. at 187.
 Court Decision 
 Question Presented 
In Burks, the Court answered the question "whether a defendant may be tried a second time when a reviewing court has determined that in a prior trial the evidence was insufficient to sustain the verdict of the jury."Burks, 437 U.S. at 5.
 The Short Answer 
A defendant, like Burks, may not be tried a second time when an appellate court reverses his conviction because the evidence at trial was insufficient to support a guilty verdict against the defendant. That court must order an acquittal. But a retrial is permissible where the reviewing court reverses a conviction for trial error.437 U.S. at 14-16.
 The Long Answer 
 Petitioner's Argument 
Beginning with the settled proposition that a second trial would violate the Double Jeopardy Clause if the trial court found that the prosecution's evidence was insufficient to sustain the jury's guilty verdict, Burks contended that the same constitutional protection should apply when the reviewing court is the court to make that determination.Burks, 437 U.S. at 5-6. The Supreme Court ultimately agreed with Burks, but it had to address and overrule contrary precedent to do so.
 Precedent 
"The Court's holdings in this area. . . . can hardly be characterized as models of consistency and clarity."—Burks v. United States, 437 U.S. 1, 9 (1978) (Burger, C.J.). In 1950, the Supreme Court rejected an argument, essentially the same as Burks', in Bryan v. United States. There, the Court held that the Double Jeopardy Clause posed no bar to retrying a defendant, who, like Burks, had unsuccessfully moved the trial court for a judgment of acquittal and, alternatively, a new trial, but whose conviction was reversed for insufficiency of the evidence by an appellate court.
But five years later, in Sapir v. United States,. the Supreme Court issued a single-paragraph per curiam opinion, vacating a Court of Appeals' order that directed a new trial under similar factual circumstances as in Bryan. The Court did not explain itself. But Justice Douglas wrote a concurring opinion, in which he distinguished Sapir from Bryan on the ground that Bryan had asked for a new trial and, therefore, had "open[ed] the whole record for such disposition as might be just."348 U.S. at 374.
Then, in Yates v. United States,, overruled by Burks v. United States, 437 U.S. 1 (1978). the Court invoked its power under 28 U.S.C. § 2106 to order new trials for some defendants and acquittals for others. "[U]nder that statute," the Court reasoned, there was "no doubt" that it was "justified in refusing to order acquittal even where the evidence might be deemed palpably insufficient, particularly since petitioners have asked in the alternative for a new trial as well as for acquittal."Yates, 354 U.S. at 328 (citing .
Finally, the Court had held in Forman v. United States, overruled by Burks v. United States, 437 U.S. 1 (1978). that a new trial following a reversal—no matter the ground—never constitutes double jeopardy: "It is elementary in our law that a person can be tried a second time for an offense when his prior conviction for that same offense has been set aside by his appeal."Forman, 361 U.S. at 425.
In Burks, the Court read the "Bryan-Forman line of decisions" to mean that "[a] defendant who requests a new trial as one avenue of relief may be required to stand trial again, even when his conviction was reversed due to failure of proof at the first trial."Burks, 437 U.S. at 10.
 Departing from Precedent  
The Court acknowledged that because Burks had appealed from the district court's denial of his motion for new trial, the Bryan-Forman line, if it were followed, allowed a new trial upon reversal. But the Court departed from that line, holding "it should make no difference that the reviewing court, rather than the trial court determined the evidence to be insufficient"—Double Jeopardy bars retrial in both cases.
 Reasoning 
The Court provided the following justifications for its rule and its rejection of precedent as well as of the Sixth Circuit's equitable remedy:
 compliance with the what the "Double Jeopardy Clause commands,"Burks, 437 U.S. at 12. because "where the Double Jeopardy Clause is applicable, its sweep is absolute," such that "[t]here are no 'equities' to be balanced," and the "constitutional policy" that the Clause declares is "not open to judicial examination";Burks, 437 U.S. at 11 n.6.
 Bryan's reliance on an 1896 case, United States v. Ball,. was misplaced because that case established merely that retrial after reversal for trial error does not violate the Double Jeopardy Clause;Burks, 437 U.S. at 12-14.
 avoidance of the "purely arbitrary distinction between those in petitioner's position and others who would enjoy the benefit of a correct decision by the [trial] court."Burks, 437 U.S. at 11. See also  (discussing the pre-Burks landscape: "A defendant who received a judgment of acquittal on appellate reversal for failure of proof was treated differently and worse than a defendant who obtained either a verdict or judgment of acquittal at the trial level, a purely arbitrary and inequitable distinction since both were entitled to an acquittal at the trial level. The former could be retried regardless of the remedy sought on appeal, while the latter was protected by the double jeopardy clause. The public interest in protecting society from those guilty of crimes was not served. Society had no more to fear from a defendant acquitted on appeal than one acquitted at trial, if the guilt of neither was proven beyond a reasonable doubt.").
The Court also explained why the Double Jeopardy Clause permits a second prosecution following reversal for trial error—such as flawed jury instructions, evidentiary rulings, or prosecutorial misconduct—but not for evidentiary insufficiency. Because trial errors "impl[y] nothing with respect to the guilt or innocence of the defendant,"Burks, 437 U.S. at 15. the Court reasoned, "[i]t would be a high price indeed for society to pay were every accused granted immunity from punishment because of any defect sufficient to constitute reversible error in the proceedings leading to conviction."Burks, 437 U.S. at 15 (quoting . Where trial error occurs, a defendant "has a strong interest in obtaining a fair readjudication of his guilt free from error, just as society maintains a valid concern for insuring that the guilty are punished."Burks, 437 U.S. at 15-16 (citing Note, Double Jeopardy: A New Trial After Appellate Reversal for Insufficient Evidence, 31 U. Chi. L. Rev 365, 370 (1964)). The same cannot be said after a reversal for insufficiency of the evidence, where the prosecution has already had "one fair opportunity to offer whatever proof it could assemble."Burks, 437 U.S. at 16. What is more, the Court observed, it is no small matter for a reviewing court to reverse a conviction on these grounds, as it "must sustain the verdict if there is substantial evidence, viewed in the light most favorable to the Government, to uphold the jury's decision."Burks, 437 U.S. at 17. The "prosecution's failure [will be] clear" in cases where a reviewing court holds otherwise.
The Court rejected the argument that a defendant, by asking for a new trial, waives his right against double jeopardy. It also disagreed with the Sixth Circuit and Yates that 28 U.S.C. § 2106 authorizes a reviewing court to order retrial in these circumstances. Because the Double Jeopardy Clause forbids retrial once such a court has ruled in favor of the defendant on the sufficiency issue, the only "just" remedy within the meaning of section 2106 is to order the lower court to acquit.
 Open Question Answered 
Soon after Burks came down, a case note about the decision observed that the Court's rule was ambiguous with respect to cases "where a trial error has affected the sufficiency of the evidence": One example of a trial error having an effect on the sufficiency of the evidence is the situation where the trial court has erroneously excluded evidence for the prosecution without which the rest of the evidence is legally insufficient to support the conviction. Another example is where the trial court has erroneously admitted evidence for the prosecution and on appeal it is determined first, that the evidence should not have been received by the trial court, and second, that without such evidence the prosecution's case is palpably insufficient and will not support the conviction. Although these issues were not addressed directly in Burks, the Court intimated that such infirmities are to be treated as trial errors. (citing Burks, 437 U.S. at 16). In Lockhart v. Nelson,488 U.S. 33 (1988). the Court answered this question. In an opinion by Chief Justice Rehnquist, it held that retrial is constitutionally permissible if a reviewing court sets aside a conviction because the lower court erroneously accepted prosecution evidence—in Nelson, a prior conviction of which the defendant had been pardoned, a fact not discovered until after trial—without which, there was insufficient proof to sustain the conviction.Lockhart, 488 U.S. at 41-42. Because a trial court considers all evidence admitted in deciding whether to grant a motion for acquittal, a reviewing court must do the same. Here, the sum of the evidence admitted at trial adequately supported the conviction.488 U.S. at 41-42. Justice Marshall, joined by Justice Brennan and Justice Blackmun, dissented, arguing, "If, in seeking to prove Nelson's four prior convictions, the State had offered documented evidence to prove three valid prior convictions and a blank piece of paper to prove a fourth, no one would doubt that [the government] had produced insufficient evidence and that the Double Jeopardy Clause barred retrial. There is no constitutionally significant difference between that hypothetical and this case."488 U.S. at 46. Lockhart nevertheless remains good law.
 Recent Supreme Court Decisions Citing or Examining Burks  
 In Nelson v. Colorado,. the Supreme Court held that due process prohibited Colorado from requiring individuals, whose convictions had been reversed or vacated, to prove their innocence before the state would reimburse them for costs, fees, and restitution payments ordered as part of their convictions. If a trial court set aside a guilty verdict for want of evidence, the state would have no claim to these individuals' property. Quoting Burks, the Court asserted "it should make no difference that the reviewing court, rather than the trial court determined the evidence to be insufficient."Nelson, 137 S. Ct. at 1256.
 In Bravo-Fernandez v. United States,. the Court cited Burks for the rule that "a court's evaluation of the evidence as insufficient to convict is equivalent to an acquittal and therefore bars a second prosecution for the same offense."137 S. Ct. at 364. This rule, it held, did not apply where the reviewing court vacated defendants' convictions because the lower court's jury instructions were legally erroneous. 
 In Evans v. Michigan,. the Supreme Court decided that where the trial court had granted the defendant's motion for a directed verdict of acquittal on the ground that the prosecution failed to prove a fact that it mistakenly believed to be an element of the offense, the Double Jeopardy Clause prohibited retrying the defendant. The Court found support for its conclusion in Burks, reading that case for the rule that the prohibition against double jeopardy applies if the "'bottom-line' question of criminal culpability" has been resolved against the prosecution.Evans, 568 U.S. at 324.
References
External links
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
"""

From "Burlington Industries, Inc. v. Ellerth" ==> """
Burlington Industries, Inc. v. Ellerth, 524 U.S. 742 (1998), is a landmark employment law case of the United States Supreme Court holding that employers are liable if supervisors create a hostile work environment for employees.. Ellerth also introduced a two-part affirmative defense allowing employers to avoid sex discrimination liability if they follow best practices. Ellerth is often considered alongside Faragher..
Facts
Kimberly Ellerth, a female employee at Burlington Industries, sued the company for sexual harassment on the part of her male supervisor. She alleged the vice president of sales made offensive remarks and unwanted overtures. She identified three episodes involving threats to deny tangible job benefits unless sexual favors were granted. She alleged a violation of title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The lower court dismissed her claim, noting that she had suffered no actual negative job consequences. The Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals reversed the lower court decision, but issued 8 separate opinions.
Burlington Industries defense
Ellerth is most referenced for its two-part affirmative defense for supervisor sexual harassment. In the case, a supervisor is defined by the ability to take a Tangible Employment Action. A Tangible Employment Action makes the company vicariously liable because the agency relationship was used to take the action. In alleged sex discrimination cases without a Tangible Employment Action, employers may prove that: 
 the employer exercised reasonable care to prevent and correct promptly any sexually harassing behavior, and that 
 the employee unreasonably failed to take advantage of any preventative or corrective opportunities provided by the employer or to avoid harm otherwise. 
Generally, having an effective sexual harassment policy that is used and works is sufficient to satisfy the first prong. Further cases (see EEOC v. Racine) examine whether an employee's failure to take advantage of the policy was unreasonable, but Ellerth holds that when the policy requires reporting to a harasser, it is not unreasonable to fail to do so. (Ellerth would have been required to report to her harasser.)
Judgment
In a 7–2 decision, the Supreme Court ruled in her favor. Justice Anthony Kennedy said that Congress had left it to the courts to determine the controlling principles. This majority ruling was summarized as follows:
Under Title VII, an employee who refuses the unwelcome and threatening sexual advances  of a supervisor, yet suffers no adverse, tangible job consequences, may recover against the employer without showing the employer is negligent or otherwise at fault for the supervisor's actions, but the employer may interpose an affirmative defense.
Justice Kennedy wrote the majority opinion, joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist, Justice Stevens, Justice O'Connor, Justice Souter, and Justice Breyer. Justice Ginsburg wrote a concurring opinion. 
Justice Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Scalia.
Notes
References
 Cullen-DuPont, Kathryn. Encyclopedia of Women's History in America (Infobase Publishing, 2009) pp 38-39
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States employment discrimination case law
Category:1998 in United States case law
Category:Sexual harassment in the United States
Category:Sexism
Category:Harassment case law
Category:Ethically disputed working conditions
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
"""

From "Burlington Northern & Santa Fe Railway Co. v. White" ==> """
Burlington Northern & Santa Fe (BNSF) Railway Co. v. White, 548 U.S. 53 (2006), is a US labor law case of the United States Supreme Court on sexual harassment and retaliatory discrimination. It was a landmark case for retaliation claims. It set a precedent for claims which could be considered retaliatory under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. In this case the standard for retaliation against a sexual harassment complainant was revised to include any adverse employment decision or treatment that would be likely to dissuade a "reasonable worker" from making or supporting a charge of discrimination.
Facts
In June 1997, Sheila White was the only woman working in the Maintenance of Way department at BNSF’s Tennessee Yard in Memphis. When she applied for the job at BNSF, her previous experience operating forklifts was noted by Marvin Brown, her interviewer at BNSF. White was hired as a "track laborer", a job that involves removing and replacing track components, transporting track material, cutting brush, and clearing litter and cargo spillage from the right-of-way. Soon after White arrived on the job, she was assigned to operate the forklift. While she also performed some of the other track laborer tasks, operating the forklift was White's primary responsibility.
In September 1997, White complained to BNSF officials that her immediate supervisor, Bill Joiner, had repeatedly told her that women should not be working in the Maintenance of Way department. Joiner, White said, had also made insulting and inappropriate remarks to her in front of her male colleagues. After an internal investigation, Burlington suspended Joiner for 10 days and ordered him to attend a sexual-harassment training session.
On September 26, Brown told White about Joiner's discipline. At the same time, he told White that he was removing her from forklift duty and assigning her to perform only standard track laborer tasks. Brown explained that the reassignment reflected co-worker's complaints that, in fairness, a "more senior man" should have the "less arduous and cleaner job" of forklift operator.
On October 10, White filed a complaint with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC). She claimed that the reassignment of her duties amounted to unlawful gender-based discrimination and retaliation for her having earlier complained about Joiner. In early December, White filed a second retaliation charge with the Commission, claiming that Brown had placed her under surveillance and was monitoring her daily activities. That charge was mailed to Brown on December 8.
A few days later, White and her immediate supervisor, Percy Sharkey, disagreed about which truck should transport White from one location to another. Some aspects of this conversation are disputed, however later that day Sharkey told Brown that White had been insubordinate. Brown immediately suspended White without pay. White invoked internal grievance procedures. Those procedures led Burlington to conclude that White had not been insubordinate. Burlington reinstated White to her position and awarded her back pay for the 37 days she was suspended. White filed an additional retaliation charge with the EEOC based on the suspension.
The anti-retaliation provision of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 forbids employer actions that "discriminate against" an employee (or job applicant) because he has "opposed" a practice that Title VII forbids or has "made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in" a Title VII "investigation, proceeding, or hearing". (a).
Judgment
First Instance
After exhausting administrative remedies, White filed suit in federal court, where a jury rejected her claims of sex discrimination but awarded her damages of $43,000 after finding that she had been retaliated against in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.http://www.ca6.uscourts.gov/opinions.pdf/04a0102p-06.pdf 
Sixth Circuit
On appeal, BNSF argued that White had not suffered "adverse employment action," and therefore could not bring the suit, because she had not been fired, demoted, denied a promotion, or denied wages. In November 2002, a panel of the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals initially agreed, where Judge James S. Gwin was joined by Judge Robert B. Krupansky, over the dissent of Judge Eric L. Clay.''White v. Burlington Northern & Santa Fe Ry. Co., 310 F. 3d 443 (2002)  The case was reheard en banc, however, and, in April 2004, the full court found for White, holding that the suspension without pay - even if back pay was eventually awarded - was an "adverse employment action," as was the change of responsibilities within the same job category.White v. Burlington N. & Santa Fe Ry. Co., 364 F.3d 789, 792 (6th Cir. 2004) (en banc).  The judges differed as to the standard they should apply in assessing such claims.364 F. 3d, at 795–800, with id., at 809 (Clay, J., concurring)
Supreme Court
One hour of oral arguments were heard on April 17, 2006, where Gregory G. Garre, the Deputy Solicitor General of the United States, appeared as a friend for the railroad.
On June 22, 2006, the Supreme Court delivered judgment unanimously in favor of Sheila White. It affirmed the decision of the Sixth Circuit, but for different reasons than those used by the lower court. Justice Stephen Breyer wrote for the majority.The Supreme Court, 2005 Term — Leading Cases, 120 Harv. L. Rev. 312 (2006).
Justice Alito concurred in the judgment, but disagreed with the majority's interpretation of the antiretaliation provision of Title VII, writing that "[t]he practical consequences of the test that the majority adopts strongly suggest that this test is not what Congress intended."
Significance
In this case the standard for retaliation against a sexual harassment complainant was revised to include any adverse employment decision or treatment that would be likely to dissuade a "reasonable worker" from making or supporting a charge of discrimination.
See also
US labor law
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 548
List of United States Supreme Court cases
Notes
External links
Text of the decision from Law Memo
decision organized by Lii
decision discussed in lay terms - everydaypsychology.com 
US Department of Labor whistleblower program reference to case
Discussion of effect of decision
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States employment discrimination case law
Category:Railway litigation in 2006
Category:BNSF Railway
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:Sexual harassment in the United States
Category:United States labor case law
Category:Harassment case law
Category:21st century in United States case law
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
"""

From "Burlington Northern Railroad Co. v. Woods" ==> """
Burlington Northern Railroad Co. v. Woods, 480 U.S. 1 (1987), was a United States Supreme Court case that applied the precedent of Hanna v. Plumer to a conflict between state and federal procedural rules for a federal court sitting in diversity.Yeazell, S.C. Civil Procedure, Seventh Edition. Aspen Publishers, New York, NY: 2008, p. 247
 Opinion of the Court 
The defendant in the original case stayed a damage judgment and went on to lose on appeal. According to an Alabama statute, the defendant would be required to pay a ten percent penalty. Under Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 38, the penalty was discretionary. Holding the federal rule to be on point and constitutional, the court applied federal rule and gave no penalty.Yeazell, p. 247
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Diversity jurisdiction case law
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:Burlington Northern Railroad
Category:Conflict of laws case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Burnap v. United States" ==> """
Burnap v. United States, 252 U.S. 512 (1920), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court concerning the Appointments Clause. 
 References 
 External links 
Category:1920 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
"""

From "Burnet v. Logan" ==> """
Burnet v. Logan, 283 U.S. 404 (1931), was a case before the United States Supreme Court.
 Facts 
Respondent, Mrs. Logan, prior to March 1913 and until March 11, 1916, owned shares in Andrews & Hitchcock Iron Company which in turn held 12% in the Mahoning Ore & Steel Company which mined iron ore.. Andrews & Hitchcock was later acquired by the Youngstown Sheet & Tube Company. Youngstown Sheet and Tube agreed to pay $2.2 million to the shareholders and 60 cents annually thereafter for each ton of ore apportioned to their shares.Burnet, 283 U.S. at 410. Respondent received this money over time, but claimed that no income tax should arise until she received the total amount of the sale of her stock equal to its value on March 1, 1913. The Commissioner of Internal Revenue ruled that the obligation to pay 60 cents per ton had a fair market value of almost $2 million, and "that this value should be treated as so much cash and the sale of the stock regarded as a closed transaction with no profit in 1916".Burnet, 283 U.S. at 411.  The Circuit Court of Appeals held that it was impossible to determine with certainty the fair market value of the agreement. Hence, respondent was entitled to the return of her capital before she could be charged with any taxable income.Burnet, 283 U.S. at 412. Since her capital had not been returned, there was no taxable income.
 Holding 
The U.S. Supreme Court agreed with the result reached by the Circuit Court of Appeals. When the profit of a transaction, if any, is actually realized, then taxpayer will be required to respond.Burnet, 283 U.S. at 413.  In order to determine whether there is a gain or loss, the initial capital at the beginning of the period in consideration must first be recovered.  As annual payments from extracted ore are paid, they can be apportioned as return of capital and later profit.  The liability for income tax can be fairly determined without resort to conjecture.  The initial promise has no ascertainable fair market value, so the transaction was not closed.  Mrs. Logan may never have recouped her initial investments from payments that were promised to her.  Based on the facts there is no way to fairly evaluate the promise of 60 cents a ton for an undisclosed portion of time. Therefore, income will only be included after all the basis has been recovered.
 Significance 
The case presents an example of an open transaction case. Philadelphia Park Amusement Co. v. United States  tells us that commonly, the value of what one receives will be the value of what one gives up in an exchange, or, more generally, in an arm's length transaction the fair market values of the transaction will be equal.  This, however is a situation where neither value is known, and so the valuation of the transaction is left open.  Even though this is still considered good law, it has fallen by the wayside and is rarely used, partially because it is often considered too generous because one is deemed as having no income while one is recovering basis.  Generally, the open transaction doctrine will only be used in the rare occurrence where the fair market value of a contingent payment obligation cannot be reasonably ascertained.S. Rep. No. 1000, 96th Cong., 2d Sess., reprinted in 1980-2 CB 494, 506-507.
See also
 Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer (1952)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 283
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1931 in United States case law
"""

From "Burnet v. Sanford & Brooks Co." ==> """
Burnet v. Sanford & Brooks Co., 282 U.S. 359 (1931), was a case heard before the United States Supreme Court dealing with accounting for purposes of federal income tax and the Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The case held that an annual accounting system is a practical necessity if the federal income tax is to produce revenue ascertainable and payable at regular intervals..
The case was decided at a time when losses could not be carried forward to future years. Since 2018, Section 172 of the Internal Revenue Code now generally allows a taxpayer to use net operating losses from previous years to deduct up to 80% of income for a given year.
References
External links
Category:United States Sixteenth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:1931 in United States case law
"""

From "Burnham v. Superior Court of California" ==> """
Burnham v. Superior Court of California, 495 U.S. 604 (1990), was a United States Supreme Court case addressing whether a state court may, consistent with the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, exercise personal jurisdiction over a non-resident of the state who is served with process while temporarily visiting the state. All nine justices unanimously agreed that this basis for personal jurisdiction—known as "transient jurisdiction"—is constitutionally permissible. However, the Court failed to produce a majority opinion, as the members were sharply divided on the reasons for the decision, reflecting two fundamentally different approaches to how due-process issues are to be analyzed. Justice Scalia wrote the lead opinion, joined in whole or part by three other Justices. Justice Brennan wrote an opinion joined by three other Justices. Justices White and Stevens wrote separate opinions.
Procedural and factual history
Dennis Burnham and Frances Cecilia (Perelman) Burnham, a married couple residing in New Jersey, agreed to divorce. Francie moved to California on July 14, 1987 with the couple's two children. Thereafter she persuaded Dennis to delay filing the divorce action in New Jersey until 18 months of separation would qualify for a "no fault" divorce. Then, several months later in early 1988 and prior to the 6-month residency requirement in California, Francie filed an action for divorce in California Superior Court. Upon learning of this action, Dennis attempted to promptly file and serve the New Jersey action instead of waiting 12 more months. Dennis was served with the summons when he travelled to California to handle an unrelated business matter and visit his children; service was made on a Sunday in the children's home. The following day, Francie was served with the New Jersey summons. Courts later held that the California action was "first in time."
Dennis filed a "special appearance" in the California court and moved to quash the service of process. He argued that he was a non-resident of California and had no connection with California sufficient to establish personal jurisdiction over him consistent with the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Initially, the Superior Court in Marin County, California granted Dennis's request to allow New Jersey to decide the personal in personam jurisdiction issues and submit the subject matter in rem jurisdiction issues to California. Then, on a motion to reconsider, citing Pennoyer v. Neff (1877), the Superior Court reversed and denied Dennis's request to quash service. Dennis then petitioned for a writ of mandate from the California Court of Appeal for the First Appellate District, which denied relief, as did the California Supreme Court. Dennis then sought review from the United States Supreme Court, which granted certiorari493 U.S. 807. to address the continued validity of transient jurisdiction in light of recent developments in the law of personal jurisdiction.Burnham v. Superior Court of Cal., County of Marin, Oyez Project..
Approximately 29 months after the U.S. Supreme Court's decision, the California Superior Court granted the divorce in October 1992.
Legal background
At common law, recognized by the Supreme Court in Pennoyer v. Neff (1877), a civil action was commenced by serving process on the defendant within the forum jurisdiction. Service on a defendant within the forum state created jurisdiction over the defendant regardless of whether the defendant was a resident of the state or was merely visiting it, and regardless of whether the subject-matter of the lawsuit had anything to do with the defendant's activities in the state.
Subsequently, in International Shoe Co. v. Washington (1946) and Shaffer v. Heitner (1977), the Supreme Court held that the Due Process Clause requires that a state's exercise of personal jurisdiction over a defendant must comport with "traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice," at least when the defendant was not served with process in the forum state. 
The issue in Burnham was whether, in light of International Shoe and Shaffer, service on a non-resident visiting a state remained a constitutionally-sufficient basis for the exercise of personal jurisdiction over the non-resident.
Judgment of the Court
The Court unanimously agreed that exercise of personal jurisdiction over Dennis Burnham based on "transient jurisdiction" through service of process was proper. However, the Justices could not agree on a rationale for the result, producing four separate opinions.
Justice Scalia's plurality opinion
Justice Scalia delivered the lead opinion in the case, joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist, Justice Kennedy, and in part by Justice White. Justice Scalia began by defining the question presented as "whether the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment denies California courts jurisdiction over a nonresident, who was personally served with process while temporarily in that State, in a suit unrelated to his activities in the State."
Justice Scalia took a historical approach to answering this question. In Justice Scalia's view, buttressed by citation of numerous cases, "[a]mong the most firmly established principles of personal jurisdiction in American tradition is that the courts of a State have jurisdiction over nonresidents who are physically present in the State." At common law, service of process on the defendant within the forum state was a prerequisite to exercising jurisdiction over the defendant in that state. In cases such as International Shoe Co. v. Washington and Shaffer v. Heitner, the Court had accepted that a non-resident served outside a state could still be subject to jurisdiction, but only where the defendant had "certain minimum contacts with it such that the maintenance of the suit does not offend 'traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice.'" However, these cases did not support the converse argument that the longstanding practice of obtaining jurisdiction over a defendant by serving process within the forum might now violate due process. "[A] a doctrine of personal jurisdiction that dates back to the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment and is still generally observed unquestionably meets th[e] standard" of due process.
Justice Brennan's opinion
Justice Brennan, in an opinion joined by Justices Marshall, Blackmun and O'Connor, concurred that California could constitutionally exercise jurisdiction over Dennis Burnham because he had been served with process while visiting the state. However, Justice Brennan rejected Justice Scalia's contention that the long history of allowing transient jurisdiction was sufficient to resolve the case. According to Justice Brennan, the Court's decision in Shaffer v. Heitner required that all methods of obtaining jurisdiction must be evaluated according to contemporary notions of due process.
Justice Brennan acknowledged that while not dispositive, the historical pedigree of transient jurisdiction was relevant in evaluating its constitutionality, because it provided potential defendants with notice that visiting a state could lead to their being subject to jurisdiction on a lawsuit in that state. While voluntarily present in a state, an individual avails himself of benefits provided by that state. Moreover, developments in modern communications and transportation make it much less burdensome than previously for a non-resident to defend himself or herself in another jurisdiction. Procedural devices such as the doctrine of forum non conveniens are available in a case where litigating in the forum would be genuinely burdensome. Justice Brennan concluded that "[f]or these reasons, as a rule the exercise of personal jurisdiction over a defendant based on his voluntary presence in the forum will satisfy the requirements of due process."
Justice White's opinion
In a short opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment, Justice White stated that "[t]he rule allowing jurisdiction to be obtained over a nonresident by personal service in the forum state, without more, has been and is so widely accepted throughout this country that I could not possibly strike it down, either on its face or as applied in this case, on the ground that it denies due process of law guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment." In Justice White's view, while the Supreme Court has authority to strike down even traditional accepted procedures that do not provide due process, there was no basis for doing so in this case. There was no showing that allowing service of process within a state to provide a basis for jurisdiction "is so arbitrary and lacking in common sense in so many instances that it should be held violative of Due Process in every case." To avoid endless litigation, Justice White concluded that challenges to the fairness of jurisdiction based on service in individual cases need not be entertained, "[a]t least ... where presence in the forum state is intentional, which would almost always be the fact."
Justice Stevens's opinion
In a separate opinion concurring in the judgment, Justice Stevens stated that he declined to join either Justice Scalia's or Justice Brennan's opinion because he was "concerned by [their] unnecessarily broad reach." Justice Stevens stated that the historical evidence cited by Justice Scalia, the considerations of fairness discussed by Justice Brennan, and the common sense of Justice White's concurrence, "all combine to demonstrate that this is, indeed, a very easy case." In a footnote, Justice Stevens laconically mused that "[p]erhaps the adage about hard cases making bad law should be revised to cover easy cases."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 495
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
External links
 Text of decision
Link to a summary of the case
Oral argument at the Oyez Project
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1990 in United States case law
Category:1990 in California
Category:Legal history of California
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Due Process Clause
Category:United States due process case law
Category:United States personal jurisdiction case law
"""

From "Burns v. Reed" ==> """
Burns v. Reed, 500 U.S. 478 (1991), was a United States Supreme Court case. A prosecutor was absolutely immune from damages based upon positions taken in a probable cause hearing for a search warrant. The same prosecutor was not held entitled to immunity for giving legal advice to the police about the legality of an investigative practice.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1991 in United States case law
"""

From "Burrage v. United States" ==> """
Burrage v. United States, 571 U.S. 204 (2014), was a United States Supreme Court case in which a unanimous Court held that a defendant cannot be liable for penalty enhancement under the penalty enhancement provision of the Controlled Substances Act unless such use is a but-for cause of the death or injury, at least when the use of a drug distributed by the defendant is not an independently sufficient cause of the victim's death or serious bodily injury., 134 S. Ct. 881 (2014).The Oyez Project: Burrage v. United States
Background
After an extended drug binge which began on April 14, 2010, involving marijuana, oxycodone (which he stole from a roommate), and heroin, Joshua Banka died on April 15. His wife found his body late that morning; they had purchased heroin together from Marcus Burrage in Story County, Iowa. When police searched their home and vehicle, they found syringes, 0.59 grams of heroin, alprazolam and clonazepam tablets, oxycodone pills, a bottle of hydrocodone, and other drugs.
Burrage pleaded not guilty to a superseding indictment alleging two counts of distributing heroin in violation of . Only one of those offenses, count 2, which alleged that Burrage unlawfully distributed heroin on April 14, 2010, and that "death...resulted from the use of th[at] substance"—thus subjecting Burrage to the 20 year mandatory minimum of , was at issue in the case.
Two medical experts testified at trial regarding the cause of Banka's death. One, a forensic toxicologist, determined that multiple drugs were present but could not say whether Banka would have lived if he had not taken the heroin, though he concluded that the drug was a factor in Banka's death. Another, an Iowa state medical examiner, similarly could not determine whether Banka would have lived had he not taken the heroin, but said that his death would have been much less likely.
Burrage moved for acquittal because Banka's death was not "because of" the heroin (there was no evidence that heroin was a but-for cause of death), but the motion was denied. The district court also declined giving Burrage's proposed jury instructions, including requiring the government to prove that heroin use "was the proximate cause of [Banka’s] death." Instead, the court instructed the jury to determine if "the heroin distributed by [Burrage] was a contributing cause of Joshua Banka's death." The jury convicted him and the court sentenced him to 20 years' imprisonment, consistent with the minimum sentence in the law. The Eighth Circuit affirmed Burrage's convictions.United States v. Burrage, 687 F. 3d 1015
The Court heard oral argument on November 12, 2013. Angela L. Campbell was appointed by the Court to argue for the petitioner, and Benjamin Horwich, assistant to the Solicitor General, argued for the United States.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Scalia wrote the opinion of the Court.
The Court held that the law considers causation as a hybrid between two constituent parts: actual cause, or cause-in-fact, and legal cause, which is also known as proximate cause. Because the cause-in-fact requirement was not met in this case, the Court did not rule on whether the crime of distribution of drugs causing death required a foreseeability or proximate cause requirement. Instead, the Court focused on the specific text found in , the federal law requiring heightened sentences for drug sales causing death or serious bodily injury. The language in that statute requires that the death “results from” the sale of illegal drugs. Because the deceased in this case was found with multiple drugs in his system, the heroin sold by the defendant could not be considered an independently sufficient cause of death.
Justice Ginsburg's Concurrence
Justice Ginsburg wrote an opinion concurring in the judgment, joined by Justice Sotomayor, objecting to an analogy made in the opinion that compared the "results from" language in drug statutes to similar language found in Title VII's anti-retaliation provision. Citing her dissent in University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center v. Nassar, , she argued that the Court's interpretation of similar language (in that case, "because of") lacked sensitivity to real-life concerns.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:Story County, Iowa
"""

From "Burroughs v. United States" ==> """
Burroughs v. United States, 290 U.S. 534 (1934), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld as constitutional the financial disclosure and reporting requirements of the Federal Corrupt Practices Act. The court also held that certain counts incorporated by description in other counts of an indictment may be considered in determining the adequacy of the original certain counts.
 Background 
The Federal Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) as amended in 1925 required political election committees to keep a detailed account of all contributions made to or by the committee. The treasurer of the committee must then file the accounts with the clerk of the United States House of Representatives.
James Cannon Jr. was the chairman, and Ada L. Burroughs the treasurer, of a political election committee from July 22, 1928, to March 16, 1929. During that time, the committee accepted contributions and made expenditures to influence the election of presidential and vice presidential electors in two states. They agreed that they would not file the requisite reports. Cannon, a powerful lobbyist, was investigated by Congress, and found in violation of the FCPA.
A grand jury returned an indictment with 11 counts against Burroughs and Cannon. The first eight counts alleged a substantive violation of the Act, but poorly described the crimes. A ninth count against Burroughs more specifically alleged a violation of the Act. A tenth count made a conspiracy charge against Cannon based on the ninth charge.
Cannon and Burroughs claimed that each count of the indictment failed to allege an offense under the FCPA, and that the FCPA violated Article II, Section 1 of the United States Constitution
The district court found all 11 counts of the indictment to be imperfect, rendering judgment on the constitutional violation moot. The court of appeals reversed, finding that the ninth count was specific enough to charge Burroughs with conspiracy. The incorporation by reference of the ninth count by the other counts was sufficient to perfect the remaining counts. It also ruled that the FCPA was not unconstitutional. The defendants appealed to the Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
 Majority 
Justice George Sutherland, writing for the majority, argued that the ninth charge contained enough information to uphold all 10 counts in the indictment. The majority did find that there was a failure in the first eight counts to charge an offense under the statute. However, the ninth count was described sufficiently. Since the first eight counts referenced the ninth count, that was enough to indict the two individuals.  Although the tenth count (conspiracy, against Cannon) was imperfect on its own, it, too, referenced the ninth count. That, the court held, was sufficient to save the tenth count.
Regarding the constitutionality of the Act, the court held that Congress has the power to pass legislation to protect the integrity of the federal election process.
While presidential electors are not officers or agents of the federal government (In re Green, 134 U.S. 377, 379), they exercise federal functions under, and discharge duties in virtue of authority conferred by, the Constitution of the United States. The President is vested with the executive power of the nation. The importance of his election and the vital character of its relationship to and effect upon the welfare and safety of the whole people cannot be too strongly stated. To say that Congress is without power to pass appropriate legislation to safeguard such an election from the improper use of money to influence the result is to deny to the nation in a vital particular the power of self protection. Congress, undoubtedly, possesses that power, as it possesses every other power essential to preserve the departments and institutions of the general government from impairment or destruction, whether threatened by force or by corruption.
 Dissent 
Justice James Clark McReynolds, however issued a stinging dissent regarding the court's ruling regarding the indictment. He argued that the court should have dismissed nine of the 10 counts.
Thus, we have allegations of what are called conspiracies to commit crimes which are nowhere adequately described. And I cannot think that such pleading should find toleration in any criminal action. An indictment ought to set out with fair certainty the charge to which the accused must respond. If crime has been committed, a fairly capable prosecuting officer can definitely describe it.
McReynolds argued that the disagreement existed between the district court and court of appeals justified a refusal to uphold the indictment.
Here, we have an example of what seems to me inordinate difficulty unnecessarily thrust upon the accused. An experienced trial judge was unable to find proper description of crime in any of the ten counts of the indictment. The Court of Appeals, with a judge of long service dissenting, ruled that every count was sufficient. This Court, being divided, now declares eight of the counts bad, but holds that two are sufficient. Surely, such contrariety of opinion concerning allegations of the indictment indicates plainly enough that no man should be required to go to trial under it.
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States elections case law
Category:Election campaign law
Category:1992 in United States case law
"""

From "Burrow-Giles Lithographic Co. v. Sarony" ==> """
Burrow-Giles Lithographic Co. v. Sarony, 111 U.S. 53 (1884), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States that upheld the power of Congress to extend copyright protection to photography..
Background of the case
thumb|left|150px|The subject of the lawsuit: Oscar Wilde No. 18 by Napoleon Sarony (1882)
Photographer Napoleon Sarony filed a copyright infringement suit against the Burrow-Giles Lithographic Company, which had marketed unauthorized lithographs of Sarony's photograph of writer Oscar Wilde, entitled "Oscar Wilde No. 18."  The company argued that photographs could not qualify as "writings" or as the production of an "author", in the language of the grant of power to Congress under article I, section 8, clause 8 of the United States Constitution to protect copyrights, and so § 4952 of the Copyright Act of 1865, which explicitly extended protection to photographs, was unconstitutional.  The federal trial court for the Southern District of New York, though expressing some doubt over the constitutionality of § 4952, declined to invalidate it and awarded a $610 judgment to Sarony (the equivalent of just over $16,000 in 2015).  The judgment was affirmed by the U.S. Circuit Court for the Southern District of New York, and subsequently by the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court's decision
Regarding the interpretation of "writings" in the Constitution, Justice Miller's unanimous opinion for the Supreme Court wrote that Congress has "properly declared these to include all forms of writing, printing, engraving, etching, &c., by which the ideas in the mind of the author are given visible expression."  The Court noted that "maps and charts" were among the subjects of the first Copyright Act of 1790, and that etchings and engravings were added when it was first amended in 1802.  The members of Congress that passed these first copyright acts were contemporaries of the Framers of the Constitution, and many of them attended the Constitutional Convention itself.  As such, their interpretation of the Constitution, Justice Miller wrote, "is of itself entitled to very great weight, and when it is remembered that the rights thus established have not been disputed during a period of nearly a century, it is almost conclusive."
Even if other visual works could be copyrighted, Burrow-Giles argued, photography was merely a mechanical process rather than an art, and could not embody an author's "idea".  The Court accepted that this may be true of "ordinary" photographs, but this was not in the case of Sarony's image of Wilde.  The trial court had found that Sarony had "by posing the said Oscar Wilde in front of the camera, selecting and arranging the costume, draperies, and other various accessories in said photograph, arranging the subject so as to present graceful outlines, arranging and disposing the light and shade, suggesting and evoking the desired expression, and from such disposition, arrangement, or representation, made entirely by the plaintiff, he produced the picture in suit."111 U.S. at 55, 60. This control that Sarony exercised over the subject matter, in the view of the Court, showed that he was the "author" of "an original work of art" and thus within the "class" of things for which the Constitution intended Congress to grant him exclusive rights under the copyright laws.111 U.S. at 60.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 111
References
External links
The Sarony Photographs of Oscar Wilde (complete)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:1884 in United States case law
Category:Oscar Wilde
Category:19th-century photography
"""

From "Burson v. Freeman" ==> """
Burson v. Freeman, 504 U.S. 191 (1992), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a Tennessee law that restricted from political campaigning within 100 feet of a polling place did not violate the First Amendment.
Background
Prior to the late 19th century, polling places lacked the privacy and decorum of more contemporary times, with campaigners allowed to directly speak to voters as they were submitting their ballots on election day, leading to voter intimidation. From the end of the 19th century into the 20th century, many states passed laws that restricted the type of activities that could be conducted around polling places.  One typical law common that was enacted by forty-seven states established a proximity around the polling place where political campaigning and electioneering were banned. Tennessee was one such state, which by Tennessee Code §§ 2-7-111(b) preventing campaigning - through verbal speech, signs, pamphlets, or other materials - within  of a polling place.
In the lead-up to the 1987 election, Mary Freeman was the treasurer for the campaign for a candidate for the Metropolitan Council of Nashville and Davidson County. She filed a suit within the Tennessee Chancery Courts to seek an injunction to permanently block enforcement of TCA §§ 2-7-111(b), arguing it was unconstitutional for violating the free speech rights by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution as well as the Constitution of Tennessee. The Chancery judge ruled to dismiss the complaint, finding that the statute did not violate either federal or state law, as it served a compelling state interest to avoid voter intimidation. The case was appealed to the Tennessee Supreme Court, which ruled 4-1 to overturn the lower court decision, and ruled the statute unconstitutional. The Tennessee Supreme Court ruled that while the state did have a compelling interest to prevent voter intimidation within the polling place, it did not a similar case for the 100-ft space around the polling place; if the state wished to prevent voter intimidation, they could enforce this as the entrances of the polling place, the court argued. Further, the court believed that as long as the polling place was free of political campaigning, voters would not be deterred by last-minute campaigning before they entered the polling place.
Supreme Court
State Attorney General Charles Burson petitioned the United States Supreme Court for writ of certiorari, asking the question if the Tennessee 100-ft radius statute violated the First Amendment. The Court granted to hear the case, with oral arguments hear on October 8, 1991. The case was heard before Justice Clarence Thomas was formally appointed to the Supreme Court, and he did not participate in the subsequent decisions.
The Court issued its decision on May 26, 1992, ruling in a 5-3 vote, that the Tennessee 100-ft statute did not violate the First Amendment, reversing the lower court's judgement. The majority opinion was written by Justice Harry Blackmun, and joined by Justices William Rehnquist, Byron White and Anthony Kennedy. Blackmun wrote in his opinion that "We simply do not view the question whether the 100-foot boundary line could be somewhat tighter as a question of constitutional dimension...The state of Tennessee has decided that these last 15 seconds before its citizens enter the polling place should be their own, as free from interference as possible. We do not find that this is an unconstitutional choice." Justice Antonin Scalia also concurred in a separate decision, though argued that Tennessee would not need a compelling reason to issue a "viewpoint-neutral" restriction on free speech.
Justice John Paul Stevens wrote the dissent, joined by Justices Sandra Day O'Connor and David H. Souter. Stevens believed that the state had not shown a compelling reason to restrict free speech in the 100-ft radius.
 Impact 
The Court's decision in Burson would later be referenced in a 2018 Supreme Court case, Minnesota Voters Alliance v. Mansky (Docket 16-1435). In Minnesota Voters Alliance (MVA), the Court was presented with a challenge to a Minnesota law that restricted voters from wearing items of clothing with "political" messages. The law was challenged as unconstitutionally violating free speech rights. The lower courts had used the Court's decision in Burson to assert the Minnesota law was similarly valid. The Court instead ruled 7-2 that unlike Burson, which set narrow bounds on what the state could restrict around polling places (specifically, political campaigning speech), the Minnesota laws was too vague on what was allowed or not, and reversed the decision of lower courts.
 References 
External links
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States First Amendment case law
Category:United States elections case law
"""

From "Burt v. Titlow" ==> """
Burt v. Titlow, 571 U.S. 12 (2013), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that when a state court makes a factual determination the federal courts must defer to its judgment so long as it is reasonable..
Background
Vonlee Titlow and Billie Rogers were arrested for the murder of Rogers' husband (Titlow's uncle). Titlow poured vodka down her uncle's throat while her aunt smothered him with a pillow. Rogers then paid her niece $100,000 for assistance and the promise to remain quiet. Even though Titlow did not actually participate in the murder of her uncle, she could be found guilty of murder through the felony murder rule.
The attorney for Titlow explained that the prosecution had the evidence to convict her for murder in the first degree. The attorney obtained a plea bargain for manslaughter in exchange for her testimony against her aunt and the Michigan trial court approved the plea bargain.
While Titlow was in custody waiting to testify against Rogers, a sheriff's deputy advised her not to plead guilty if she did not believe that she was guilty. Not understanding the felony murder rule, she then obtained a new attorney, Fred Toca. Through Toca she demanded a lower sentence (three to seven as opposed to seven to 15). The prosecutor declined the offer and Titlow withdrew her plea in open court. Without Titlow's testimony, Billie Rogers was acquitted and later died.
Trial
After her plea withdrawal, Titlow was placed on trial for murder. Her lawyer, however, did no investigation in the case before representing her in trial nor did he contact her previous lawyer. In addition as a retainer fee he obtained some legal rights to Titlow's biography, creating a conflict of interest.
During her trial, Titlow testified that she did not harm her uncle in any way and tried to prevent her aunt from harming him. However, Titlow had made out-of-court statements that plainly described her participation in her uncle's death. The jury convicted her of murder in the second degree sentencing her to 20 to 40 years in prison.
State appeal
Removing Toca as counsel Titlow appealed to the Michigan Court of Appeals. She argued that Toca had advised her to withdraw her plea without doing any research on her case therefore providing her with ineffective counsel. The Appeals Court rejected her argument, stating that her withdrawal of the plea bargain started with her conversation with the sheriff's deputy, not Toca. The Court stated "[w]hen a defendant proclaims…innocence…, it is not objectively unreasonable to recommend that the defendant refrain from pleading guilty-no matter how 'good' the deal may appear".
Titlow filed a motion under The Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act, requesting a review by federal court.
District Court
The District Court rejected Titlow's argument and the Michigan Courts decision was "completely reasonable". It made the point that "counsel could not be ineffective by trying to negotiate a better plea agreement…". Titlow appealed.
Appeals Court
The Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit reversed the District Court's ruling. It found in the record that Titlow's decision to withdraw her offer was based on the fact that the offer was much higher than Michigan's guidelines for second-degree murder. The record also shows that there is no indication that Toca informed his client of the consequences of withdrawing her plea. Therefore, she was rendered ineffective counsel because Titlow lost the benefit of the plea bargain.
The Circuit Court remanded the case, ordering that the prosecution reoffer the original plea bargain and that the state court should find some remedy for the violation of her right to ineffectual counsel.
Decision of the court
The court held unanimously, with Justice Alito writing for the majority. The Court reversed the Sixth Circuit arguing that the Appellate Court had not applied the doubly differential standard. Under this standard federal courts must give credit to the State Court's factual findings so long as it was reasonable.
Alito makes the point that where there is a record the defendant adamantly asserted her innocence; therefore on its face the plea withdrawal was reasonable. In addition, there is no factual record on how long Toca took to prepare for Titlow's case, therefore the court cannot jump to the conclusion that just because there is an absence of record counsel was ineffective.
Justice Sotomayor concurred with the entire judgment expanding on Alito's opinion stating that regardless of a defendant's assertion of innocence counsel must make its own conclusion and offer clear advice of outcomes. Only then may counsel bow to the wishes of the defendant.
Justice Ginsburg did not join with the majority only concurring the outcome of the case. She found the State's argument that Toca had acted reasonably "dubious". However, because Titlow's aunt was later acquitted then died, there was no ability for the State to reoffer her original plea.
References
External links
http://www.scotusblog.com/2013/10/a-messy-follow-up-to-lafler-and-frye-can-fun-facts-produce-good-law/
http://www.scotusblog.com/2013/11/opinion-analysis-court-says-more-about-federal-habeas-review-than-ineffective-assistance-in-plea-bargaining/
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Legal history of Michigan
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Burton v. United States" ==> """
thumb|right|Sen. Burton
Burton v. United States is the name of two appeals to the Supreme Court of the United States by Senator Joseph R. Burton (R-KS) following his conviction for compensated representation of a party in a proceeding in which the United States was interested: Burton v. United States, 196 U.S. 283 (1905)Burton v. United States (Burton I), 196 U.S. 283 (1905). and Burton v. United States, 202 U.S. 344 (1906).Burton v. United States (Burton II), 202 U.S. 344 (1906). Burton was convicted of acting as counsel to Rialto Grain and Securities Company in the United States Postmaster General's investigation of Rialto for mail fraud.
On Burton's first appeal, the Supreme Court reversed his convictions because venue and vicinage could not be proper in the Eastern District of Missouri on the sole ground that Burton's bank sent the check to St. Louis after he cashed it. Further, the Court cited the prejudicial refusal of jury instructions. After Burton was retried and convicted, the Court affirmed, inter alia, on the ground that the agreement between Burton and Rialto had occurred in St. Louis.
Burton was the first defendant convicted under § 1782 of the Revised Statutes, 40 years after its 1864 enactment. Burton and his supporters argued that he was selectively prosecuted, on the orders of President Theodore Roosevelt, for political reasons. Burton also became the first member of the United States Senate to be convicted of public corruption, in fact the first member of the Senate to be convicted of any crime.United States Senate Historical Office, Expulsion and Censure. The next year, Senator John H. Mitchell (R-OR) was convicted under the same statute for his role in the Oregon land fraud scandal.Jerry A. O'Callaghan, Senator Mitchell and the Oregon Land Frauds, 1905, 21  255 (1952).
Background
thumb|right|Rialto was named for the historic financial center in Venice.
Rialto Co.'s matter
In 1872, Congress created the crime of mail fraud.Jed S. Rakoff, The Federal Mail Fraud Statute (Part I), 18  771 (1980). Rev. Stat. § 3929 authorized the United States Postmaster General, "upon evidence satisfactory to him" that mail fraud was being committed, to instruct the post master at the fraudster's local post office to return registered mail addressed to the fraudster to the sender with the word "Fraudulent" written or stamped on the envelope.Rev. Stat. § 3929. In 1895, this authority was extended to all mail.Act of Mar. 2, 1895, ch. 191, 26 Stat. 465; 28 Stat. 963, 964. Further, Rev. Stat. § 4041 authorized the Postmaster to also bar suspected fraudsters from cashing postal money orders.26 Stat. 465, 466 (codified at Rev. Stat. § 4041).
The Rialto Grain and Securities Company, whose principal place of business was in St. Louis, Missouri, was under investigation by the Postmaster for mail fraud.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 360–363. The Postmaster had received two complaints and forwarded them for investigation on November 7, 1902. State courts were also investigating complaints from investors against Rialto. Hugh C. Dennis, the President of Rialto, and other officers had been criminally indicted, but (at the time of Burton's indictment) none had been convicted. As of Burton's indictment, Dennis had been once acquitted in federal court and four indictments were pending against him in state courts. For a time, Rialto's offices had been closed due to a judicial attachment by its creditors.
Burton's representation
thumb|right|Burton deposited his checks at Riggs National Bank.
That same month—while the two were in Illinois, en route from St. Louis to Chicago—former state judge Thomas B. Harlan, the general counsel of Rialto, arranged to hire Senator Joseph R. Burton (R-KS), a lawyer, to appear before the Postmaster as counsel for Rialto in connection with these investigations for a monthly salary of $500.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 361–64, 382. When the general counsel returned to St. Louis on November 18, he communicated Burton's offer to Rialto and Rialto accepted.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 361–64, 382–83. Rialto notified Burton of its acceptance by telegram to him in Washington that same day.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 283.
Burton informed Rialto by mail that he had learned of the two complaints from the Postmaster, arranged for himself to be notified of any future complaints, and arranged to represent Rialto in a hearing before the Postmaster before any sanctions would issue. Burton continued to represent Rialto before the Postmaster, and draw his monthly salary, for five months.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 283–84. Burton's intervention was successful, and the Postmaster's investigation was ceased without the entry of a fraud order.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 363–64.
Rialto paid Burton by monthly checks for the first four months. Burton received the first check on November 22.Burton I, 196 U.S. at 285. Burton indorsed and deposited the checks at Riggs National Bank in Washington, D.C., which in turn sent the checks to Rialto's bank, the Commonwealth Trust Company in St. Louis, Missouri, for payment.Burton I, 196 U.S. at 296. The last $500 was paid in cash to Burton in person, at Rialto's office in St. Louis, on March 26, 1903, after which Burton's representation of Rialto terminated.Burton I, 196 U.S. at 283–84; Burton II, 202 U.S. at 364–65.
Indictment
A federal grand jury in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri was already investigating the Brooks Brokerage Company, with which Dennis, the President of Rialto, was associated. Witnesses against Burton at the grand jury included Chief Post Office Inspector William E. Cochran, Dennis, and W.B. Mehaney, the Vice President of Rialto. About two weeks before Burton's indictment, the grand jury came into possession of the checks from Rialto to Burton.
Burton was indicted on January 24, 1904, in the Eastern District of Missouri, on nine counts of violating Rev. Stat. § 1782.Senator Burton Indicted, , Jan. 24, 1904. Section 1782 (enacted 1864) provided, in relevant part:
No Senator . . . after his election and during his continuance in office . . . shall receive or agree to receive any compensation whatever, directly or indirectly, for any services rendered, or to be rendered, to any person, either by himself or another, in relation to any proceeding . . . controversy . . . or other matter or thing in which the United States is a party, or directly or indirectly interested, before any Department . . . whatever. Every person offending against this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be imprisoned not more than two years, and fined not more than ten thousand dollars, and shall, moreover, by conviction therefor, be rendered forever thereafter incapable of holding any office of honor, trust, or profit under the Government of the United States.13 Stat. 123, ch. 119 (codified at Rev. Stat. § 1782). The current version of this statute is codified at 18 U.S.C. § 203.
The first and second counts of the indictment pertained to the receipt of the final cash payment from Rialto with reference to two separate interests of the United States.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 378. The third count pertained to receipt of the final cash payment from Mahaney. The sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth counts of the indictment pertained to the receipt of the four check for the first four months.
Burton arguably could not have been arrested at the time of his indictment because Congress was in session. Article One provides that senators and representatives "shall in all Cases, except Treason, Felony and Breach of the Peace, be privileged from Arrest during their Attendance at the Session of their respective Houses, and in going to and returning from the same." art. I, § 6, cl. 1. But, Burton voluntarily surrendered. On January 24, Burton and his wife departed for St. Louis.Burton to Face Charges, , Jan. 24, 1904.
Trial and conviction
thumb|right|Assistant U.S. Attorney Horace Dyer prosecuted Burton at both trials.
Judge Elmer B. Adams, sitting as the United States Circuit Court for the Eastern District of Missouri, presided over Burton's trial. Former state judge Chester H. Krum appeared as Burton's attorney.  Assistant U.S. Attorney Horace Dyer acted as prosecutor.
In his opening statement, Krum argued that Burton had only agreed to act as general counsel and to allow his name to be placed in Rialto's literature and that the agreement explicitly provided that Burton would never represent Rialto before any federal agency.Senator Burton on Trial, , Mar. 23, 1904.
On March 23, the prosecution began its case in chief. Post Office Department employees identified the letters of complaint received against Rialto.Burton Wrote for Pay, , Mar. 23, 1904. Ernest H. Kastor, of a St. Louis advertising firm, testified that he introduced Burton to Dennis and Harlan in November 1902. Witnesses said that the agreement was as Krum described and that the pay was agreed as $2,500 in $500 installments. Dyer read into evidence the letter from Burton to Rialto.
The prosecution's case continued on March 24. Inspector Cochran testified that Burton had attempted to discuss the case with him the day his indictment was made public.Burton Needed $70,000, , Mar. 24, 1904. Cochran refused to discuss it. Reporter J.H. Aubere testified that he had interviewed Burton that day and that Burton had denied practicing before the Post Office. Hector McRea, the Controller of Rialto, testified to a meeting between Mahaney and Burton, where Burton's representation was ended because the matter before the Post Office had concluded. Inspector Cochran was recalled to state that his conversation with Burton took place before Aubere's interview. Further, Cochran testified that, on February 5, 1902, Burton had told him that he wished to represent Rialto before the Department for a fee, having been assured by other senators that such conduct was common and legal. Burton also told Cochran that he needed to repay a disputed debt of $70,000. Finally, Mahaney testified that, on the day he personally paid Burton $500, Burton advised Rialto to destroy its correspondence with him and that two such letters were destroyed. Thereafter, the prosecution rested.
The defense case commenced on March 25.Senator Burton Wanted to Build Up Practice, , Mar. 25, 1904. The third count of the indictment was quashed as duplicative with the first. Burton testified that he had accepted Rialto's employment due to personal financial reversals. Burton testified that his duties would include acting as a criminal defense attorney for Dennis, but would not include any activity in Washington. Burton testified that he received notice of his appointment from Harlan on November 20, 1902, and that he had only contacted the Post Office to notify them of his intent to defend Dennis in a criminal case. He explained that he only asked to be notified of complaints against Rialto so that he could terminate his association with them should any arise.
After the jury returned deadlocked 11-1, Judge Adams delivered an Allen charge. Soon afterwards, the jury returned a verdict that failed to address the third count in the indictment, so the Judge Allen ordered the jury to return to deliberations without reading the verdict. On March 28, 1904, after forty-one total hours of deliberation, the jury convicted Burton on five counts—counts one, two, six, eight, and nine—but acquitted on count three.Burton Is Guilty; Will Fight Verdict, , Mar. 28, 1904. Burton's convictions would have authorized a maximum sentence of 10 years imprisonment and a $50,000 fine.
Burton asked that the jury be polled, and each stated that the verdict was his own. Burton moved for a new trial. Judge Adams indicated that he would accept a supersedeas bond of $5,000, and Burton was not sentenced. Burton became the first defendant ever convicted under § 1782, more than 40 years after its enactment.
Burton had a right to appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit, but instead opted for a direct appeal to the Supreme Court. On July 2, Judge Adams certified Burton's direct appeal on the grounds that Burton was convicted of an "infamous offense."Gives J.R. Burton an Appeal, , July 2, 1904. Burton posted a $10,000 bond. On July 11, Justice Brewer allowed the direct appeal.Senator Burton's Appeal Granted by Brewer, , July 12, 1904.
Burton I (1905)
Before the Supreme Court, on November 30 and December 1, 1904, Burton was represented by (former judge) John Forrest Dillon and (future Solicitor General) Frederick William Lehmann at oral argument, with Harry Hubbard and W.H. Rossington also on the brief.Burton I, 196 U.S. at 287. Solicitor General Henry M. Hoyt represented the United States.
On January 16, 1905, the Court overturned Burton's convictions.
Sufficiency of the indictment and the evidence
Without any discussion of the merits, 5-4, the Court held that the indictment stated offenses under § 1782 and that the evidence was sufficient for the jury to have convicted Burton.Burton I, 196 U.S. at 295–96. Justices Harlan, Brown, McKenna, Holmes, and Day were in the majority; Chief Justice Fuller, and Justices Peckham, Brewer, and White, were in dissent.
Venue and vicinage
Article III provides that: "The Trial of all Crimes, except in Cases of Impeachment, shall be by Jury; and such Trial shall be held in the State where the said Crimes shall have been committed." art. III, § 2, cl. 2. The Vicinage Clause of the Sixth Amendment provides that: "In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and district wherein the crime shall have been committed, which district shall have been previously ascertained by law . . . ." amend. VI.
Burton argued that both constitutional provisions were violated because the crime had not occurred in the Eastern District of Missouri. Justice Peckham, writing for the entire Court except for Justice Harlan in dissent, reversed Burton's convictions on these grounds.Burton I, 196 U.S. at 296–304. The Court held that Burton's negotiation of the check in Washington, D.C. did not constitute conduct by Burton in St. Louis (the site of the drawee bank). In other words, whatever the Washington, D.C. bank did with the check afterwards, it did for itself, not as Burton's agent. "From the time of the delivery of the check by the defendant to the bank it became the owner of the check; it could have torn it up or thrown it in the fire or made any other use or disposition of it which it chose, and no right of defendant would have been infringed."Burton I, 196 U.S. at 297. Thus, the Court held that it was error for the trial judge to have submitted the question of the "understanding . . . between the defendant and the bank" to the jury.Burton I, 196 U.S. at 300. In support of this argument, the Court cited several of its own precedents concerning negotiable instrument law, as well as cases from the House of Lords and the courts of New York and Massachusetts.Burton I, 196 U.S. at 301–04.
In a single paragraph, the Court rejected the application of the continuing offense doctrine, which had been codified in Rev. Stat. § 731.Burton I, 196 U.S. at 304. "This is not a case of the commencement of a crime in one district and its completion in another so that under the statute the court in either district has jurisdiction. There was no beginning of the offense in Missouri. The payment of the money was in Washington, and there was no commencement of that offense when the officer of the Rialto Company sent the checks from St. Louis to defendant. The latter did not thereby begin an offense in Missouri."Burton I, 196 U.S. at 304 (citations omitted).
Justice Harlan dissented on this ground.Burton I, 196 U.S. at 308–10 (Harlan, J., dissenting). "As between the accused and his client," Harlan argued, "he was not, in any true sense, compensated for the services alleged to have been rendered in violation of the statute, until by payment of the checks by the St. Louis bank he was relieved of all liability to the Riggs National Bank arising from his indorsing the checks to it."Burton I, 196 U.S. at 309–10. Harlan concluded that the majority had "sacrificed substance to mere form," illustrating the Latin maxim "Qui haeret in litera haeret in cortice."Burton I, 196 U.S. at 310 (Harlan, J., dissenting).
Refused jury instructions
By the same 8-1 majority, the Court found a separate and independent ground for the reversal of Burton's convictions.Burton I, 196 U.S. at 304–08. Burton had requested certain jury instructions, which the trial judge had delivered. But, along with the requested instructions, the trial judge had stated that: "[These instructions were] asked by counsel for the defendant to give certain declarations here, and while I think they have, in the main, been covered by the charge, yet I will give them to you. . . . These are abstract propositions of law, which I give in connection with the charge, as perhaps more fully amplifying it. I am willing to give them, inasmuch as they are asked, and they contain general propositions of law."
After the jury returned deadlocked 11-1, the trial judge delivered an Allen charge.Burton I, 196 U.S. at 305. At this point, the judge refused Burton's request to instruct the jury that the earlier requested instructions stood on the same footing as the other instructions.Burton I, 196 U.S. at 305–06. The Court held that this was reversible error.Burton I, 196 U.S. at 306–07.
Harlan also dissented from this ground for reversal, arguing that Burton was not substantially prejudiced.
Further, the Court disapproved of the judge's having asked the jury for the proportions of their deadlock (even though he did not ask how many were for conviction and how many were for acquittal). In Brasfield v. United States (1926), citing Burton, the Court held that such was reversible error, regardless of whether the defendant objected in the trial court.Brasfield v. United States, 272 U.S. 448 (1926).
Retrial
thumb|right|Judge (and future Supreme Court Justice) Van Devanter presided over Burton's second trial.
Burton was reindicted, still in the circuit court Eastern District of Missouri, on April 13, 1905,Senator Burton Reindicted, , Apr. 13, 1905. and arraigned on June 4 before Judge John Henry Rogers, of the Western District of Arkansas, sitting by designation.Burton Again Arraigned, , June 4, 1905. The new indictment had eight counts.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 360.Senator Burton Convicted, , Nov. 30, 1905. The first, second, fourth, sixth, and eighth counts charged that Burton had agreed to receive compensation from Rialto. The third, fifth, and seventh counts charged that Burton had actually received compensation from Rialto. The counts different only in the interest of the United States which was alleged to have been involved in the matter. Counts four and five were dismissed before trial.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 361. Unlike the first indictment, the second alleged that Burton had received $500 in person in St. Louis. The first indictment alleged only compensated representation, the second indictment also alleged an agreement to do so.New Trial for Senator, , Sept. 12, 1905.
While the indictment was pending, Burton was robbed in Chicago and his wallet was recovered in a mail box by postal employees.Robbed Senator Burton, , May 13, 1905. Before Burton's second trial, the Department of Justice learned that Burton had also collected $14,000 for representing the Chickasaw before the Interior Department: $5,000 of which was paid directly to him, and $9,000 of which was paid to his brother Z.R. Burton.New Case Against Burton, , Aug. 23, 1905.
The trial date was originally set for October 3, and subpoenas to witnesses—many of whom resided in Washington, D.C.—issued on September 12.  Judge Willis Van Devanter (a future Supreme Court justice), of the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit presided over Burton's second trial.Burton Must Go to Jail Supreme Court Decides, , May 21, 1906. On November 20, Assistant U.S. Attorney Dyer gave the opening statement for the prosecution and Lehmann for the defense.Senator Burton on trial, , Nov. 20, 1905. As in the first trial, Lehmann argued that Burton's intent was to represent Dennis (now deceased) in a criminal case.
On November 21, the prosecution introduced the letters, telegrams, and checks into evidence.Burton Got $500 a Month, , Nov. 21, 1905. On November 22, Harland testified that Burton had stated: "I am not going to do anything inconsistent with my duty as a Senator."Destroyed Burton Letters, , Nov. 22, 1905. Mahaney testified to the in-person payment and the destruction of the letters at Burton's request on March 22, 1902. Inspector Cochran testified that Burton represented Rialto before him.
On November 26, 1905, after two hours of deliberation, the jury convicted Burton on the six remaining counts: counts one, two, three, six, seven, and eight.Senator Burton Convicted, , Nov. 27, 1905. Burton was sentenced on the sixth and seventh counts only (because some of the counts involved the same transactions). Burton was sentenced to six months imprisonment in a county jail and a $2,000 fine on the sixth count and six months imprisonment and a $500 fine on the seventh count. In addition, he was "rendered forever hereafter incapable of holding any office of honor, trust or profit under the Government of the United States."
Burton II (1906)
thumb|left|Dillon, the leader of Burton's appellate team
The second time before the Court, on April 3–4, 1906, Burton was again represented by Dillon and Lehmann, plus Bailey P. Waggener, again with Hubbard and Rossington on the brief, plus W. Knox Haynes and W.P. Hackney.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 345. All together, Burton was represented by a team of ten lawyers, led by Dillon.Senator's Above Courts, Burton's Brief Says, , Mar. 30, 1906. Waggener delivered the argument in chief, assisted by Lehmann. Assistant Attorney General (and future judge) Charles Henry Robb represented the United States.
On May 21, 1906, the Supreme Court upheld Burton's convictions. That same day, another of Burton's lawyers, former Senator John Mellen Thurston, filed a petition for rehearing, which operated as a 60-day continuance, and in effect stayed the matter much longer because the Court was set to adjourn until October.
Separation of powers
Article One provides: "Each House shall be the Judge of the Elections, Returns and Qualifications of its own Members . . . . Each House may . . . punish its Members for disorderly Behavior, and, with the Concurrence of two-thirds, expel a Member." art. I, § 5, cls. 1–2.
Burton argued that § 1782 was an unconstitutional violation of the separation of powers because the Senate's power to punish its members was exclusive. Burton's brief compared the ban on legislators practicing before executive agencies to a ban on the President lobbying legislators for legislation. The New York Times called this "one of the most interesting efforts to get a new meaning out of the Constitution that has appeared for some time." A later article noted that, "[t]he decision is especially interesting because of the large array of legal talent in the case and the ingenious argument made by Bailey Wagner [sic] of Topeka that the Senate is the judge of the qualifications of its own members . . . ."
The Court unanimously rejected this argument.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 365–70. The Court cited earlier laws prohibiting members of Congress from practicing before the United States Court of Claims and from entering into contracts with the United States.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 365–66 (citing Act of Mar. 3, 1863, ch. 92, 12 Stat. 765 (codified at Rev. Stat. § 1058) and Rev. Stat. § 3739). Further, the Court noted that "[t]he proper discharge of those duties does not require a Senator to appear before an executive Department in order to enforce his particular views, or the views of others, in respect of matters committed to that Department for determination."Burton II, 202 U.S. at 367.
Burton also argued that the provision rendering those convicted under § 1782 "incapable of holding any office of honor, trust or profit under the Government of the United States" unconstitutionally infringed on the Qualifications Clause. The Court dodged this question by holding that the provision would not bar a convicted defendant from serving in the Senate because Senators (at the time) were elected by the state legislatures.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 369–70.
Interests of the United States
Burton next argued that the indictment was insufficient because the Postmaster's decision to return mail addressed to suspected fraudsters back to senders and to bar suspected fraudsters from cashing money orders was not a "proceeding . . . controversy. . . or other matter or thing in which the United States is . . . directly or indirectly interested." The Court rejected this argument, 6-3.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 370–73. Although the Court admitted that the United States had no pecuniary interest in the proceeding, it argued:
The United States was the real party in interest on one side, while the Rialto Company was the real party in interest on the other side. If the Postmaster General did not represent the United States, whom did he represent? . . . [I]t is, we think, a mistake to say that the United States was not interested, directly or indirectly, in protecting its property, that is, its mails and postal facilities, against improper and illegal use . . . ."Burton II, 202 U.S. at 370–71 (citations omitted).
Justice Brewer, joined by Justices White and Peckham dissented on this point. They argued that the statute applied only to the pecuniary interests of the United States.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 390–400 (Brewer, J., dissenting). These justices were among the four (in addition to Chief Justice Fuller) who would have held the indictment insufficient in Burton I, presumably for this reason.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 390 (Brewer J., dissenting). The dissenters argued that the majority's interpretation would find the United States interested in any administrative proceeding, thus rendering the statutory words "before any Department, court martial, bureau, officer, or any civil, military, or naval commission whatever" to be mere surplussage.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 396–97 (Brewer, J., dissenting). Further, the dissent cited the Reconstruction Era legislative history pointing towards a narrower interpretation.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 398–99 (Brewer, J., dissenting).
Sufficiency of the evidence
Burton next argued that the evidence was insufficient to support his conviction. Reviewing the evidence, the Court rejected this argument.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 373–77.
Separate offenses of agreeing and receiving
Section 1782 provided that "No Senator . . . shall receive or agree to receive any compensation . . . ." Burton argued that he could not simultaneously be charged with separate offenses for agreeing to receive compensation and actually receiving compensation for the same transaction. The Court rejected this argument.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 377–78. The Court stated that Burton's interpretation "does violence to [the statute's] words," emphasizing the word "or."
Justice McKenna disagreed with this holding. Thus, he concurred only in the affirmance of the charges alleging receipt, not the charges alleging agreement.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 389–90 (McKenna, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).
Double jeopardy
Burton next argued that his prosecution violated the Double Jeopardy Clause. Specifically, Burton argued that his acquittal on the third count in the first trial barred his conviction on the third and seventh counts in the second trial.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 379–80. The Court rejected this argument.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 378–81. The Court held that the earlier and later counts did not describe the same offense because they named the payor as Mahaney and Rialto, respectively.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 379.
Venue and vicinage
Finally, Burton argued that the Eastern District of Missouri was an unconstitutional venue and vicinage (an argument that the Court had accepted in Burton I). This time, the Court rejected the argument.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 381–89. The Court held that the agreement had occurred in St. Louis (as the jury had been instructed that it was required to find) based on Rialto's acceptance in St. Louis, the telegram, and the letter.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 381–83. The Court bolstered this view by citation to its own and other precedents concerning offer and acceptance in contract law.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 384–86. The Court further cited its earlier precedents holding that the venue provision of Article III does not require the physical presence of the defendant in the forum state.Burton II, 202 U.S. at 386–89.
Aftermath
Burton remained a senator while each of his appeals were pending. Allegedly, his colleagues made it known that they would move to expel him if he appeared in the Senate. However, Burton did appear in the Senate after his conviction. On April 6, 1904, Burton appeared to push for appropriations for the acquisition of land in the Adirondacks and Catskills.Adirondacks for the Rich, , Apr. 6, 1904. On January 22, 1906, Burton appeared in the Senate chamber again, for 30 seconds, in order to be eligible for $1,000 in travel reimbursements from the federal government.Burton's Step Costs $1,000, , Jan. 22, 1906.
Burton's term was due to expire on March 4, 1907. After his conviction was finally affirmed, a resolution to expel Burton from the Senate was referred to the United States Senate Committee on Privileges and Elections on May 22, 1906. Burton resigned from office on June 4, 1906, before the Senate could act.United States Senate Historical Office, The Expulsion Case of Joseph R. Burton of Kansas (1906).
Burton served five months of his six-month sentence in the Iron County Jail in Ironton, Missouri. In March 1907, he returned to Abilene.
Role of President Roosevelt
thumb|right|Circuit Attorney Folk visited the White House prior to Burton's indictment.
Contemporary rumor held that Burton's indictment had been ordered by President Theodore Roosevelt. Although Joseph W. Folk, the Circuit Attorney for the City of St. Louis (and future Governor of Missouri), had recently visited with the President and Attorney General, the New York Times reported that "there was not a word in either of those interviews about the Burton case."
Burton himself alleged that Roosevelt had orchestrated his prosecution on March 23, 1907 speech in Abilene, Kansas after his release from prison.Rossevelt Plotted to Ruin Me—Burton, , Mar. 23, 1907. Burton pointed out that his was the first prosecution under § 1782 and that numerous other public officials before him had potentially violated it, under the interpretation that prevailed in the Supreme Court.
Burton and Roosevelt had a complicated history. Burton, as a leader at the 1900 Republican National Convention, was perhaps instrumental in Roosevelt's securing his party's nomination. Roosevelt's last appointment to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit (whose jurisdiction, at the time, included appeals from Kansas) had been William Cather Hook, a choice favored by Burton's political opponents: Senator Chester I. Long (R-KS) and Governor Willis J. Bailey (R-KS).Extraordinary Charge Against a Senator, , July 12, 1903. When the next vacancy opened on the Eighth Circuit, Burton and his allies favored the appointment of Charles Blood Smith. D.W. Mulvane was unsuccessful in pressing Smith's candidacy in a June 1903 meeting with Roosevelt.
Earlier that year, while accompanying Roosevelt on a  visit to Kansas, Burton told Roosevelt about his project to create a reproduction of Jerusalem at the time of Christ's birth for the St. Louis World's Fair. Roosevelt gave Burton a letter praising the exhibit, which Burton in turn published by facsimile in a magazine advertisement for the sale of stock in the exhibit. The White House received a letter from the magazine inquiring into the authenticity of the letter on the same day that Mulvane returned for a second meeting to press Smith's appointment. Roosevelt was enraged, demanded the return of the letter, and declared that "from now on Burton would be considered politically a Democratic Senator, as far as patronage is concerned." "The President's indignation knew no bounds. He had never been so grossly and humiliatingly deceived during his incumbency in office."
Burton was also in a "long standing feud" with Fourth Assistant Postmaster (and future senator) Joseph L. Bristow, whom Burton had lobbied Roosevelt (and his predecessor, William McKinley) to replace. Roosevelt refused to remove Bristow except for cause, and in any case refused to appoint one of Burton's friends to replace him.
Another issue with which Burton clashed with Roosevelt was reciprocity with Cuba. Burton cited this issue in his Abilene speech. In order to force concessions from Roosevelt, Burton had joined with Senators from beet sugar states. Although Burton publicly spoke against a treaty with Cuba, he repeatedly privately informed Roosevelt that he would support the ratification of the treaty. According to the New York Times, "[t]he history of Burton's manoeuvres at this time will never be fully told."
Notes
Further reading
 37–39 (2d ed. 2003). .
Peter W. Schroth, Corruption and Accountability of the Civil Service in the United States, 42  554 (2006).
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1905 in United States case law
Category:1906 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three venue case law
Category:Vicinage Clause case law
Category:Qualifications Clause case law
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
Category:United States federal public corruption crime case law
Category:Negotiable instrument law
Category:Mail and wire fraud case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Political history of Kansas
Category:Congressional scandals
"""

From "Burton v. Wilmington Parking Authority" ==> """
Burton v. Wilmington Parking Authority, 365 U.S. 715 (1961), was a United States Supreme Court case that decided that the Equal Protection Clause applies to private business that operates in a relationship to a government that is close to the point that it becomes a "state actor.". 
 Background 
The Wilmington Parking Authority (WPA) is a government agency established by the State of Delaware in 1951 to encourage parking access. Although a state agency, the WPA worked closely with the City of Wilmington, which would issue the bonds for initial construction. The first project of the new agency was to build the Midtown Parking Center, a garage on the downtown block in Wilmington between 8th, Orange, 9th, and Shipley Streets. The city's economic analysis showed that the bonds could be repaid only if the parking income was augmented with rental income from a strip of storefronts built along 9th Street. The Eagle Coffee Shoppe, Inc., was one of the tenants and signed a 20-year lease in 1957.
Shortly after it opened, seven black local Chrysler workers were arrested for trespass when they staged a sit-in at the counter and refused to leave until they were served in an unsuccessful attempt to desegregate the restaurant. Louis L. Redding, a local civil rights attorney who helped litigate Brown v. Board of Education, became involved in the dispute. Rather than appeal those arrests, he had City Councilman William H. Burton park at the garage and then go to the Eagle Coffee Shoppe, where he was refused service explicitly because he was an African American.
Prior litigation
A suit was filed in 1958 on Burton's behalf against the parking authority and the coffeehouse by claiming that the discrimination was sanctioned by the state by virtue of the landlord and the close relationship between the business and state agency. The lawsuit sought to force the Eagle Coffee Shoppe to integrate its dining room or to terminate its lease.
The Delaware Court of Chancery ruled that the government lease to a discriminating company was a violation of Burton's civil rights. However, the Delaware Supreme Court overruled that decision found that Eagle Coffee Shoppe's refusal to serve black clientele was legal because of a state law, 24 Del.C. § 1501, which allowed restaurants to refuse service if a person was disturbing other customers.
 Redding then appealed to the federal courts on behalf of Burton.
 Decision 
The majority opinion, written by Justice Tom Clark, looked closely at the specifics of the financing of the parking garage and the building plan's dependence on retail rental income to determine that the Eagle Coffee Shoppe was integral to the government purpose of building and financing a parking garage. Also, a close symbiosis was noted between retail businesses having nearby parking and a garage being close to shopping opportunities to the point that they were a "joint participant." Based on the close interplay between the government and the company, the court found that the exclusion of black customers was a violation even though no government agency was directly discriminating: "the exclusion of appellant under the circumstances shown to be present here was discriminatory state action in violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment."Burton, 365 U.S. at 717.
Justice Potter Stewart concurred with the verdict but felt that since no evidence had been submitted that Burton had bothered other customers, the Delaware law allowing restaurants to exclude customers was a pretense to allow racial discrimination and so was itself unconstitutional.Burton, 365 U.S. at 726-27 (Stewart, J., concurring). In dissent, Justice John Harlan II, joined by Charles Whittaker, found the state court ruling so ambiguous that they preferred to return the case to the lower court for clarification.Burton, 365 U.S. at 728-30 (Harlan, J., dissenting). Justice Felix Frankfurter wrote a separate dissent that also called for returning the case to the state court.Burton, 365 U.S. at 727-28 (Frankfurter, J., dissenting).
 Legal consequences 
The case broadened the reach of the Equal Protection Clause to include not only direct government action but also actions by private companies acting in close relationship to a government agency. The impact of the ruling was later limited in Moose Lodge No. 107 v. Irvis to situations in which the government support of the business was substantial before private discrimination could be considered a "state action.".
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 365
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States racial desegregation case law
Category:1961 in United States case law
Category:Delaware state case law
Category:Garages (parking) in the United States
Category:Wilmington, Delaware
Category:African-American history of Delaware
Category:Civil rights movement case law
"""

From "Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc." ==> """
Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc., 573 U.S. 682 (2014), is a landmark decision in United States corporate law by the United States Supreme Court allowing privately held for-profit corporations to be exempt from a regulation that its owners religiously object to, if there is a less restrictive means of furthering the law's interest, according to the provisions of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993. It is the first time that the Court has recognized a for-profit corporation's claim of religious belief, but it is limited to privately held corporations. The decision does not address whether such corporations are protected by the free exercise of religion clause of the First Amendment of the Constitution.
For such companies, the Court's majority directly struck down the contraceptive mandate, a regulation adopted by the United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) requiring employers to cover certain contraceptives for their female employees, by a 5–4 vote.See:
  The court said that the mandate was not the least restrictive way to ensure access to contraceptive care, noting that a less restrictive alternative was being provided for religious non-profits, until the Court issued an injunction 3 days later, effectively ending said alternative, replacing it with a government-sponsored alternative for any female employees of privately held corporations that do not wish to provide birth control.See:
  The ruling is considered to be part of the political controversy regarding the Affordable Care Act in the United States.
 Background 
 Federal law 
 Religious Freedom Restoration Act 
The United States Supreme Court ruled in Employment Division v. Smith (1990) that a person may not defy neutral laws of general applicability even as an expression of religious belief. "To permit this," wrote Justice Scalia, citing the 1878 Reynolds v. United States decision, "would make the professed doctrines of religious belief superior to the law of the land, and in effect to permit every citizen to become a law unto himself. " He wrote that generally applicable laws do not have to meet the standard of strict scrutiny, because such a requirement would create "a private right to ignore generally applicable laws". Strict scrutiny would require a law to be the least restrictive means of furthering a compelling government interest.
In 1993, the US Congress responded by passing the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA), requiring strict scrutiny when a neutral law of general applicability "substantially burden[s] a person's exercise of religion". The RFRA was amended in 2000 by the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act (RLUIPA) to redefine exercise of religion as any exercise of religion, "whether or not compelled by, or central to, a system of religious belief", which is to be "construed in favor of a broad protection of religious exercise, to the maximum extent permitted by the terms of this chapter and the Constitution". The Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the RFRA as applied to federal statutes in Gonzales v. O Centro Espirita in 2006.
 Affordable Care Act 
Of those Americans who have health insurance, most are covered by employer-sponsored health insurance. In 2010, Congress passed the Affordable Care Act (ACA), which relies on the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), part of the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), to specify what kinds of preventive care for women should be covered in certain employer-based health plans. HHS exempted religious employers (churches and their integrated auxiliaries, associations of churches, and any religious order), non-profit organizations that object to any required contraception, employers providing grandfathered plans (that have not had specific changes before March 23, 2010), and employers with fewer than 50 employees. The HRSA decided that all twenty contraceptives approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) should be covered. Companies that refuse are fined $100 per individual per day, or they can replace their health coverage with higher wages and a calibrated tax.
 Hobby Lobby Stores and Conestoga Wood Specialties 
Hobby Lobby is an arts and crafts company founded by billionaire David Green and owned by the Evangelical Christian Green family with about 21,000 employees. It provided health insurance covering the contraceptives  Plan-B and Ella until it dropped its coverage in 2012, the year it filed its lawsuit.  The Hobby Lobby case also involved Mardel Christian and Educational Supply, which is owned by Mart Green, one of David's sons.
Hobby Lobby's case was consolidated with another case by Conestoga Wood Specialties, a furniture company owned by the Mennonite Hahn family that has about 1,000 employees, represented by the Alliance Defending Freedom.
 Specific contraceptives contested by plaintiffs 
The plaintiffs believed that life began at conception which they equated to fertilization, and objected to their businesses providing health insurance coverage to their female employees of four FDA-approved contraceptives that the plaintiffs believed prevented implantation of a fertilized egg. The plaintiffs believed the following forms of birth control constituted an abortion:
 Emergency contraceptive pills
 levonorgestrel (sold under the brand name Plan B among others)
 ulipristal acetate (sold under the brand name Ella among others)
 Intrauterine devices (IUDs)
 copper IUDs (sold under the brand name ParaGard among others)
 Hormonal IUDs (sold under the brand names Mirena and Skyla among others)
 Lower court history 
In September 2012, Hobby Lobby filed a lawsuit in the United States District Court for the Western District of Oklahoma against enforcement of the contraception rule based on the RFRA and the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment.  On November 19, 2012, U.S. District Judge Joe L. Heaton denied Hobby Lobby's request for a preliminary injunction.  On December 26, 2012, Justice Sonia Sotomayor issued an in-chambers opinion denying an injunction pending appeal.  In March 2013, the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit granted a hearing of the case. In June, the appeals court ruled that Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc. is a person who has religious freedom. Circuit Judge Timothy Tymkovich wrote for the five-judge en banc majority, over a three-judge dissent.Recent Cases: Tenth Circuit Holds For-Profit Corporate Plaintiffs Likely to Succeed on the Merits of Substantial Burden on Religious Claim,  127 Harv. L. Rev. 1025 (2014). Neil Gorsuch voted with the majority and also wrote an opinion on the case. The court ordered the government to stop enforcement of the contraception rule on Hobby Lobby and sent the case back to the district court, which granted preliminary injunction in July. In September, the government appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
Two other federal appeals courts ruled against the contraception coverage rule, while another two upheld it.
The case was previously titled Sebelius v. Hobby Lobby. Sylvia Burwell was automatically substituted as petitioner when she was approved by the United States Senate as the Secretary of Health and Human Services after being nominated by President Barack Obama to replace Kathleen Sebelius following Sebelius' resignation on April 10, 2014.
 U.S. Supreme Court consideration 
 Acceptance and briefs 
On November 26, the Supreme Court accepted and consolidated the case with Conestoga Wood Specialties v. Sebelius. Two dozen amicus briefs support the government, and five dozen support the companies. American Freedom Law Center's brief argues that birth control harms women because men will only want them "for the satisfaction of [their] own desires." Another brief argues that the contraception rule leads to "the maximization of sexual activity". Two of the briefs oppose each other on the constitutionality of the RFRA. Two briefs that do not formally take sides oppose each other on whether the right to religion applies to corporations. One of those briefs argues that if shareholders are separated by the corporate veil from corporate liabilities, then their religious values are also separate from the corporation. It mentions the ruling in Domino's Pizza, Inc. v. McDonald made against the African American owner of JWM Investments whose contracts were breached due to racial discrimination. The brief argues that if JWM Investments could not suffer discrimination through its owner, then Hobby Lobby could not suffer religious burden through its owner. Two briefs were filed by LGBT groups concerned that future anti-discrimination laws would be pre-emptively harmed if employers could claim to be religiously exempt.
 Argument and deliberation 
Oral arguments were held on March 25, 2014 for 30 minutes more than the usual one hour.
The three women in the court focused their questioning on Hobby Lobby's lawyer, Paul Clement, while the men focused on the administration's lawyer, Solicitor General Donald B. Verrilli Jr. Justice Sotomayor quoted the ruling from United States v. Lee (1982) saying that an employer can't deprive employees of a statutory right because of religious beliefs. Clement replied that Lee does not apply because it was a challenge against a tax rather than against a significant burden. Sotomayor said that instead of paying the burden of the penalty, Hobby Lobby could replace its health care with the equivalent expense of higher wages and a calibrated tax, which the government would use to pay for the employees' health care. Near the end of Clement's argument, Justice Kennedy expressed concern for the rights of the employees who may not agree with the religious beliefs of their employers. When Verrilli argued that the ruling in Cutter v. Wilkinson requires the court to weigh the impact on third parties in every RFRA case, Justice Scalia said that the RFRA does not require the court to balance the interest of the religious objector to the interest of other individuals. Verilli returned to Lee, saying that granting an exemption to an employer should not impose the employer's religious faith on the employees.
 Opinion of the Court 
 Majority opinion 
thumb|left|185px|Justice Samuel Alito was the author of the Court's majority opinion.
On June 30, 2014, Associate Justice Samuel Alito delivered the judgment of the court. Four justices (Roberts, Scalia, Kennedy, and Thomas) joined him to strike down the HHS mandate, as applied to closely held corporations with religious objections, and to prevent the plaintiffs from being compelled to provide contraception under their healthcare plans. The ruling was reached on statutory grounds, citing the RFRA, because the mandate was not the "least restrictive" method of implementing the government's interest. The ruling did not address Hobby Lobby's claims under the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment.
The court argued that the purpose of extending rights to corporations is to protect the rights of shareholders, officers, and employees., slip op. at 24 (2014). It said that "allowing Hobby Lobby, Conestoga, and Mardel to assert RFRA claims protects the religious liberty of the Greens and the Hahns." The court found that for-profit corporations could be considered persons under the RFRA. It noted that the HHS treats nonprofit corporations as persons within the meaning of RFRA. The court stated, "no conceivable definition of the term includes natural persons and nonprofit corporations, but not for-profit corporations." Responding to lower court judges' suggestion that the purpose of for-profit corporations "is simply to make money," the court said, "For-profit corporations, with ownership approval, support a wide variety of charitable causes, and it is not at all uncommon for such corporations to further humanitarian and other altruistic objectives." The court rejected the contention that "the Nation lacks a tradition of exempting for-profit corporations from generally applicable laws," pointing to a federal statute from 1993 that exempted any covered health care entity from engaging in "certain activities related to abortion".
The court held that the HHS contraception mandate substantially burdens the exercise of religion, rejecting an argument that the $2,000-per-employee penalty for dropping insurance coverage is less than the average cost of health insurance. Responding to HHS's argument that the provision of coverage does not itself result in destruction of embryos, the Court asserted that the argument dodges the substantial burden question that the Court is supposed to address. The Court added, citing Jesuit moral manuals, that the argument is also the religious question of the morality of enabling the immoral acts of others, to which HHS had provided "a binding national answer". The Court argued that federal courts should not answer religious questions because they would in effect be deciding whether certain beliefs are flawed.134 S. Ct. 2751, 2778 fn.34 (citing David S. Oderberg, Ethics of Co-operation in Wrongdoing, in Modern Moral Philosophy 203-228 (A. O'Hear ed. 2004) ; Thomas Higgins S.J., Man as Man: The Science and Art of Ethics 353, 355 (1949); 1 Henry Davis S.J., Moral and Pastoral Theology 341 (1935).   The court argued that "companies would face a competitive disadvantage in retaining and attracting skilled workers," that increased wages for employees to buy individual coverage would be more costly than group health insurance, that any raise in wages would have to take income taxes into account, and that employers cannot deduct the penalty.
The court found it unnecessary to adjudicate on whether the HHS contraceptive mandate furthers a compelling government interest and held that HHS has not shown that the mandate is "the least restrictive means of furthering that compelling interest". The court argued that the most straightforward alternative would be "for the Government to assume the cost ..." and that HHS has not shown that it is not "a viable alternative". The court said that the RFRA can "require creation of entirely new programs". The court also pointed out that HHS already exempts any nonprofit organization from paying for any required contraception by allowing it to certify its religious objection to its insurance issuer, which must "[p]rovide separate payments for any contraceptive services required to be covered". However, the court said the approach might not necessarily be the least restrictive alternative for all religious claims.
The court concluded by addressing "the possibility that discrimination in hiring, for example on the basis of race, might be cloaked as religious practice to escape legal sanction". The court said that their decision "provides no such shield", and that "prohibitions on racial discrimination are precisely tailored to achieve that critical goal." The court also said that the requirement to pay taxes despite any religious objection is different from the contraceptive mandate because "there simply is no less restrictive alternative to the categorical requirement to pay taxes." The court acknowledged the dissent's "worries about forcing the federal courts to apply RFRA to a host of claims made by litigants seeking a religious exemption from generally applicable laws ...", noting that this point was "made forcefully by the Court in Smith." The court responded by saying, "Congress, in enacting RFRA, took the position that 'the compelling interest test as set forth in prior Federal court rulings is a workable test for striking sensible balances between religious liberty and competing prior governmental interests' ... The wisdom of Congress's judgment on this matter is not our concern. Our responsibility is to enforce RFRA as written, and under the standard that RFRA prescribes, the HHS contraceptive mandate is unlawful."
 Concurring opinion 
thumb|right|150px|Justice Kennedy, joined in the majority opinion but also wrote a concurring opinion addressing the dissent.
Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote a concurring opinion, responding to the "respectful and powerful dissent", by emphasizing the limited nature of the ruling and saying that the government  "makes the case that the mandate serves the Government's compelling interest in providing insurance coverage that is necessary to protect the health of female employees", but that the RFRA's least-restrictive way requirement is not met because "there is an existing, recognized, workable, and already-implemented framework to provide coverage," the one that HHS has devised for non-profit corporations with religious objections. "RFRA requires the Government to use this less restrictive means. As the Court explains, this existing model, designed precisely for this problem, might well suffice to distinguish the instant cases from many others in which it is more difficult and expensive to accommodate a governmental program to countless religious claims based on an alleged statutory right of free exercise." (Kennedy, J., concurring, pp. 3, 4)
 Dissenting opinions 
thumb|left|185px| Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote a stern dissent disagreeing with the Court's reasoning.
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg delivered the primary dissent, which was joined by Justice Sotomayor in full and by Justices Breyer and Kagan as to all but Part III–C–1 on "whether a corporation qualifies as a 'person' capable of exercising religion". Ginsburg began, "In a decision of startling breadth, the Court holds that commercial enterprises, including corporations, along with partnerships and sole proprietorships, can opt out of any law (saving only tax laws) they judge incompatible with their sincerely held religious beliefs. ... Compelling governmental interests in uniform compliance with the law, and disadvantages that religion-based opt-outs impose on others, hold no sway, the Court decides, at least when there is a 'less restrictive alternative.' And such an alternative, the Court suggests, there always will be whenever, in lieu of tolling an enterprise claiming a religion-based exemption, the government, i.e., the general public, can pick up the tab."
She challenged the majority's unprecedented view of for-profit religion saying "Until this litigation, no decision of this Court recognized a for-profit corporation's qualification for a religious exemption from a generally applicable law, whether under the Free Exercise Clause or RFRA. The absence of such precedent is just what one would expect, for the exercise of religion is characteristic of natural persons, not artificial legal entities...  Religious organizations exist to foster the interests of persons subscribing to the same religious faith. Not so of for-profit corporations. Workers who sustain the operations of those corporations commonly are not drawn from one religious community." Responding to the majority's argument that the government should "assume the cost" of contraceptives, Ginsburg said that "the nation's only dedicated source of federal funding for safety net family planning services ..." is not designed to absorb the unmet needs of those already insured. She noted that "a less restrictive alternative" has not been written into law by Congress. Ginsburg warns, "The Court, I fear, has ventured into a minefield ..."
Justices Breyer and Kagan wrote a one-paragraph dissenting opinion, saying that "the plaintiffs' challenge to the contraceptive coverage requirement fails on the merits" and that they "need not and do not decide whether either for-profit corporations or their owners may bring claims under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993."
 Reactions 
Barbara Green, co-founder of Hobby Lobby, said "Today, the nation's highest court has reaffirmed the vital importance of religious liberty as one of our country's founding principles. The court's decision is a victory, not just for our family business, but for all who seek to live out their faith."
Conestoga CEO Anthony Hahn said, "Americans don't have to surrender their freedom when they open a family business."
Organizations
Conservative and pro-life groups praised the ruling. National Review said that the Supreme Court ruling "[led] Alliance Defending Freedom attorney Matt Bowman to call Hobby Lobby an 'inclusive decision' that advances everyone's freedom." Susan B. Anthony List President Marjorie Dannenfelser said, "This is a great victory for religious liberty – the bedrock of our founding. In living out our religious convictions, there are certain things we must not do. This is why we are at a watershed moment. Religious people will no longer be ordered to take action that our religion says we must not take." Family Research Council President Tony Perkins said, "The Supreme Court has delivered one of the most significant victories for religious freedom in our generation. We are thankful the Supreme Court agreed that the government went too far by mandating that family businesses owners must violate their consciences under threat of crippling fines." The U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops said, "We welcome the Supreme Court's decision to recognize that Americans can continue to follow their faith when they run a family business ... Now is the time to redouble our efforts to build a culture that fully respects religious freedom."
Pro-choice and civil-liberties groups criticized the ruling. Cecile Richards, president of the Planned Parenthood Action Fund, said, "Today, the Supreme Court ruled against American women and families, giving bosses the right to discriminate against women and deny their employees access to birth control coverage. This is a deeply disappointing and troubling ruling that will prevent some women, especially those working hourly-wage jobs and struggling to make ends meet, from getting birth control." Deputy legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union Louise Melling said, "This is a deeply troubling decision. For the first time, the highest court in the country has said that business owners can use their religious beliefs to deny their employees a benefit that they are guaranteed by law."
In an editorial, the New England Journal of Medicine called the decision "a setback for both the ACA's foundational goal of access to universal health care and for women's health care specifically", voicing concern that "in assessing the competing claims about abortion and birth control, the Court's majority focused on the religious claims of the corporations without discussing scientific or medical opinions." In JAMA Internal Medicine, Alta Charo wrote that "consistent with a disturbing trend among courts and legislatures to misstate or misuse scientific information in the context of women's reproductive rights and health, the Supreme Court's decision ignored the well-accepted distinction between contraception and abortion." The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, representing 90% of U.S. board-certified gynecologists, supported a bill to overturn the Hobby Lobby ruling.
Government
White House spokesman Josh Earnest said, "Congress needs to take action to solve this problem that's been created and the administration stands ready to work with them to do so. President Obama believes that women should make personal health care decisions for themselves, rather than their bosses deciding for them. Today's decision jeopardizes the health of women that are employed by these companies."
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) said, "If the Supreme Court will not protect women's access to health care, then Democrats will. We will continue to fight to preserve women's access to contraceptive coverage and keep bosses out of the examination room."
Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell said, "[T]he Obama administration cannot trample on the religious freedoms that Americans hold dear."
Senator Chuck Schumer (D-NY), who introduced the RFRA in 1993, said his law "was not intended to extend the same protection to for-profit corporations, whose very purpose is to profit from the open market."
Speaker of the House John Boehner (R-Ohio) said, "The mandate overturned today would have required for-profit companies to choose between violating their constitutionally-protected faith or paying crippling fines, which would have forced them to lay off employees or close their doors."
House minority leader Nancy Pelosi (D-CA) said, "Although the Court restricted their ruling to 'closely held' companies, this ruling will immediately affect the lives of millions of women across the country. Over 90 percent of America's businesses are 'closely held', including such large employers as Koch Industries and Bechtel. Women should not be forced to jump through extra hoops to secure the fundamental health care they need. Allowing employers and CEOs to limit the health care available to employees is a gross violation of their workers' religious rights. It's just not her boss' business."
Senator Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) said, "Today's victory in the Hobby Lobby case is terrific news—but now is no time to rest. We cannot rely on the courts alone to defend our religious liberty."
Senator Orrin Hatch (R-Utah) said, "I applaud the Supreme Court's decision to protect the religious freedom of all Americans, both individually and collectively. The notion that religious freedom belongs only to some, and even then only in private, defies our nation's traditions, our laws, and our Constitution. And as the Supreme Court rightfully said today, the Religious Freedom Restoration Act could not have been clearer in saying religious liberty of all Americans must be equally protected and not unnecessarily burdened."
Rep. Michele Bachmann (R-Minn) said, "I am extremely encouraged by today's Supreme Court decision to uphold the religious liberty rights of the Green family of Hobby Lobby."
Aftermath
Cases following SCOTUS ruling
Forbes reported that following the ruling in Burwell v. Hobby Lobby, "the Supreme Court vacated the judgment against Eden Foods and sent the case back to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit for further consideration."
On November 6, 2015 the Supreme Court of the United States decided it will hear arguments for the case of Zubik v. Burwell combined with six other challenges—including Priests for Life v. Burwell, Southern Nazarene University v. Burwell, Geneva College v. Burwell,
Roman Catholic Archbishop of Washington v. Burwell, East Texas Baptist University v. Burwell, Little Sisters of the Poor Home for the Aged v. Burwell—to the contraceptive mandate of Obamacare.
Wheaton College order
On July 3, 2014, the Supreme Court granted a temporary exemption to the approach it suggested as a less restrictive alternative in Hobby Lobby, where the plaintiffs would send a form (EBSA Form 700) to its insurance issuer, which would pay for the contraception. In an unsigned emergency injunction for Wheaton College in Illinois, the court said that instead of notifying its insurance issuer, Wheaton can notify the government. Once notified, the government should notify the issuer. Wheaton believed that by transferring the obligation to cover contraceptives to its insurance issuer, it was triggering that obligation. The emergency injunction does not constitute a ruling on the merits of Wheaton's religious objection. The court said "Nothing in this interim order affects the ability of the applicant's employees and students to obtain, without cost, the full range of FDA approved contraceptives."Order in Pending Case, Wheaton College v. Bruwell, On Application for Injunction , July 3, 2014
In a 15-page dissent joined by the other two women on the court, Justice Sonia Sotomayor criticized the majority's reasoning: "Wheaton's application comes nowhere near the high bar necessary to warrant an emergency injunction from this court ... The court's actions in this case create unnecessary costs and layers of bureaucracy, and they ignore a simple truth: The government must be allowed to handle the basic tasks of public administration in a manner that comports with common sense."
The Supreme Court Justice Sotomayor granted a similar temporary injunction to the Little Sisters of the Poor at the end of 2013, just before the mandate was to go into effect.
In dueling commentaries between regular SCOTUSblog contributor Marty Lederman and co-founder Tom Goldstein, Lederman argued that only Form 700 can require an insurance provider to pay for contraception coverage. Goldstein argued that an existing regulation allows the government to specify an alternative to Form 700. He pointed out that "the Court didn't accept Wheaton's most aggressive argument" that it cannot be required to do anything. He said that Justice Kennedy's concurrence is controlling and makes clear that the RFRA is not violated by requiring Wheaton to notify the government.
A revised version of EBSA Form 700, effective August 2014, says "[a]s an alternative to using this form, an eligible organization may provide notice to the Secretary of Health and Human Services that the eligible organization has a religious objection to providing coverage for all or a subset of contraceptive services ...".
Possible leak
In November 2022, The New York Times reported on a possible leak of the Hobby Lobby decision about two weeks prior to its formal announcement; this story was published following the leak and decision of Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization in June 2022 which overturned Roe v. Wade on abortion rights. Reverend Rob Schneck wrote to both Chief Justice John Roberts and to the Times stating that he had been told of which way Hobby Lobby was to be decided though a close associate after Schenck and his wife had a dinner party with Alito and his wife. At the time, Schneck used that information to inform Hobby Lobby and other religious organizations to prepare for the formal announcement of the decision. Schneck had opted to reveal this information in 2022 to aid in the investigation of the Dobbs decision leak. In 2011 through their connection to the Historical Society, Hobby Lobby's owners attended a Christmas party in Supreme Court chambers shortly before litigation was initiated which became Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc.
 Implications 
Religious exemption from laws that apply to the general public
Although the court stated clearly that the decision is limited to the contraceptive mandate (Syllabus p. 4-5), the ruling is seen to have consequences extending far beyond contraception. Walter Dellinger, former acting solicitor general said, "for the first time, commercial enterprises could successfully claim religious exemptions from laws that govern everyone else." Fifteen states had filed a brief arguing that businesses would be able to deny coverage for transfusions, stem cell treatments, and psychiatric care. In line with the dissenting opinion, The American Prospect asked, "[W]ill the taxpayers have to send a check to employees if employers feel that minimum wage laws violate their religious beliefs?" Jonathan Rauch, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, said that objections to paying health benefits for same-sex spouses will get traction. The National Gay and Lesbian Task Force (NGLT) and the National Center for Lesbian Rights withdrew their support for the Employment Non-Discrimination Act (ENDA) passed by the Senate, saying that its religious exemptions would allow companies to fire or refuse to hire LGBT workers in light of the Hobby Lobby ruling. NGLT executive director Rea Carey said, "We do not take this move lightly. We've been pushing for this bill for 20 years."
Such concerns are focused on the court's application of the federal RFRA law and were driven by national controversy over a state RFRA amendment bill in Arizona. Douglas Laycock, law professor at the University of Virginia, said, "The whole secular left has decided" that RFRA laws "are very dangerous because they care so much more about the contraception cases and gay rights." He said RFRA laws are mischaracterized because they do not dictate outcomes favoring religious objectors, they only require courts to use the highest standard of scrutiny on any law challenged. Mark Kernes, Senior Editor and Chief Legal Analyst for AVN magazine stated in an op-ed piece, "If the Hobby Lobby decision supports the 'right' of companies not to make available birth control that will prevent women from 'catching' a pregnancy, what's to keep those same religious companies from arguing that providing access to PrEP drugs like Truvada, which help prevent gays (and, admittedly, everyone) from catching HIV shouldn't similarly be excluded from their health plans?"
In 2021, Senator Cory Booker introduced a bill called the Do No Harm Act to reverse Burwell v. Hobby Lobby.
As of April 2022, there is an expectation that "Hobby Lobby 2.0" is forthcoming should President Biden pass changes to Obamacare regarding extensions for protections for trans people and the interpretation of discrimination on the basis of sex. 
Imposition of religious beliefs onto others
Ian Millhiser from Vox.com argued that as a general rule in religious liberty cases prior to the Hobby Lobby decision religion can't be used to diminish the rights of others. He pointed to the 1982 U.S. Supreme Court case United States v. Lee (1982) (1982) in which the Court declared “when followers of a particular sect enter into commercial activity as a matter of choice, the limits they accept on their own conduct as a matter of conscience and faith are not to be superimposed on the statutory schemes which are binding on others in that activity.” According to Millhiser the Hobby Lobby decision marks the first time "rights of religious believers could trump the rights of others." Marcia Greenberger, co-president of the National Women's Law Center, argued in the same direction Millhiser by saying that the Supreme Court has never ruled that companies have religious beliefs and that "it has never held that religious exercise provides a license to harm others, or violate the rights of third parties." 
Louise Melling, ACLU deputy legal director, said religious freedom "gives us all the right to hold our beliefs, but it doesn't give you the right to impose your beliefs on others, to discriminate against others." The editorial board of The New York Times wrote that the decision "swept aside accepted principles of corporate law and religious liberty to grant owners of closely held, for-profit companies an unprecedented right to impose their religious views on employees." A Fox News columnist wrote, "..., with all of the debate about the religious beliefs of the Hobby Lobby owners, what about the religious beliefs of their employees? They are just as important, and should not be trampled upon." The director of the United Church of Christ's Washington, D.C. office, said that the ruling "may embolden private employers to claim religious objections to particular health care services, in effect forcing their own religious views upon their employees." Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said, "It's the first time that our court has said that a closely held corporation has the rights of a person when it comes to religious freedom, which means that the ... corporation's employers can impose their religious beliefs on their employees." The Center for American Progress said that the ruling "moves in the direction this court has been moving already, which is talking about corporate personhood—really treating corporations like people, saying that the corporation has a religion itself and that should be imposed on its employees." Interfaith Alliance leader Rev. Welton Gaddy said, "The First Amendment is at its best when it is used to protect the rights of minorities from the whims of the powerful. Today's decision, which gives the powerful the right to force their religious beliefs on those around them, is a far cry from the best traditions of religious freedom."
Scholars on the other side (including some on the left) disagree, arguing that companies owned and run by liberals will likewise benefit from the freedom to operate according to their conscience or values—which has not been viewed as "imposing" views, because people routinely choose whom to associate with based on philosophical compatibility.
Corporate liability
The New York Times editor Dorothy J. Samuels invoked the cautionary adage "be careful what you wish for", speculating that "if owners indicate that they are not entirely separate from their corporation—by denying corporation employees' birth control coverage based on their personal religious beliefs—the case could be made in future state-court litigation that they have waived their right to be shielded from responsibility for corporate financial liabilities." The dean of the UC Irvine School of Law, Erwin Chemerinsky, said, "The liabilities of the corporation are not attributed to the owners, so why should the owners be able to attribute their beliefs to the company?" Several legal scholars wrote an amicus brief to the Supreme Court for this case arguing this danger, while scholars on the other side counter that incorporated non-profit organizations enjoy liability protection despite their activities based on religious or other values/conscience-based causes.
 See also 
 United States corporate law
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 573
 King v. Burwell
 Zubik v. Burwell
 David Zubik
 National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius
 Sherbert Test
 R v Big M Drug Mart Ltd - Supreme Court of Canada ruling on religious liberty of a corporation
 Notes and references 
Notes:
References:
 Further reading 
Chatman, Carliss (2018). "The Corporate Personhood Two-Step." Nevada Law Journal. 18: 811–861.
 Ewan McGaughey, 'Fascism-Lite in America (or the social idea of Donald Trump)' (2016) TLI Think! Paper 26/2016
Rachel VanSickle-Ward and Kevin Wallsten. 2019. The Politics of the Pill: Gender, Framing, and Policymaking in the Battle over Birth Control. Oxford University Press.
External links
 Coverage on SCOTUSblog
 Hobby Lobby v. Sebelius Tenth Circuit 2013
 Hobby Lobby v. Sebelius W.D. Okla. 2012
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:Affordable Care Act lawsuits
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:History of religion in the United States
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States reproductive rights case law
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:Alliance Defending Freedom litigation
Category:Hobby Lobby
"""

From "Busey v. District of Columbia" ==> """
Busey v. District of Columbia, 319 U.S. 579 (1943), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States overturned the conviction of a Jehovah's Witness for unlicensed selling of magazines on public sidewalks..
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 319
Jones v. Opelika
Murdock v. Pennsylvania
References
Further reading
External links
Category:1943 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:United States First Amendment case law
Category:1943 in religion
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
"""

From "Bush v. Gore" ==> """
Bush v. Gore, 531 U.S. 98 (2000), was a landmark decision of the United States Supreme Court on December 12, 2000, that settled a recount dispute in Florida's 2000 presidential election between George W. Bush and Al Gore. On December 8, the Florida Supreme Court had ordered a statewide recount of all undervotes, over 61,000 ballots that the vote tabulation machines had missed. The Bush campaign immediately asked the U.S. Supreme Court to stay the decision and halt the recount. Justice Antonin Scalia, convinced that all the manual recounts being performed in Florida's counties were illegitimate, urged his colleagues to grant the stay immediately. On December 9, the five conservative justices on the Court granted the stay for Bush, with Scalia citing "irreparable harm" that could befall Bush, as the recounts would cast "a needless and unjustified cloud" over Bush's legitimacy. In dissent, Justice John Paul Stevens wrote that "counting every legally cast vote cannot constitute irreparable harm."  Oral arguments were scheduled for December 11.
In a 5-4 per curiam decision, the Court ruled, strictly on equal protection grounds, that the recount be stopped. Specifically, the use of different standards of counting in different counties violated the Equal Protection Clause of the U.S. Constitution; the case had also been argued on the basis of Article II jurisdictional grounds, which found favor with only Justices Scalia, Clarence Thomas, and William Rehnquist. The Court then ruled as to a remedy, deciding against the remedy proposed by Justices Stephen Breyer and David Souter to send the case back to Florida to complete the recount using a uniform statewide standard before the scheduled December 18 meeting of Florida's electors in Tallahassee. Instead, the majority held that no alternative method could be established within the discretionary December 12 "safe harbor" deadline set by Title 3 of the United States Code (3 U.S.C.), , which the Florida Supreme Court had stated that the Florida Legislature intended to meet. That deadline arrived two hours after the release of the Court's decision. The Court, stating that not meeting the "safe harbor" deadline would therefore violate the Florida Election Code, rejected an extension of the deadline.
The Supreme Court decision allowed the previous vote certification made by Florida Secretary of State, Katherine Harris, to stand for Bush, who thereby won Florida's 25 electoral votes. Florida's votes gave Bush, the Republican candidate, 271 electoral votes, one more than the 270 required to win the Electoral College. This meant the defeat of Democratic candidate Al Gore, who won 267 electoral votes but received 266, as a "faithless elector" from the District of Columbia abstained from voting. Media organizations later analyzed the ballots and found that, under specified criteria, the originally pursued recount of undervotes of several large counties would have confirmed a Bush victory, whereas a statewide recount would have revealed a Gore victory. Florida later retired the punch card voting machines that produced the ballots disputed in the case.
Background
In the United States, each state conducts its own popular vote election for president and vice president. The voters are actually voting for a slate of electors, each of whom pledges to vote for a particular candidate for each office, in the Electoral College. Article II, § 1, cl. 2 of the U.S. Constitution provides that each state legislature decides how electors are chosen. Referring to an earlier Supreme Court case, McPherson v. Blacker, the Court noted that early in U.S. history, most state legislatures directly appointed the slate of electors for each of their respective states.
Today, state legislatures have enacted laws to provide for the selection of electors by popular vote within each state. While these laws vary, most states, including Florida, award all electoral votes to the candidate for either office who receives a plurality of the state's popular vote. Any candidate who receives an absolute majority of all electoral votes nationally (270 since 1963) wins the presidential or vice presidential election.
thumb|left|Close-up view of satellite trucks parked by the Florida State Capitol during the 2000 presidential election vote dispute
On November 8, 2000, the Florida Division of Elections reported that Bush won with 48.8% of the vote in Florida, a margin of victory of 1,784 votes. The margin of victory was less than 0.5% of the votes cast, so a statutorily mandatedSee Fla. Stat. § 102.141(4).  (This archived version of the Florida statute is dated July 2, 2001, and is from Archive.org.) automatic machine recount occurred. On November 10, with the machine recount apparently finished in all but one county, Bush's margin of victory had decreased to 327 votes.
According to legal analyst Jeffrey Toobin, later analysis showed that a total of 18 counties—accounting for a quarter of all votes cast in Florida—did not carry out the legally mandated machine recount, but "No one from the Gore campaign ever challenged this view" that the machine recount had been completed.Toobin, Jeffrey. "Too Close to Call". Random House, 2002, p. 66. Florida's election lawsSee Fla. Stat. § 102.166.  (This archived version of the Florida statute is dated July 2, 2001, and is from Archive.org.) allow a candidate to request a county to conduct a manual recount, and Gore requested manual recounts in four Florida counties: Volusia, Palm Beach, Broward, and Miami-Dade, which are counties that traditionally vote Democratic and would be expected to garner more votes for Gore. Gore did not, however, request any recounts in counties that traditionally vote Republican. The four counties granted the request and began manual recounts. However, Florida law also required all counties to certify their election returns to the Florida secretary of state within seven days of the election;See Fla. Stat. § 102.112.  (This archived version of the Florida statute is dated April 21, 2001, and is from Archive.org.) and several of the counties conducting manual recounts did not believe they could meet this deadline.
On November 14, the statutory deadline, the Florida Circuit Court ruled that the seven-day deadline was mandatory but that the counties could amend their returns at a later date. The court also ruled that the secretary of state, after "considering all attendant facts and circumstances," had discretion to include any late amended returns in the statewide certification. Before the 5 p.m. deadline on November 14, Volusia County had completed its manual recount and certified its results. At 5 p.m. on November 14, Florida Secretary of State Katherine Harris announced that she had received the certified returns from all 67 counties, while Palm Beach, Broward, and Miami-Dade counties were still conducting manual recounts.
Harris issued a set of criteriaPalm Beach County Canvassing Bd. v. Harris, 772 So.2d 1220 (November 21, 2000). Late-filing criteria are at note 5. See The American Presidency Project for other documents related to the 2000 election dispute. by which she would determine whether to allow late filings, and she required any county seeking to make a late filing to submit to her, by 2 p.m. the following day, a written statement of the facts and circumstances justifying the late filing. Four counties submitted statements, and after reviewing the submissions, Harris determined that none justified an extension of the filing deadline. She further announced that after she received the certified returns of the overseas absentee ballots from each county, she would certify the results of the presidential election on November 18. However, on November 17, the Florida Supreme Court enjoined Harris from certifying the election while it heard appeals from the various cases in progress. On November 21, it allowed continuation of the manual recounts and delayed certification until November 26.
Stay of the Florida recount
thumb|right|Florida Supreme Court
By December 8, 2000, there had been multiple court decisions regarding the presidential election in Florida.For example, the concurring opinion in Bush v. Gore cited the December 6, 2000, decision in Touchston v. McDermott, 234 F.3d 1130  (11th Cir. 2000). On that date the Florida Supreme Court, by a 4–3 vote, ordered a statewide manual recount of undervotes. On December 9, ruling in response to an emergency request by Bush, the U.S. Supreme Court stayed the recount. The Court also decided to treat Bush's application for relief as a petition for a writ of certiorari, granted that petition, requested briefing from the parties by 4 p.m. on December 10, and scheduled oral argument for the morning of December 11.
Although opinions are rarely issued in connection with grants of certiorari (a minimum of four of the nine justices must vote in favor of the grant), Justice Scalia filed an opinion concurring in the Court's decision, noting that "a brief response is necessary to [Justice Stevens's] dissent". According to Scalia,
Justice Stevens's dissenting opinion was joined by Justices Souter, Ginsburg, and Breyer. According to Stevens,
A number of legal scholars have agreed with the dissenters' argument that Bush failed to carry the "heavy burden" of demonstrating a "likelihood of irreparable harm".
Rapid developments
The oral argument in Bush v. Gore occurred on December 11.Transcript and audio of oral arguments in Bush v. Gore, via Oyez.org. Retrieved 2008-06-05. Theodore Olson, a Washington, D.C., lawyer, delivered Bush's oral argument. New York lawyer David Boies argued for Gore.
During the brief period when the U.S. Supreme Court was deliberating on Bush v. Gore, the Florida Supreme Court provided clarifications of its November 21 decision in Palm Beach County Canvassing Board v. Harris (Harris I), which the U.S. Supreme Court had requested on December 4 following arguments in the case of Bush v. Palm Beach County Canvassing Board. Because of the extraordinary nature and argued urgency of the case, the U.S. Supreme Court issued its opinion in Bush v. Gore on December 12, 2000, a day after hearing oral argument.
Relevant law
The Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment is the U.S. Constitutional provision on which the decision in Bush v. Gore was based. ("The petition presents the following questions: whether the Florida Supreme Court established new standards for resolving Presidential election contests, thereby violating Art. II, § 1, cl. 2, of the United States Constitution and failing to comply with 3 U. S. C. § 5, and whether the use of standardless manual recounts violates the Equal Protection and Due Process clauses.")
Article II, § 1, cl. 2 of the Constitution specifies the number of electors per state, and, most relevant to this case, specifies the manner in which those electors are selected, stipulating that:
This clause arguably gives power to only one branch of Florida's state government (i.e., the state legislature).
Section 2 of the Electoral Count Act, now codified in 3 U.S.C. § 5, regulates the "determination of controversy as to appointment of electors" The quote is the title of Section 5, Title 3. in presidential elections. Of particular relevance to this case was the so-called "safe harbor" provision, which assures Congress' deference to states in their appointments of electors if done by a specified deadline:
Since the electors were set to meet December 18, the discretional "safe harbor" deadline was December 12, just one day after the Court heard oral arguments in this case.
According to :
Issues considered by the Court
thumb|upright|Theodore Olson represented Bush The Court had to resolve two different questions to fully resolve the case:
Were the recounts, as they were being conducted, constitutional?
If the recounts were unconstitutional, what was the appropriate remedy?
Three days earlier, the five-Justice majority had ordered the recount stopped, and the Court had to decide whether to restart it.
Equal Protection Clause
Bush argued that recounts in Florida violated the Equal Protection Clause because Florida did not have a statewide vote recount standard. Each county was on its own to determine whether a given ballot was an acceptable one. Two voters could have marked their ballots in an identical manner, but the ballot in one county would be counted while the ballot in a different county would be rejected, because of the conflicting manual recount standards. "The Equal Protection Clause prohibits government officials from implementing an electoral system that gives the votes of similarly situated voters different effect based on the happenstance of the county or district in which those voters live." Paragraph 2 in Argument, Part III-A.
Gore argued that there was indeed a statewide standard, the "intent of the voter" standard, and that this standard was sufficient under the Equal Protection Clause. "The court below was quite insistent that the counting of ballots must be governed by a single uniform standard: the intent of the voter must control." Paragraph 3 in Argument, Part III-A. Furthermore, Gore argued that the consequence of ruling the Florida recount unconstitutional simply because it treated different voters differently would effectively render every state election unconstitutionalId. "...if petitioners mean to say that all votes must be tabulated under a fixed and mechanical standard (e.g., the "two-corner chad rule"), their approach would render unconstitutional the laws of States that hinge the meaning of the ballot on the intent of the voter..." Paragraph 3 in Argument, Part III-A. and that each voting mechanism has a different rate of error in counting votes. Voters in a "punch-card" county have a greater chance of having their votes undercounted than voters in an "optical scanner" county. If Bush prevails, Gore argued, every state would have to have one statewide method of recording votes to be constitutional.thumb|upright|David Boies represented Gore
This was the most closely decided issue in the case. The arguments presented by counsel did not extensively address what the Court should do if the Court were to find an equal protection violation. However, Gore did argue briefly that the appropriate remedy would not be to cancel all recounts, but rather would be to order a proper recount. "[T]he appropriate remedy for either an Equal Protection Clause or Due Process Clause violation would not be to cancel all recounts, but rather to order that the recounts be undertaken under a uniform standard." Footnote 28.
Article II
Bush also argued that the Florida Supreme Court's ruling violated Article II, § 1, cl. 2 of the U.S. Constitution. Essentially, Bush argued that the Florida Supreme Court's interpretation of Florida law was so erroneous that its ruling had the effect of making new law. Since this "new law" had not been directed by the Florida legislature, it violated Article II. Bush argued that Article II gives the federal judiciary the power to interpret state election law in presidential elections to ensure that the intent of the state legislature is followed. "By rewriting that statutory scheme—thus arrogating to itself the power to decide the manner in which Florida's electors are chosen—the Florida Supreme Court substituted its judgment for that of the legislature in violation of Article II. Such a usurpation of constitutionally delegated power defies the Framers' plan." Paragraph 2 in Argument, Part I.
Gore argued that Article II presupposes judicial review and interpretation of state statutes, and that the Florida Supreme Court did nothing more than exercise the routine principles of statutory construction to reach its decision. "Even apart from the absurd theory that McPherson requires everything relevant to a state's process for choosing electors to be packed into a specialized presidential electoral code, the very premise of petitioner's argument is fatally flawed because the Florida Legislature re-enacted the contest statute in 1999 against the settled background rule that decisions of circuit courts in contest actions are subject to appellate review." Paragraph 5 in Argument, Part I.
Decision
In brief, the breakdown of the decision was:
Five justices agreed that there was an Equal Protection Clause violation in using differing standards of determining a valid vote in different counties, causing an "unequal evaluation of ballots in various respects". "Noting that the Equal Protection clause guarantees individuals that their ballots cannot be devalued by 'later arbitrary and disparate treatment,' the per curiam opinion held that the Florida Supreme Court's scheme for recounting ballots was unconstitutional." The per curiam opinion (representing the views of Justices Kennedy, O'Connor, Rehnquist, Scalia, and Thomas) specifically cited that:
 Palm Beach County changed standards for counting dimpled chads several times during the counting process;
 Broward County used less restrictive standards than Palm Beach County;
 Miami-Dade County's recount of rejected ballots did not include all precincts;
 The Florida Supreme Court did not specify who would recount the ballots.
The per curiam opinion also identified an inconsistency with the fact that the Florida statewide recount of rejected ballots was limited to undervotes. The opinion implied that a constitutionally valid recount would include not only Florida's undervotes, but also its overvotes. The per curiam expressed concern that the limited scope of Florida’s recount would mean that, unlike some undervotes found to be reclaimable, valid votes among the overvotes would not be reclaimed. Furthermore, if a machine incorrectly reads an overvote as a valid vote for one of two marked candidates instead of rejecting it, Florida would wrongly count what should be an invalid vote.
Justices Breyer and Souter disagreed with the majority, pointing out that Bush presented no evidence in any court of legal overvotes uncounted and did not see any problem in Florida's decision to limit its recount to undervotes. The dissents of Breyer and Souter were full dissents. Unlike the five-justice majority, each identified an equal protection concern that did not rise to the level of a constitutional violation, and they proposed a remedy altogether different from the majority’s remedy. A dissenting opinion does not create precedent nor does it become a part of case law. Under the American legal system, dissenting court opinions are not considered valid holdings and are not included in the court's ruling. Nothing in Breyer's or Souter's dissents can be construed as being part of any decision by the majority justices.
In dissenting, Justice Ginsburg wrote that, for better or worse, disparities were a part of all elections and that if an equal-protection argument applied in any way, it surely applied more to black voters.
Five justices agreed that December 12 (the date of the decision) was the deadline Florida had established for recounts in keeping with 3 U.S.C. §5 (Rehnquist, O'Connor, Scalia, Kennedy, and Thomas in support; Stevens, Souter, Ginsburg, and Breyer opposed). Souter, joined by Breyer, Ginsburg and Stevens, said, "But no State is required to conform to §5 if it cannot do that (for whatever reason); the sanction for failing to satisfy the conditions of §5 is simply loss of what has been  called its 'safe harbor.' And even that determination is to be made, if made anywhere, in the Congress." Justices Souter and Breyer wanted to remand the case to the Florida Supreme Court to permit that court to establish uniform standards of what constituted a legal vote for a manual recount of all rejected ballots using those standards. 
Three justices (Rehnquist, Scalia and Thomas) argued that the Florida Supreme Court had acted contrary to the intent of the Florida legislature. Four justices (Stevens, Souter, Ginsburg and Breyer) specifically disputed this in their dissenting opinions, and the remaining two Justices (O'Connor and Kennedy) declined to join Rehnquist's concurrence on the matter.
Equal Protection Clause
The Supreme Court, in a per curiam opinion, ruled that the Florida Supreme Court's decision, calling for a statewide recount, violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Kennedy has since been identified as the primary author of the opinion. In addition to writing the opinion, Kennedy also decided to include Souter, Breyer and Stevens as agreeing that there were equal protection "problems" without consulting them. Stevens demanded his name be removed from the draft opinion, which Kennedy agreed to only after Stevens pulled his name from Breyer's dissent. Breyer also objected in private. The New York Times reported that Kennedy's opinion "later caused some confusion by its reference to 'seven justices of the court' who 'agree that there are constitutional problems with the recount.' That was true, but it was also beside the point." Later interviews by Vanity Fair indicated that Breyer and Souter were trying to appeal to Kennedy to join them on the remedy, rather than actually agreeing that an equal protection violation had occurred. Jack Balkin, writing in Yale Law Journal, considered this to be a cheap trick to construct the illusion of a larger majority, likening it to "saying that two doctors agree that a patient is sick, but one wants to use leeches, and the other wants to prescribe antibiotics".
The Court held that the Equal Protection Clause guarantees to individuals that their ballots cannot be devalued by "later arbitrary and disparate treatment". Even if the recount was fair in theory, it was unfair in practice. The record, as weighed by the Florida Supreme Court, suggested that different standards were seemingly applied to the recount from ballot to ballot, precinct to precinct, and county to county, even when identical types of ballots and machines were used.Justices Breyer and Souter stated:It is true that the Equal Protection Clause does not forbid the use of a variety of voting mechanisms within a jurisdiction, even though different mechanisms will have different levels of effectiveness in recording voters' intentions; local variety can be justified by concerns about cost, the potential value of innovation, and so on. But evidence in the record here suggests that a different order of disparity obtains under rules for determining a voter's intent that have been applied (and could continue to be applied) to identical types of ballots used in identical brands of machines and exhibiting identical physical characteristics (such as "hanging" or "dimpled" chads).
According to the Court, the statewide standard (that a "legal vote" is "one in which there is a 'clear indication of the intent of the voter'" Id. 5th paragraph in Part I.) could not guarantee that each county would count the votes in a constitutionally permissible fashion. The Court stated that the per curiam opinion's applicability was "limited to the present circumstances, for the problem of equal protection in election processes generally presents many complexities." However, the Court did not state what those complexities were, nor did it explain (or apparently consider) why the absence of a constitutionally acceptable standard for counting votes, which was the basis for the Court's ruling, would not have invalidated the entire presidential election in Florida.
Critics would later point out that the court had denied certiorari on equal protection grounds when Bush first sought Supreme Court review. Law clerks who worked for Kennedy and O'Connor at the time would later state their belief that the justices settled on equal protection as grounds for their decision, rather than Article II, because they thought it would seem more fair.
Remedy
The Court ruled 5–4 that no constitutionally valid recount could be completed by a December 12 "safe harbor" deadline. The Court asserted that "the Supreme Court of Florida has said that the legislature intended the State's electors to 'participat[e] fully in the federal electoral process,' as provided in ." The Court therefore effectively ended the proposed recount, because "the Florida Legislature intended to obtain the safe-harbor benefits of 3 U.S.C. §5." Souter said bluntly, "The 3 U.S.C. §5 issue is not serious." Breyer's dissent stated, "By halting the manual recount, and thus ensuring that uncounted legal votes will not be counted under any standard, this Court crafts a remedy out of proportion to the asserted harm. And that remedy harms the very fairness interests the Court is attempting to protect."
Four justices (Stevens, Ginsburg, Souter and Breyer) had dissented from the Court's earlier (December 9) decision, by the same five-justice majority, to grant Bush's emergency request to stop the recount and grant certiorari. In their dissents from the Court's December 12 per curiam opinion, Breyer and Souter acknowledged that the counting up until December 9 had not conformed with equal protection requirements. However, Souter and Breyer favored remanding the case to the Florida Supreme Court for the purpose of crafting specific guidelines for how to count disputed ballots, in contrast to the majority's decision to halt the recount altogether.Toobin, Jeffrey (2007).  The Nine: Inside the Secret World of the Supreme Court , pp. 184, (Doubleday, New York, NY). The actual counting had ended with the December 9 ruling, issued three days before any deadline.
The dissenting opinions strongly criticized the five-justice majority for involving the Court in state-level affairs. Justice Stevens's dissent (joined by Justices Breyer and Ginsburg) concluded as follows:
The per curiam opinion did not technically dismiss the case and instead "remanded for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion." Gore's attorneys therefore understood that they could fight on and could petition the Florida Supreme Court to repudiate the notion that December 12 was final under Florida law.
Despite this, Gore dropped the case – and conceded the 2000 United States presidential election to George W. Bush shortly afterward – reportedly because he was not optimistic about how the Florida justices would react to further arguments and, as one of his advisers put it, "the best Gore could hope for was a slate of disputed electors." In addition, Gore campaign chairman Bill Daley argued that fighting on was futile because even if the Florida Supreme Court defied the U.S. Supreme Court and ordered a new recount, "the GOP would take them straight back to Washington, where the [U.S.] Supreme Court would repeat: 'You ain't going to count, okay? So quit bothering us.'"
On remand, the Florida Supreme Court issued an opinion on December 22 that did not dispute whether December 12 was the deadline for recounts under state law, although this was disputed in a concurring opinion by Florida Supreme Court Justice Leander Shaw who nevertheless expressed deference to the U.S. Supreme Court's view on this issue and who also argued that, in any case, the Florida Supreme Court would (in his opinion) be unable to craft a remedy which would satisfy all of the U.S. Supreme Court's equal protection, due process, and other concerns.Gore v. Harris, 773 So. 2d 524  (December 22, 2000). Only Florida Supreme Court Justice Leander Shaw, in a concurring opinion, disputed that December 12 was the deadline for recounts under state law. Justice Shaw had joined the dissenting opinion in Gore v. Harris before the ruling in Bush v. Gore.
Article II
Chief Justice Rehnquist's concurring opinion, joined by Justices Scalia and Thomas, began by emphasizing that this was an unusual case in which the Constitution requires federal courts to assess whether a state supreme court has properly interpreted the will of the state legislature. Usually, federal courts do not make that type of assessment, and indeed the per curiam opinion in this case did not do so. After addressing this aspect of the case, Rehnquist examined and agreed with arguments that had been made by the dissenting justices of the Florida Supreme Court.
Rehnquist also mentioned that he, along with Justices Scalia and Thomas, joined the Supreme Court's per curiam opinion and agreed with the legal analysis that was presented there.
The ruling also states "the state legislature's power to select the manner for appointing electors is plenary; it may, if it so chooses, select the electors itself, which indeed was the manner used by state legislatures in several States for many years after the framing of our Constitution. ... The State, of course, after granting the franchise in the special context of Article II, can take back the power to appoint electors."
Scholarly analyses
Bush v. Gore prompted many strong reactions from scholars, pundits and others regarding the Court's decision, with a majority of publications in law reviews being critical. An analysis in The Georgetown Law Journal found that 78 scholarly articles were published about the case between 2001 and 2004, with 35 criticizing the decision and 11 defending it.
The critical remedial issue
The most closely decided aspect of the case was the key question of what remedy the Court should order, in view of an Equal Protection Clause violation. Gore had argued for a new recount that would pass constitutional muster, but the Court instead chose to end the election. Citing two Florida Supreme Court opinions, Gore v. Harris (December 8, seemingly in error) and Palm Beach County Canvassing Board v. Harris (November 21, footnote 55), the U.S. Supreme Court asserted that "the Florida Supreme Court has said that the Florida Legislature intended to obtain the safe-harbor benefits of 3 U.S.C. § 5" and that "any recount seeking to meet the December 12 date will be unconstitutional." This assertion has proven very controversial.
Finding that reasoning not to be persuasive, Michael W. McConnell writes that the two Florida court opinions cited by the Supreme Court supply no authoritative pronouncement of an absolute deadline. As better support for December 12 being the deadline under state law, McConnell points to two footnotes in the Florida Supreme Court's December 11 response on remand in Palm Beach County Canvassing Board v. Harris (Harris I), which he says must not have come to the justices' attention. Footnotes 17 and 22 characterized the safe harbor date of December 12 as an "outside deadline." Therefore, he writes, although these passages may not justify the U.S Supreme Court's decision, since the Court did not rely on them, "the Court may have reached the right result for the wrong reason." These footnotes state:Palm Beach County Canvassing Board v. Harris, 772 S2d 1273  (Fla December 11, 2000).
According to Nelson Lund, former law clerk to Justice O'Connor and associate counsel to George H. W. Bush, a dissenter might argue that the Florida Supreme Court on remand in Harris I was discussing the "protest provisions of the Florida Election Code, whereas the issues in Bush v. Gore arose under the contest provisions." In retort to himself, Lund writes that the Florida court's decision in the contest case did not mention any alternative possible deadlines.Lund, Nelson. "The Unbearable Rightness of Bush v. Gore" in The Longest Night: Polemics and Perspectives on Election 2000, page 176 (University of California Press, Arthur Jacobson and Michel Rosenfeld, eds. 2002). Peter Berkowitz writes, "Perhaps it would have been more generous for the Court to have asked the Florida court on remand whether 'outside deadline' referred to contest-period as well as protest-period recounts."Berkowitz, Peter and Wittes, Benjamin.  "The Lawfulness of the Election Decision: A Reply to Professor Tribe", Villanova Law Review, Vol. 49, No. 3, 2004. Abner Greene points to evidence that "the Florida Supreme Court thought all manual recounts – whether protest or contest – must be completed no later than December 12."Greene, Abner. "Is There a First Amendment Defense for Bush v. Gore?", 80 Notre Dame L. Rev. 1643 (2005). Greene points to footnotes 21 and 22 in Gore v. Harris, 772 S2d 1243 (December 8, 2000), as evidence that the Florida Supreme Court thought all recounts had to be completed by December 12, 2008. Nevertheless, Greene concludes "lack of clarity about the Florida Supreme Court's views on the safe-harbor provision should have resulted in a remand to that court for clarification," in addition to the remand of December 4. The Court in Bush v. Gore did remand the case instead of dismissing it, but the remand did not include another request for clarification. Louise Weinberg argues that even giving the U.S. Supreme Court the benefit of the doubt that it acted appropriately in intervening in Florida state law, its actions should be deemed unconstitutional because its intervention was not coupled with any kind of remedy aimed at determining the actual outcome of the election.Weinberg, Louise.  in When Courts Decide Elections: The Constitutionality of Bush v. Gore, 82 Boston University Law Review 609 (2002), p. 33.
Arguably, the Florida Supreme Court, after having stated on December 11 that December 12 was an "outside deadline", could have clarified its views on the safe-harbor provision or reinterpreted Florida law to state that December 12 was not a final deadline under Florida law, which the United States Supreme Court did not forbid the Florida Supreme Court from doing. Lund states that, as a practical matter, the Florida Supreme Court was unlikely to have actually been capable of conducting and completing a new constitutionally valid recount by the December 18, 2000 deadline for the meeting of the Electoral College.https://www.law.gmu.edu/assets/files/publications/working_papers/1061VeryStreamlinedIntroduction.pdf 
Michael Abramowicz and Maxwell Stearns further argue that if the Florida Supreme Court had clarified or reinterpreted Florida state law on remand, then the United States Supreme Court might have struck down the Florida Supreme Court's action as being a violation of Article II of the United States Constitution.https://scholarship.law.vanderbilt.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1885&context=vlr  Abramowicz and Stearns point out that while Justices Anthony Kennedy and Sandra Day O'Connor did not join Chief Justice William Rehnquist's Article II concurrence, they did not explicitly oppose this concurrence either and thus kept the door open to nullifying a future ruling of the Florida Supreme Court on Article II grounds. Abramowicz and Stearns also argue that if the Bush v. Gore per curiam opinion genuinely allowed the Florida Supreme Court to clarify or reinterpret Florida state law and to thus order a new Florida manual recount, then Justices David Souter and Stephen Breyer likely would have joined the Bush v. Gore per curiam opinion–which they had not done. Laurence Tribe has a similar view on this issue, arguing that "[e]ven assuming the leeway [in regard to the remedy] the Court theoretically left open was real, the window it had failed to slam shut was hardly the sort of opening through which anyone would dare to crawl."
Limitation to present circumstances
Some critics of the decision argue that the majority seemed to seek refuge from their own logicCharles L. Zelden, Bush v. Gore: Exposing the Hidden Crisis of American Democracy (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2008) . in the following sentence in the majority opinion: "Our consideration is limited to the present circumstances, for the problem of equal protection in election processes generally presents many complexities." (6th paragraph from end of Part II-B). The Court's defenders argued that this was a reasonable precaution against the possibility that the decision might be read over-broadly, arguing that in the short time available it would not be appropriate to attempt to craft language spelling out in greater detail how to apply the holding to other cases. Critics, however, interpreted the sentence as stating that the case did not set precedent in any way and could not be used to justify any future court decision, and some suggested that this was evidence the majority realized its holding was untenable. Regardless of whether the majority intended the decision to be precedential, it has been cited by several federal courts in election cases, as well as by a lawyer for a Republican congressional candidate during legal arguments coincident with the 2020 United States Presidential Election.
Accusation of partisanship or conflict of interest
According to legal analyst Jeffrey Toobin, "Bush v. Gore broke David Souter's heart. The day the music died, he called it. It was so political, so transparently political, that it scarred Souter's belief in the Supreme Court as an institution." (emphasis in original)
Various authors have claimed that conservative Republican-appointed justices ruled against Gore in this case for partisan reasons. Harvard University law professor Alan Dershowitz writes:
Chapman University School of Law professor Ronald Rotunda responded that Democratic-appointed justices of the Florida Supreme Court also ruled against Gore:
There has also been analysis of whether several justices had a conflict of interest that should have forced them to recuse themselves from the decision. On several occasions, Rehnquist had expressed interest in retiring under a Republican administration; one study found that press reports "are equivocal on whether facts existed that would have created a conflict of interest" for Rehnquist. At an election night party, O'Connor became upset when the media initially announced that Gore had won Florida, her husband explaining that they would have to wait another four years before retiring to Arizona. Both justices remained on the Court beyond President Bush's first term, until Rehnquist's death in 2005 and O'Connor's retirement in 2006. According to Steven Foster of the Manchester Grammar School:
The day after Thanksgiving, when the conservative justices agreed to hear Bush's appeal in the case of Bush v. Palm Beach County Canvassing Board (excluding Bush's equal protection claim), the opposing justices were convinced that the majority intended to reverse the Florida Supreme Court and shut down the recount. They began drafting a dissent before this case was argued before them, a dissent that was temporarily shelved upon the Court's unanimous remand to the Florida court.
The liberal law clerks noted Justice Scalia later had begun campaigning for the stay of the Florida court's December 8 recount order before the Court had received Gore's response to Bush's request and was so incensed at Stevens's dissent in the matter of the stay and grant of certiorari, that he requested the release of opinions be delayed so that he could amend his opinion to include a response to Stevens. Kennedy is also reported to have sent out a memo which accused the dissenters of "trashing the court". Later, court personnel, as well as Ron Klain, speculated that there was an unspoken understanding that the judges on the winning side would not retire until after the next election, as a way of preserving some sense of fairness. Indeed, no Supreme Court justices retired during President Bush's first term.
It has been argued that none of the justices ended up voting in a way that was consistent with their prior legal jurisprudence, though this conclusion has been challenged by George Mason University law professor Nelson Lund (who argues that, unlike in suspect classification cases, the United States Supreme Court has never actually required a showing of intentional discrimination in fundamental rights cases, such as Bush v. Gore itself). The five conservative justices decided to involve the federal judiciary in a matter that could have been left to the states, while also expanding the previous US Supreme Court interpretations of the Equal Protection Clause. Meanwhile, the liberal justices all supported leaving the matter in the hands of a state and also sometimes advocated in favor of a narrower reading of existing Equal Protection Clause SCOTUS precedents. This increased the perceptions that the judges used their desired results to drive their reasoning, instead of using legal reasoning to arrive at a result. David Cole of Georgetown Law argued that, as a way of trying to rehabilitate the court's image after Bush v. Gore, the court became more likely to reach a liberal decision in the four years after Bush v. Gore than they had been before the case, and that the conservative justices were more likely to join the liberals rather than the other way around.
Recount by media organizations
In 2001, the National Opinion Research Center (NORC) at the University of Chicago, sponsored by a consortium of major United States news organizations, conducted the Florida Ballot Project, a comprehensive review of 175,010 ballots that vote-counting machines had rejected from the entire state, not just the disputed counties that were recounted. The project's goal was to determine the reliability and accuracy of the systems used in the voting process, including how different systems correlated with voter mistakes. The study was conducted over a period of 10 months. Based on the review, the media group concluded that if the disputes over the validity of all the ballots in question had been consistently resolved and any uniform standard applied, the electoral result would have been reversed and Gore would have won by 60 to 171 votes. On the other hand, under scenarios involving review of limited sets of ballots uncounted by machines, Bush would have kept his lead. In one such scenario — Al Gore's request for recounts in four predominantly Democratic counties — Bush would have won by 225 votes. In another scenario (if the remaining 64 Florida counties had carried out the hand recount of disputed ballots ordered by the Florida Supreme Court on December 8, applying the various standards that county election officials said they would have used), Bush would have emerged the victor by 493 votes.
The scenarios involving limited sets of ballots included the completed uncertified recount by Palm Beach County, which nevertheless had excluded a set-aside cache of dimpled ballots with clear indications of intent, an uncounted net gain of 682 votes for Gore.  In contrast, the scenarios involving all uncounted ballots statewide considered all votes from Palm Beach County, subjected to various standards of inclusion. The Washington Post qualified the tallies conducted by the NORC consortium with the statement: "But no study of this type can accurately recreate Election Day 2000 or predict what might have emerged from individual battles over more than 6 million votes in Florida's 67 counties."
Further analysis revealed that black-majority precincts had three times as many rejected ballots as white precincts. "For minorities, the ballot survey found, a recount would not have redressed the inequities because most ballots were beyond retrieving. But a recount could have restored the votes of thousands of older voters whose dimpled and double-voted ballots were indecipherable to machines but would have been clear in a ballot-by-ballot review."Fessenden, Ford. "Ballots Cast by Blacks and Older Voters Were Tossed in Far Greater Numbers", The New York Times (November 12, 2001).
Critiques
Several subsequent articles have characterized the decision as damaging the reputation of the court, increasing the view of judges as partisan, and decreasing Americans' trust in the integrity of elections, an outcome predicted by Justice Stevens in his dissent. Part of the reason recounts could not be completed was the various stoppages ordered by the various branches and levels of the judiciary, most notably the Supreme Court. Opponents argued that it was improper for the Court (by the same five justices who joined the per curiam opinion) to grant a stay that preliminarily stopped the recounts based on Bush's likelihood of success on the merits and possible irreparable injury to Bush. Although stay orders normally do not include justification, Scalia concurred to express some brief reasoning to justify it, saying that one potential irreparable harm was that an invalid recount might undermine the legitimacy of Bush's election (presumably if, for example, it were to find that Gore should have won). Supporters of the stay, such as Charles Fried, contend that the validity of the stay was vindicated by the ultimate decision on the merits and that the only thing that the stay prevented was a recount "being done in an unconstitutional way."Fried, Charles. "An Unreasonable Reaction to a Reasonable Decision" in Bush V. Gore: The Question of Legitimacy, page 12 (Yale University Press, Bruce Ackerman ed. 2002): "The outrage against the stay by 673 law professors is, to say the least, overwrought. If the decision on the merits was justified, the stay becomes irrelevant. Yes, it did shut down the counting three and a half days earlier, but by hypothesis that counting was being done in an unconstitutional way."
Some critics argued that the Court's decision was a perversion of the Equal Protection Clause and contrary to the political question doctrine.Tribe, Laurence H., "The Unbearable Wrongness of Bush v. Gore". George Mason Law & Economics Research Paper No. 03-33; Harvard Law School, Public Law Working Paper No. 72. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=431080 Scott Lemieux of University of Washington points out that if recounting votes without a uniform statewide standard were truly a violation of the Equal Protection Clause, this should have meant that the initial count, which also lacked a uniform standard, was itself unconstitutional. On the other hand, Geoffrey R. Stone has expressed sympathy with the Court's equal protection reasoning, even though Stone was dismayed by what he saw as the sudden and suspect conversion of Justices Rehnquist, Scalia and Thomas to that equal protection principle. According to Stone:
Justice Stevens' criticism of the Court in his dissent for questioning the impartiality of Florida's judiciary was itself criticized by Lund, a former law clerk for Justice O'Connor.The dissent by Justice Stevens in Bush v. Gore stated, "What must underlie petitioners' entire federal assault on the Florida election procedures is an unstated lack of confidence in the impartiality and capacity of the state judges who would make the critical decisions if the vote count were to proceed. Otherwise, their position is wholly without merit. The endorsement of that position by the majority of this Court can only lend credence to the most cynical appraisal of the work of judges throughout the land. It is confidence in the men and women who administer the judicial system that is the true backbone of the rule of law. Time will one day heal the wound to that confidence that will be inflicted by today's decision. One thing, however, is certain. Although we may never know with complete certainty the identity of the winner of this year's Presidential election, the identity of the loser is perfectly clear. It is the Nation's confidence in the judge as an impartial guardian of the rule of law." Professor Charles Zelden faults the per curiam opinion in the case for, among other things, not declaring that the nation's electoral system required significant reform, and for not condemning administration of elections by part-time boards of elections dominated by partisan and unprofessional officials. Zelden concludes that the Court's failure to spotlight this critical flaw in American electoral democracy made a replay of Bush v. Gore more likely, not less likely, either in Florida or elsewhere. In 2013, retired Justice O'Connor, who had voted with the majority, said that the case "gave the court a less-than-perfect reputation". She added, "Maybe the court should have said, 'We're not going to take it, goodbye.' ... And probably the Supreme Court added to the problem at the end of the day."
A subsequent article in Vanity Fair quotes several of the court's clerks at the time who were critical of the decision. They note that, despite the per curiam decision's declaration that the case was taken "reluctantly", Justice Kennedy had been rather enthusiastic about taking the case all along. They felt at the time, as had many legal scholars, that the case was unlikely to go to the Supreme Court at all. In fact some of the justices were so certain that the case would never come before them that they had already left for vacations.
Public reaction
Editorials in the country's leading newspapers were overwhelmingly critical of the decision. A review by The Georgetown Law Journal found that the nation's top newspapers, by circulation, had published 18 editorials criticizing the decision, compared with just 6 praising it. They similarly published 26 op-eds criticizing the decision, compared to just 8 defending the decision. Polls showed a range of reactions, with 37–65% of respondents believing that personal politics influenced the decision of the justices, depending on the poll. A Princeton Survey poll recorded 46% of respondents saying that the decision made them more likely to suspect the partisan bias of the judges in general. An NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll showed that 53% of respondents believed that the decision to stop the recount was based mostly on politics. A 2010 article in Slate listed the case as the first in a series of events that eroded American trust in the results of elections, noting that the number of lawsuits brought over election issues has more than doubled since Bush v. Gore.
See also
List of United States presidential elections by Electoral College margin
Electoral Commission (United States)
Supreme Injustice, a 2001 book by Alan Dershowitz
Unprecedented: The 2000 Presidential Election, a 2002 documentary
Recount, a 2008 HBO movie about the 2000 presidential election and Bush v. Gore
Post-election lawsuits related to the 2020 United States presidential election
2000 United States presidential election in popular culture
Notes and references
External links
After Bush v. Gore by Retro Report
Tony Sutin: Presidential Election Law
Peter Berkowitz & Benjamin Wittes: "The Lawfulness of the Election Decision"
Adam Cohen: "Has Bush v. Gore Become the Case That Must Not Be Named?", Editorial Observer, The New York Times, August 15, 2006.
Text and audio of U.S. Supreme Court oral arguments – Bush v. Gore
Video highlight of Florida Supreme Court Chief Justice Wells opening Gore v. Harris argument on November 20, 2000
Video highlights of November 20, 2000, and December 7, 2000, oral arguments in Gore v. Harris in front of Florida Supreme Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States elections case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2000 United States presidential election in Florida
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:2000 controversies in the United States
Category:George W. Bush 2000 presidential campaign
Category:Al Gore 2000 presidential campaign
"""

From "Bush v. Palm Beach County Canvassing Board" ==> """
Bush v. Palm Beach County Canvassing Board, 531 U.S. 70 (2000), was a United States Supreme Court decision involving Florida voters during the 2000 presidential election.  In this case, the U.S. Supreme Court requested clarification from the Florida Supreme Court regarding the decision it had made in Palm Beach County Canvassing Board v. Harris (Harris I).  Shortly after the Florida Supreme Court provided those clarifications on December 11, the U.S. Supreme Court resolved the election in favor of George W. Bush over Al Gore in the case of Bush v. Gore.
Background
The 2000 presidential election was contingent upon who won the popular vote in Florida. Republican George W. Bush was narrowly ahead in the tally.  Democrat Al Gore challenged the decision of Katherine Harris, Florida's Secretary of State, to certify Bush as the winner on November 14 (a 7-day deadline set by Florida statute § 102.111). Gore asserted that Harris had disregarded manual recount results in four Florida counties. The Florida Supreme Court, in deciding between two conflicting provisions of Florida statute (§ 102.111 and § 102.112), enjoined Harris from certifying the election results and invoked its equitable powers to set a November 26 deadline for a return of ballot counts, thereby extending the deadline by 12 days. (The court allowed Harris the option of setting the deadline as November 27, which was a Monday. Harris did not.)  The court directed Harris to accept manual recounts submitted prior to the new deadline. Bush then appealed the Florida Supreme Court decision to the U.S. Supreme Court.
Issues before U.S. Supreme Court
The Court was faced with two questions.  First, did post-election court decisions in Florida violate the Due Process Clause of the U.S. Constitution or ? Second, did the Florida Supreme Court violate Article II of the United States Constitution, which confers plenary power in the appointment of Electors on state legislatures, when the Florida Supreme Court allegedly changed the manner in which Florida's electoral votes were chosen?
Holding
The Court unanimously held that there was "considerable uncertainty" as to the reasons for the Florida Supreme Court's decision. According to Vanity Fair, "The unanimity was, in fact, a charade; four of the justices had no beef at all with the Florida Supreme Court, while at least four others were determined to overturn it." Therefore, the Court declined to review the questions presented, instead vacating the Florida Supreme Court decision and remanding the case for clarification of two questions.  First, to what extent did the Florida Supreme Court see the Florida Constitution as circumscribing the legislature's authority under Article II of the federal Constitution (i.e., 
whether it had based its ruling on the state constitution, which the Bush team had said was improper, or had acted under state statute, which was arguably permissible.)? Second, how much consideration did the Florida Supreme Court give to a relevant federal statute, namely 3 U.S.C. § 5?
See also
 Bush v. Gore (2000)
 Moore v. Harper (2023)
References
External links
Category:2000 United States presidential election in Florida
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States elections case law
Category:2000 in United States case law
"""

From "Bush v. Vera" ==> """
Bush v. Vera, 517 U.S. 952 (1996), is a United States Supreme Court case concerning racial gerrymandering, where racial minority majority-electoral districts were created during Texas' 1990 redistricting to increase minority Congressional representation. The Supreme Court, in a plurality opinion, held that race was the predominant factor in the creation of the districts and that under a strict scrutiny standard the three districts were not narrowly tailored to further a compelling governmental interest.
 Background 
As a result of the 1990 United States Census, Texas was entitled to three additional congressional districts. In a called session in 1991, the Texas Legislature decided to draw one new Hispanic-majority district in South Texas (District 28), one new African-American majority district in Dallas County (District 30), and one new Hispanic-majority district in the Houston area (District 29). In addition, the Legislature decided to reconfigure an existing minority-majority district in the Houston area (District 18) to increase its percentage of African-Americans. The Texas Legislature had developed a state-of-the-art computer system, RedApl, that allowed it to draw congressional districts using racial data at the census block level. Working closely with the Texas congressional delegation and various members of the Legislature who intended to run for Congress, the Texas Legislature took great care to draw three new districts and reconfigure districts that the chosen candidates could win.
The Justice Department precleared the plan under § 5 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 and it was used in the 1992 election.
Plaintiffs Al Vera, Edward Blum, Polly Orcutt, Ken Powers, Barbara Thomas, and Ed Chen challenged 24 of the state's 30 congressional districts as racial gerrymanders. A three-judge panel of the federal district, consisting of United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit Judge Edith H. Jones, United States District Judges Melinda Harmon and David Hittner, struck down three Districts (18, 29, and 30) but the decision was stayed pending appeal, so the plan continued in use for the 1994 general election.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court, in a plurality opinion written by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, found that the plan was subject to strict scrutiny as it was an impermissible racial gerrymander. She repeated what the Court had said in Shaw v. Reno and Miller v. Johnson: Strict scrutiny applies where "redistricting legislation . . . is so extremely irregular on its face that it rationally can be viewed only as an effort to segregate the races for purposes of voting, without regard for traditional districting principles," or where "race for its own sake, and not other districting principles, was the legislature's dominant and controlling rationale in drawing its district lines," and "the legislature subordinated traditional race-neutral districting principles . . . to racial considerations,".
The Court again held that strict scrutiny does not apply merely because redistricting is performed with consciousness of race: that strict scrutiny does not apply in all cases of intentional creation of majority-minority districts, such as the compact districts created by a state court in California. But strict scrutiny does apply where race was the predominant factor in drawing district lines and traditional, race-neutral districting principles were subordinated to race.  The Court found evidence that other factors, including incumbent protection, were considered.
thumb|left|180px|Outline of Texas' 30th Congressional District that was struck down in Bush v. Vera.
The State argued, for example, that the bizarre shape of District 30 in Dallas County was explained by the drafters' desire to unite urban communities of interest and that the bizarre shape of all three districts was attributable to the Legislature's efforts to protect incumbents of old districts while designing the new ones. The Supreme Court upheld the district court's finding to the contrary, holding that race was the predominant factor, saying that "the contours of Congressional District 30 are unexplainable in terms other than race."
In applying strict scrutiny, the Court again assumed without deciding that complying with § 2 of the Voting Rights Act was a compelling state interest, but found that the districts were not narrowly tailored to comply with § 2 because all three districts were bizarrely shaped and far from compact as a result of racial manipulation. To the extent there was political manipulation, race was used as a proxy for political affiliation. It was race that predominated over all other factors.
Justice O'Connor further noted that: "[B]izarre shape and noncompactness cause constitutional harm insofar as they convey the message that political identity is, or should be, predominantly racial. . . . [C]utting across pre-existing precinct lines and other natural or traditional divisions, is not merely evidentially significant; it is part of the constitutional problem insofar as it disrupts nonracial bases of identity and thus intensifies the emphasis on race."
The court pointed out that, if the minority population is not sufficiently compact to draw a compact district, there is no violation of § 2; if the minority population is sufficiently compact to draw a compact district, nothing in § 2 requires the creation of a race-based district that is far from compact.
A § 2 district that is reasonably compact and regular, taking into account traditional districting principles such as maintaining communities of interest and traditional boundaries, may pass strict scrutiny without having to defeat rival compact districts designed by plaintiffs' experts in endless "beauty contests."
The Court found that the district lines were not justified as an attempt to remedy the effects of past discrimination, since there was no evidence of present discrimination other than racially polarized voting. Since racially polarized voting only served to make a case for a violation of § 2, and the plan was not narrowly tailored to remedy a § 2 violation, the bizarre shapes were not justified.
The Court found that creation of District 18, the reconfigured African-American district in the Houston area, was not justified as an attempt to avoid retrogression under § 5, since it actually increased the African-American voting population from 40.8 percent to 50.9 percent.
 Concurrences 
In an unusual move, Justice O'Connor wrote a concurrence to her own opinion in which she expressed her view on two points: first, compliance with the results test of §2 of the Voting Rights Act is a compelling state interest, and second, that the test can co-exist in principle and in practice with Shaw v. Reno and its progeny.
Justice Anthony Kennedy, who joined in the plurality opinion, wrote separately to express his view that anytime a district is drawn with a pre-ordained racial composition that strict scrutiny would apply.
Justice Clarence Thomas issued a concurring opinion in which Justice Antonin Scalia joined which stated that "Strict scrutiny applies to all governmental classifications based on race, and we have expressly held that there is no exception for race based redistricting."
 Dissents 
There were two dissents filed in this case, one by Justice John Paul Stevens in which Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen Breyer joined and one by Justice David Souter, in which Ginsburg and Breyer also joined.
 See also 
 Wesberry v. Sanders, 
 Wright v. Rockefeller, 
 Shaw v. Reno, 
 Miller v. Johnson, 
 Hunt v. Cromartie, 
 Easley v. Cromartie, 
 Georgia v. Ashcroft, 
 League of United Latin American Citizens v. Perry, 
 Alabama Legislative Black Caucus v. Alabama, 
 References 
 Bush v. Vera, U.S. Supreme Court Case Summary and Oral Argument
 External links 
Thompson, Krissah, "Edward Blum defies odds in getting cases to Supreme Court", Washington Post, February 25, 2013. Bush v. Vera was Blum's first case. In 2013, two more cases challenging racial preferences—in University of Texas admissions and in the Voting Rights Act respectively—and with Blum's active contribution are before the Supreme Court.
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
Category:1996 in United States case law
Category:Gerrymandering in the United States
Category:Congressional districts of Texas
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Legal history of Texas
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Byrd v. Blue Ridge Rural Electric Cooperative, Inc." ==> """
Byrd v. Blue Ridge Rural Electric Cooperative, Inc., 356 U.S. 525 (1958), decided on May 19, 1958, was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States that refined the doctrine regarding in what instances courts were required to follow state law.
Background of the case
Electric power utility company Blue Ridge Rural Electric Cooperative, Inc., the defendant in this case, provided electric power to subscribers in rural South Carolina.  James Earl Byrd, the plaintiff, was employed by R. H. Bouligny, Inc., an independent contractor. Bouligny had a $334,300 contract with Blue Ridge to construct 24 miles of new power lines, the reconversion to higher capacities of about 88 miles of existing lines, and the construction of two new substations and a breaker station. Byrd touched a live wire and suffered injuries while connecting power lines to one of the new substations. He brought a claim against his employer, Bouligny, and collected workmen's compensation, his guaranteed but only remedy for work-related injuries under state law. 
Byrd then proceeded to bring an action in diversity against Blue Ridge in the District Court for the Western District of South Carolina. Byrd was a resident of the state of North Carolina and Blue Ridge was a South Carolina corporation. Byrd sought damages for injuries allegedly caused by Blue Ridge's negligence. At issue was South Carolina's Workmen's Compensation Act that held that the employees of subcontractors are considered employees of the contractor for the purposes of the Act if, but only if, they perform work that is part of the contractor's trade or business. Additionally, the local judicial interpretation of the Act held that it was a question of law, not fact whether a workman was an employee under the statute, thus to be decided by a judge, not a jury. 
Byrd argued that the work that Bouligny, Inc. was performing (building electric substations) was not part of Blue Ridge's "trade or business." At trial the judge entered judgment for Byrd (agreeing with the plaintiff that substations are not part of a trade or business, as the use of the substations was purely internal, and trade or business required work for someone else). The United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit reversed and directed judgment for Blue Ridge. The Supreme Court granted certiorari.
The Court's decision
The question was whether the cause of action brought by the plaintiff was covered by the South Carolina Workmen's Compensation Act and therefore whether the plaintiff was barred from any other remedy against his employer in connection with the events at issue in the case. The Court, in a majority opinion by Justice William Brennan, first discussed whether the issue should be decided by a jury or by a court, as is the practice (and common law) in South Carolina.  
The Court noted that while in South Carolina the court decided the question, the rule is not bound up with the definitions and rights of the parties, being purely a practical consideration with irrelevant historic causes, a custom. The Court then addressed the outcome determinative test of York. The Court reasoned that if reaching the same outcome were the only consideration then the federal court would have to follow state practice.  However, in addition to the outcome-determinative test of York, the court reasoned the federal courts should consider any countervailing federal policies. 
In the case, following the state practice would disrupt the federal system of allocating functions between judges and juries and go against "the influence - if not the command - of the Seventh Amendment" (that guarantees the right of a trial by jury in suits at common law). Thus the Court found that the possibility of a different outcome was less important than perverting the judge-jury function allocations in the American federal system. Brennan concluded that there is no certainty or even a strong possibility that a different outcome would necessarily result if the issue is decided by a jury, mentioning numerous powers federal judges have (including making judgments notwithstanding the verdict.)
Analysis by scholars
C. Wright  and M. Kane wrote in the Law of Federal Courts that "[t]here was considerable difficulty in applying the Byrd test" and that it stemmed from "the fact that there is no scale to say with assurance in a particular case that the federal interest asserted is more or less important than the interest in preserving uniformity of result with the state court." 
In The Irrepressible Myth of Erie, John Hart Ely, wrote that "[t]he [Byrd] opinion exhibits a confusion that exceeds even that normally surrounding a balancing test, and lower courts understandably experienced considerable difficulty in applying it."87 Harv. L. Rev. 693 
See also
Erie doctrine
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 356
References
External links
Case Brief for Byrd v. Blue Ridge Rural Electric Cooperative, Inc. available at Lawnix.com
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Diversity jurisdiction case law
Category:Conflict of laws case law
Category:United States Erie Doctrine
Category:1958 in United States case law
"""

From "Byrd v. United States" ==> """
Byrd v. United States, 584 U.S. ___ (2018), was a United States Supreme Court case that held that drivers of rental cars have rights protecting them from unconstitutional searches by police, even if the drivers are not listed on the rental agreement..
Background
In mid-2014, Terrance Byrd was driving a rental car along a Pennsylvania highway. The car had been rented from Budget Rent a Car by his long-time girlfriend and driven with her consent, but Byrd's name was not listed as an authorized driver of the car on the rental agreement. A state trooper with the Pennsylvania State Police, David Long, pulled Byrd over for a small traffic violation, and Byrd's mannerisms raised Long's suspicions. Further checks of Byrd's history revealed past criminal convictions and an arrest warrant in New Jersey. As Byrd was not listed on the rental agreement, Long initiated a search of the car without Byrd's consent and found several pounds of heroin and body armor in the trunk. Byrd was arrested and tried on federal drug charges in the United States District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania.
Byrd's lawyers attempted to have the search of the car dismissed as evidence, as it violated Byrd's rights against unreasonable searches under the Fourth Amendment defined under the motor vehicle exception, but the judge refused to clear it since by the Budget rental contract, Byrd was not an authorized driver and did not have that right. Byrd pleaded guilty to the charges but left the option to appeal the conviction. He was sentenced to ten years in prison.
Byrd's lawyers appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, which was heard and reviewed in late 2016. The Third Circuit acknowledged there was a split among the Circuit Courts as to the right of privacy related to rental cars, and previous cases of the Third Circuit had ruled that such drivers did not have expectations of privacy. The Third Circuit upheld the District Court's decision on that basis.
Supreme Court
Byrd's lawyers submitted a petition for writ of certiorari with the Supreme Court in March 2017. The petition focused on the question of whether an otherwise well-established expectation of privacy for a driver of a car is nullified in the case of a rental car where the driver is not on the rental contract. The Court agreed to hear the case in September 2017.
Oral arguments were heard on January 9, 2018. Oral arguments in another Fourth Amendment case relating to vehicles and rights to privacy, Collins v. Virginia, were heard the same day.
The Supreme Court issued its ruling on May 14, 2018. In a unanimous decision favoring Byrd, Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote, "The mere fact that a driver in lawful possession or control of a rental car is not listed on the rental agreement will not defeat his or her otherwise reasonable expectation of privacy". Kennedy added that there can be numerous reasons for a driver unlisted on a rental contract needing to drive the rental car, and the government had not shown that whether the simple breach of the rental contract would affect the expectation of privacy. Kennedy's decision stated that there remained two issues that the Supreme Court remanded back to the lower courts: whether Long had probable cause to search the car in the first place and whether Byrd "intentionally used a third party as a straw man in a calculated plan to mislead the rental company from the very outset, all to aid him in committing a crime."
 References 
External links
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Pennsylvania State Police
Category:Avis Budget Group
Category:United States contract case law
"""

From "C & L Enterprises, Inc. v. Citizen Band, Potawatomi Indian Tribe of Oklahoma" ==> """
C & L Enterprises, Inc. v. Citizen Band, Potawatomi Indian Tribe of Oklahoma, 532 U.S. 411 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the tribe waived its sovereign immunity when it agreed to a contract containing an arbitration agreement..
Background
In 1993, the Citizen Band Potawatomi Indian Tribe of Oklahoma entered into a contract with C & L Enterprises, Inc. to install a roof on a tribally owned building that was not on reservation land. Prior to the work being performed under the contract, the Potawatomi decided to use a different type of roof, re-bid the job and selected another contractor to install the roof.
The contract used with C & L Enterprises was provided by the tribe and contained both an arbitration clause and a choice of law clause.  C & L then sought to enforce the arbitration clause and the tribe claimed sovereign immunity. The arbitrator ruled in favor of C & L and C & L filed suit to enforce the judgment in the District Court of Oklahoma County.
The trial court denied the tribes motion to dismiss based upon sovereign immunity and the tribe appealed.  The Oklahoma Court of Civil Appeals affirmed and the Oklahoma Supreme Court declined to review the case. It was next appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
During the time the case was pending, the U.S. Supreme Court decided Kiowa Tribe of Okla. v. Manufacturing Technologies, Inc.. In view of that decision, the decision of the Oklahoma Court of Civil Appeals was vacated and the case remanded. On remand, the Court of Civil Appeals held that the Potawatomi did have sovereign immunity and C & L appealed.
Several other courts had held that an arbitration clause waived immunity, and the Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve the conflict.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg delivered the opinion of the court, reversing and remanding.
An Indian tribe has sovereignty and is immune from suit in a state court unless that immunity has been specifically abrogated by the United States Congress or clearly waived by the tribe.  In this case, the Potawatomie Tribe entered into a contract, using a contract form that the tribe provided, that agreed to arbitration and to having the dispute heard in state court.  This is a clear waiver of the tribe's sovereign immunity.
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Citizen Potawatomi Nation
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States tribal sovereign immunity case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Caban v. Mohammed" ==> """
Caban v. Mohammed, 441 U.S. 380 (1979), was a United States Supreme Court family law case which argued that a New York law, which allowed unwed mothers, but not unwed fathers, a veto over the adoption of that couple's children, was discriminatory..
Background
At the time of this case, § 111 of New York's Domestic Relations Law required any adoption of a child to be limited by the consent of either married parent of a child, but only the mother in the case that the parents had never married.  The law, in part, read:
consent to adoption shall be required as follows: . . . (b) Of the parents or surviving parent, whether adult or infant, of a child born in wedlock; [and] (c) Of the mother, whether adult or infant, of a child born out of wedlock. . . .
Abdiel Caban and his partner Maria Gonazles lived together for five years, during which time they had a son, and later, a daughter. After separating in 1973, Maria later married to Kazim Mohammed.  Two years later, Kazim filed to legally adopt the children. Caban had also married to his new wife Nina, they also filed for adoption, but due to § 111, that attempt was blocked, and the Mohammed's request was granted. Caban appealed unsuccessfully to the New York Supreme Court, Appellate Division and then the New York Court of Appeals, after which he appealed to the United States Supreme Court, arguing violations of both equal protection and due process.
New York argued for the law's distinction, expressing the concern that allowing an unwed father to veto his child's adoption might have the effect of discouraging adoption, which wouldn't be in the best interests of the children.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|left|125px|Justice Lewis Powell delivered the opinion of the Court.
The Court split 5-4, with Justice Lewis F. Powell, Jr. writing the majority opinion. That opinion found that § 111 of New York's Domestic Relations Law unconstitutionally discriminated on the basis of sex, conflicting with the Fourteenth Amendment's guarantee of equal protection, using an intermediate level of judicial scrutiny. Powell's reasoning argued that Caban's formation of a "natural family", through five years of living with his partner and the children, entitled him to legal rights to those children.Dolgin, p. 106 Moreover, Powell found that treating mothers and fathers differently in  § 111 did not "bear a substantial relation to the State's interest in providing adoptive homes for its illegitimate children."
Powell's opinion declined to decide whether there was also a due process violation, or whether there was an additional equal protection issue in treating fathers differentially depending on whether or not they had been legally married.
Stewart's dissent, on the other hand, found no violation of equal protection. Stewart believed that the process of carrying the child to term was a situational difference between mothers and fathers which, along with the state's interest in having illegitimate children adopted provided a legitimate basis for the differential treatment of unwed mothers and fathers in § 111. Similarly, Stevens' dissent found a strong interest in promoting adoption and that maternity created a significant difference in physical and psychological parenting between biological mothers and fathers.Hartman, p. 46Dolgin, p. 107
 Subsequent developments 
As a result of the ruling, Caban regained the visitation rights he had enjoyed before the original decision granting adoption to Kazim Mohammed.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 441
References
External links
Category:1979 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States family case law
Category:United States men's rights case law
Category:History of women in New York (state)
"""

From "Cabell v. Chavez-Salido" ==> """
Cabell v. Chavez-Salido, 454 U.S. 432 (1982), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States that upheld a state law as constitutional that excluded aliens from positions as probation officers.  The Court found that probation officers fell within the political function exception to strict scrutiny equal protection analysis because probation officers exercise discretionary power involving a basic governmental function that gives them authority over the individual.Varat, J.D. et al.  Constitutional Law Cases and Materials, Concise Thirteenth Edition.  Foundation Press, New York, NY: 2009, p. 667
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 454
References
External links
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1982 in United States case law
"""

From "Caetano v. Massachusetts" ==> """
Caetano v. Massachusetts, 577 U.S. 411 (2016), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States unanimously vacated a Massachusetts conviction of a woman who carried a stun gun for self-defense., slip op. at 1-2 (2016) (per curiam).
Background
Jaime Caetano was reported to have been hospitalized and "in fear for [her] life" after an altercation with her "abusive" boyfriend.Caetano, slip op. at 1 (Alito, J., concurring in the judgment) (internal quotations omitted) (modification in slip opinion). After obtaining several restraining orders that "proved futile", Caetano accepted a stun gun from a friend for self-defense.Caetano, slip op. at 1 (Alito, J., concurring in the judgment). One night, when her ex-boyfriend confronted her outside her work and threatened her, she displayed the stun gun and successfully avoided an altercation. However, when police discovered that she was in possession of the stun gun, she was arrested, tried, and convicted under a Massachusetts law that outlawed the possession of stun guns.Caetano, slip op. at 2 (Alito, J., concurring in the judgment) (citing Mass. Gen. Laws, ch. 140, § 131J (2014). The Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court had said her stun gun was "not the type of weapon that is eligible for Second Amendment protection” because it was “not in common use at the time of [the Second Amendment’s] enactment.”Caetano, slip op. at 1 (Alito, J., concurring in the judgment) (citing 470 Mass. 774, 781) (internal quotations omitted) (modification in slip opinion). Caetano then appealed the Massachusetts court's ruling to the Supreme Court of the United States.Caetano, slip op. at 1 (per curiam).
Opinion of the Court
In a per curiam decision, the Supreme Court vacated the ruling of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court.Caetano, slip op. at 2 (per curiam). Citing District of Columbia v. Heller. and McDonald v. City of Chicago,. the Court began its opinion by stating that "the Second Amendment extends, prima facie, to all instruments that constitute bearable arms, even those that were not in existence at the time of the founding" and that "the Second Amendment right is fully applicable to the States". The term "bearable arms" was defined in District of Columbia v. Heller, 554 U.S. 570 (2008) and includes any "“[w]eapo[n] of offence” or “thing that a man wears for his defence, or takes into his hands,” that is “carr[ied] . . . for the purpose of offensive or defensive action.” 554 U. S., at 581, 584 (internal quotation marks omitted)."Caetano v. Massachusetts, 577 U.S. 411 (2016), slip op. at 4, footnote 3 (Alito, J., concurring in the judgment).
The Court then identified three reasons why the Massachusetts court's opinion contradicted prior rulings by the United States Supreme Court. First, the Massachusetts court said that stun guns could be banned because they "were not in common use at the time of the Second Amendment’s enactment", but the Supreme Court noted that this contradicted Heller'''s conclusion that Second Amendment protects "arms ... that were not in existence at the time of the founding”.Caetano, slip op. at 1 (per curiam) (citing Heller, 554 U.S., at 582) (internal quotations omitted). Second, the Massachusetts court said that stun guns were "dangerous per se at common law and unusual" because they were "a thoroughly modern invention", but the Supreme Court held that this was also inconsistent with Heller.Caetano, slip op. at 1-2 (per curiam) (citing  470 Mass., at 781) (internal quotations omitted). Third, the Massachusetts court said that stun guns could be banned because they were not "readily adaptable to use in the military", but the Supreme Court held that Heller rejected the argument that "only those weapons useful in warfare" were protected by the Second Amendment.Caetano, slip op. at 1-2 (per curiam) (citing  470 Mass., at 781; Heller, 554 U.S., at 624–25) (internal quotations omitted).
Justice Alito's concurring opinion
Justice Samuel Alito wrote an opinion concurring in the judgment, in which he was joined by Justice Clarence Thomas. Justice Alito characterized the per curiam decision as "grudging" and wrote that "[t]he reasoning of the Massachusetts court poses a grave threat to the fundamental right of self-defense".Caetano, slip op. at 9 (Alito, J., concurring in the judgment). He provided an analysis of why he believed that the Massachusetts court's ruling contradicted Heller and other cases interpreting the Second Amendment.Caetano, slip op. at 4-8 (Alito, J., concurring in the judgment). After concluding that the Massachusetts stun gun ban violates the Second Amendment, Justice Alito wrote: "if the fundamental right of self-defense does not protect Caetano, then the safety of all Americans is left to the mercy of state authorities who may be more concerned about disarming people than about keeping them safe".Caetano, slip op. at 10 (Alito, J., concurring in the judgment).
Subsequent developments
On July 6, 2016, after the prosecution and defense reached an agreement, Caetano was found not guilty by a Massachusetts judge.
In a subsequent case, Ramirez v. Commonwealth, the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court relied on Caetano to strike down the state's stun gun law.No. SJC-12340, 2018 Mass. LEXIS 237 (April 17, 2018)
Commentary and analysis
Lyle Denniston observed that the Court's opinion was the first direct interpretation of the meaning of the Second Amendment since the Court's 2008 ruling in Heller''. However, given the limited nature of the per curiam opinion, Denniston noted that "[t]he facts in this case do not necessarily stand as a definite constitutional declaration".
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Second Amendment case law
"""

From "Caillot v. Deetken" ==> """
Caillot v. Deetken, 113 U.S. 215 (1885), was a writ of error filed in the circuit court recorded March 16, 1882, and the transcript that was returned with it was filed in this Court November 28, 1884. Two full terms of the Court had passed between the filing of the writ of error in the circuit court and its return with the transcript into this Court..
This Court can acquire no jurisdiction under a writ of error where the return to it is made by filing the transcript of the record here after the expiration of the term of this Court next succeeding the filing of the writ in the circuit court.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States appellate procedure
Category:Statutes of limitations
Category:1885 in United States case law
"""

From "Calder v. Bull" ==> """
Calder v. Bull, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 386 (1798), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court decided four important points of constitutional law.
First, the ex post facto clause of the United States Constitution applies to criminal laws that have at least one of four effects:
1st. Every law that makes an action done before the passing of the law, and which was innocent when done, criminal; and punishes such action. 2nd. Every law that aggravates a crime, makes it greater than it was, when committed. 3rd. Every law that changes the punishment, and inflicts a greater punishment, than the law annexed to the crime, when committed. 4th. Every law that alters the legal rules of evidence, and receives less, or different, testimony, than the law required at the time of the commission of the offence, in order to convict the offender.. The decision restates this categorization later as laws "that create, or aggregate, the crime; or encrease  the punishment, or change the rules of evidence, for the purpose of conviction" [emphasis in the original].See generally Black's Law Dictionary, p. 520 (5th ed. 1979).The prohibition against ex post facto laws in the United States Constitution "applies only to criminal matters [ . . . ]." Wayne R. LaFave & Austin W. Scott, Jr.,Criminal Law, paragr. 2.4, p. 97, West Publishing Co. (2d ed. 1986)."The inhibition against the passage of an ex post facto law by Congress in § 9 of Article I of the Constitution applies only to criminal laws." Mahler v. Eby, 264 U.S. (1924).See also Harisiades v. Shaughnessy, 342 U.S. 580 (1952)."The constitutional prohibition against ex post facto laws applies only to penal legislation that imposes or increases criminal punishment for conduct predating its enactment. [ . . . ] The Ex Post Facto Clause is not applicable in a civil context." Saxon v. Commissioner, T.C. Memo. 2006-52 (2006).In Calder v. Bull, the U.S. Supreme Court construed the ex post facto clause "as being limited to criminal legislation." Gerald Gunther, Constitutional Law, p. 443, The Foundation Press, Inc. (11th ed. 1985).
Second, the Supreme Court lacked the authority to nullify state laws that violate that state's constitution:
this court has no jurisdiction to determine that any law of any state Legislature, contrary to the Constitution of such state is void.
Third, the Supreme Court said that:
no man should be compelled to do what the laws do not require; nor to refrain from acts which the laws permit. [emphasis in the original]
Fourth, the Supreme Court decided that this specific act of the Connecticut legislature, and any other state legislative act, is not a violation of the ex post facto clause if 
there is no fact done by Bull and wife, Plaintiff's in Error, that is in any manner affected by the law or resolution of Connecticut: It does not concern, or relate to, any act done by them. [emphasis in the original]
Background
The Connecticut legislature ordered a new trial in a court case about the contents of a will, overruling an earlier court ruling. In a unanimous decision, the United States Supreme Court held that the legislature's actions did not violate the ex post facto law in article 1, section 10 of the Constitution, which states:
No State shall enter into any Treaty, Alliance, or Confederation; grant Letters of Marque and Reprisal; coin Money; emit Bills of Credit; make any Thing but gold and silver Coin a Tender in Payment of Debts; pass any Bill of Attainder, ex post facto Law, or Law impairing the Obligation of Contracts, or grant any Title of Nobility.
An ex post facto law or retroactive law, is a law that retroactively changes the legal consequences of acts committed or the legal status of facts and relationships that existed prior to the enactment of the law.
The holding in this case still remains good law: the ex post facto provision of the Constitution applies solely to criminal cases, not civil cases.
Legal arguments
In this case, the participating Supreme Court judges were William Cushing, James Iredell, William Paterson and Samuel Chase.
Justice Samuel Chase argued that the government has no authority to interfere with an individual's rights, and "the general principles of law and reason" forbid the legislature from interfering. He then explained that judges ought to rely on natural law when making their decisions:
The purposes for which men enter into society will determine the nature and terms of their social compact.... There are certain vital principles in our free republican governments which will determine and overrule an apparent and flagrant abuse of legislative power; as to authorize manifest injustice by positive law; or to take away that security for personal liberty, or private property, for the protection whereof government was established.  An act of the Legislature (for I cannot call it a law) contrary to the great first principles of the social compact, cannot be considered a rightful exercise of legislative authority.... It seems to me, that the right of property, in its origin, could only arise from compact express, or implied, and I think it the better opinion, that the right, as well as the mode, or manner, of acquiring property, and of alienating or transferring, inheriting, or transmitting it, is conferred by society...and is always subject to the rules prescribed by positive law.
Justice James Iredell stated that courts cannot strike down statutes based only upon principles of natural justice:
[t]he ideas of natural justice are regulated by no fixed standard: the ablest and the purest men have differed upon the subject; and all that the Court could properly say, in such an event, would be, that the Legislature (possessed of an equal right of opinion) had passed an act which, in the opinion of the judges, was inconsistent with the abstract principles of natural justice.
Iredell affirmed the ability of the Supreme Court to review legislative acts, but based on something more than principles of natural justice:
If any act of Congress, or of the Legislature of a state, violates those constitutional provisions, it is unquestionably void...If, on the other hand, the Legislature of the Union, or the Legislature of any member of the Union, shall pass a law, within the general scope of their constitutional power, the Court cannot pronounce it to be void, merely because it is, in their judgment, contrary to the principles of natural justice...
There are then but two lights, in which the subject can be viewed: 1st. If the Legislature pursue the authority delegated to them, their acts are valid...they exercise the discretion vested in them by the people, to whom alone they are responsible for the faithful discharge of their trust... 2nd. If they transgress the boundaries of that authority, their acts are invalid...they violate a fundamental law, which must be our guide, whenever we are called upon as judges to determine the validity of a legislative act.
And:
If, then, a government, composed of Legislative, Executive and Judicial departments, were established, by a Constitution, which imposed no limits on the legislative power, the consequence would inevitably be, that whatever the legislative power chose to enact, would be lawfully enacted, and the judicial power could never interpose to pronounce it void. It is true, that some speculative jurists have held, that a legislative act against natural justice must, in itself, be void; but I cannot think that, under such a government, any Court of Justice would possess a power to declare it so.
Justice William Cushing agreed with the judgement, saying that:
The case appears to me to be clear of all difficulty, taken either way. If the act is a judicial act, it is not touched by the Federal Constitution: and, if it is a legislative act, it is maintained and justified by the ancient and uniform practice of the state of Connecticut.
This case explains that an ex post facto law is the legislature exercising a judicial power. 
These acts were legislative judgments; and an exercise of judicial power.
This case explained the grounds that individuals who brought forth such law used as a justification:
The ground for the exercise of such legislative power was this, that the safety of the kingdom depended on the death, or   other punishment, of the offender: as if traitors, when discovered, could be so formidable, or the government so insecure! With very few exceptions, the advocates of such laws were stimulated by ambition, or personal resentment, and vindictive malice. To prevent such, and similar, acts of violence and injustice, I believe, the Federal and State Legislatures, were prohibited from passing any bill of attainder; or any ex post facto law.
Chase explained the difference between ex post facto laws (which are prohibited) and retrospective laws (which are allowed): 
In my opinion, the true distinction is between ex post facto laws, and retrospective laws. Every ex post facto law must necessarily be retrospective; but every retrospective law is not an ex post facto law: The former, only, are prohibited. Every law that takes away, or impairs, rights vested, agreeably to existing laws, is retrospective, and is generally unjust, and may be oppressive; and it is a good general rule, that a law should have no retrospect: but there are cases in which laws may justly, and for the benefit of the community, and also of individuals, relate to a time antecedent to their commencement; as statutes of oblivion, or of pardon. [emphasis in the original] 
Although this case is good law, courts do not decide if a law violates the ex post facto clause based on its benefit to the person it is enacted upon. Nor are challenges made to some retrospective law based on a separation of powers dispute.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 3
 Rule according to higher law
 References 
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States ex post facto case law
Category:1798 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Ellsworth Court
"""

From "Calder v. Jones" ==> """
Calder v. Jones, 465 U.S. 783 (1984), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that a court within a state could assert personal jurisdiction over the author and editor of a national magazine which published an allegedly libelous article about a resident of that state, and where the magazine had wide circulation in that state..
Facts
The plaintiff, actress Shirley Jones, sued the defendants, the National Enquirer, its distributor, the writer of the article, and Calder, the editor-in-chief of the magazine, over an October 9, 1979 article in which the Enquirer alleged that Jones was an alcoholic. Jones lived in California, and although the Enquirer article had been written and edited in Florida, Jones filed her lawsuit in a California state court. Jones asserted that the court had jurisdiction based on the large circulation Enquirer enjoyed in California - selling over 600,000 copies each week out of a total national circulation of about 5,000,000 copies per week.
The publisher and the distributor did not object to jurisdiction in California. The trial court dismissed the claim as to the author and editor on the grounds that it lacked personal jurisdiction over the defendants, basing this finding on First Amendment concerns that permitting jurisdiction in such cases would chill free speech. The California Court of Appeal reversed, and the Supreme Court of California affirmed the appellate court's ruling. Calder appealed, as did the writer of the article, contending that the writer and editor of a magazine article were like welders of a boiler part. In such a case, although the manufacturer of the product could be held liable in another state where the product caused an injury, a worker who had neither a stake in the distribution nor any control over it would not be held liable in that state.
Issue
The issue presented to the U.S. Supreme Court was whether the sale of a magazine article provided sufficient minimum contacts to permit the assertion of personal jurisdiction over the editor of that article, pursuant to the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Holding
The Court, in a unanimous opinion written by Justice Rehnquist, held that California courts had jurisdiction over the defendant. Petitioners argued that, because they were merely employees of the libelous newspaper, their case was analogous to a welder who works on a boiler in Florida that subsequently explodes in California. The Court distinguishes this by noting that unlike the welder they intentionally targeted the California contact. Rehnquist wrote that the analogy to a welder "does not wash" and noted that the editor was aware that the magazine had a significant circulation in California, that the plaintiff resided in California, and that the allegations made in the article would harm her career there. The Court also rejected any First Amendment considerations, noting that the defendants could assert a First Amendment defense against the claim itself but not against the jurisdiction of the state court to hear the claim.
Other developments
On the same day as this decision was reported, the Court held in Keeton v. Hustler Magazine, Inc. (1984) that jurisdiction would also be found even where the party injured by the libelous assertion was not a resident of the state where the lawsuit was brought. The court in Keeton found that the sale of "10,000 to 15,000 copies of its magazine - a very small percentage of its total publication,". was sufficient to maintain that Hustler Magazine had sufficient minimum contacts with New Hampshire, such that the state could exercise jurisdiction over the magazine without conflicting with the constitutional requirements of due process.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 465
 Pennoyer v. Neff
 International Shoe Co. v. Washington
 Personal jurisdiction in Internet cases in the United States
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States personal jurisdiction case law
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:National Enquirer
"""

From "Califano v. Aznavorian" ==> """
Califano v. Aznavorian, 439 U.S. 170 (1978), was a United States Supreme Court case involving denial of Social Security Benefits to recipients while they are abroad and the Fifth Amendment due process right to international travel..
 Background 
The Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program was enacted by Congress in 1972 to aid needy aged, blind, and disabled people. The legislation stipulated that the recipient would not receive benefits for any month spent entirely outside the United States. Grace Aznavorian was an American citizen and a resident of California in 1974, and was eligible recipient of SSI benefits. On July 21, 1974, she left the United States, traveled to Mexico, and was unable to return to the United States until September 1, 1974. She did not receive benefits for August or September.
Aznavorian pursued administrative remedies without success before filing suit in the United States District Court for the Southern District of California, seeking judicial review administrative agency's decision. She moved for certification of a plaintiff class including all persons denied SSI benefits because of international travel. The District Court certified the class, concluding that a class action was not barred by the Social Security Act, because the class would be limited to those who had presented unsuccessful claims to the Secretary. The District Court granted summary judgment for the plaintiff's class. The Secretary appealed to the Ninth Circuit.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Stewart delivered the opinion of the Court, holding, without dissent, that Section 1611(f) of the Social Security Act was constitutional because it had a rational basis and did not impose an impermissible burden on the freedom of international travel in violation of the Fifth Amendment because the section merely had an incidental effect on international travel, (distinguishing Kent v. Dulles,. Aptheker v. Secretary of State,. and Zemel v. Rusk)..  The Court found the challenged statute to be entitled to a strong presumption of constitutionality, citing Mathews v. de Castro,. and that the Court had consistently upheld the constitutionality of arbitrary classifications in federal welfare legislation where a rational basis existed for Congress' choice.  The section clearly effectuated the basic congressional decision to limit SSI payments to residents of the United States. Moreover, § 1611(f) might have represented Congress' decision simply to limit payments to those who need them in the United States. While these justifications for the legislation might not have been compelling, its constitutionality, in contrast to the standard applied to laws that penalize the right of interstate travel, did not depend on compelling justifications.
The Court rejected Aznavorian's assertion that because the statutory provision of § 1611(f)limits the freedom of international travel, a more stringent standard must be applied in its constitutional appraisal.  The Court noted that legislation providing governmental payments of monetary benefits here had an incidental effect on a protected liberty and it did not have nearly so direct an impact on the freedom to travel internationally as occurred in the Kent, Aptheker, or Zemel.   It did not limit the availability or validity of passports and it did not limit the right to travel on grounds that may be in tension with the First Amendment. It merely withdrew a governmental benefit during and shortly after an extended absence from this country. Unless the limitation imposed by Congress is wholly irrational, it was constitutional in spite of its incidental effect on international travel.
Moreover, the Court held that Congress may simply have decided to limit payments to those who need them in the United States. The needs to which this program responded might vary dramatically in foreign countries and the Social Security Administration would be hard pressed to monitor the continuing eligibility of persons outside the country. Congress may only have wanted to increase the likelihood that these funds would be spent inside the United States.  These justifications for the legislation in question were not, perhaps, compelling. But its constitutionality did not depend on compelling justifications. The Court held that it was enough if the provision was rationally based, citing Dandridge v. Williams..
 Concurrence 
Justice Marshall and Justice Brennan, concurring in the result, but pointed out that sustaining classifications in welfare legislation that are "arbitrary," so long as they are not "wholly irrational" would be inconsistent with the settled principle that the "standard by which [welfare] legislation . . . must be judged 'is not a toothless one,'" citing Mathews v. de Castro.  Therefore, they did not understand the Court to imply that welfare legislation not involving a fundamental interest or suspect classification is subject to a lesser standard of review than the traditional rational basis test.
See also
 Kent v. Dulles
 References 
 External links 
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:Social Security lawsuits
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Califano v. Goldfarb" ==> """
Califano v. Goldfarb, 430 U.S. 199 (1977), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court,.  which held that the different treatment of men and women mandated by 42 U.S.C. § 402(f)(1)(D). constituted invidious discrimination against female wage earners by affording them less protection for their surviving spouses than is provided to male employees, and therefore violated the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The case was brought by a widower who was denied survivor benefits on the grounds that he had not been receiving at least one-half support from his wife when she died. Justice Brennan delivered the opinion of the court, ruling unconstitutional the provision of the Social Security Act which set forth a gender-based distinction between widows and widowers, whereby Social Security Act survivors benefits were payable to a widower only if he was receiving at least half of his support from his late wife, while such benefits based on the earnings of a deceased husband were payable to his widow regardless of dependency. The Court found that this distinction deprived female wage earners of the same protection that a similarly situated male worker would have received, violating due process and equal protection.
 Background 
Leon Goldfarb, a widower in the state of New York, applied for survivor benefits under the Social Security Act. Leon Goldfarb's late wife had worked as a secretary for New York City public schools for nearly twenty-five years and paid all of her social security taxes until her death in 1968. Upon his wife's death, Leon Goldfarb applied for survivor benefits but was denied. The relevant statute, 42 U.S.C § 402(f)(1)(D), mandated that surviving widowers must meet the burden of proving that they had been receiving over half of their financial support from their wives. The law made no such requirement for widows, who would be provided survivor benefits regardless of their dependency on their husbands.
Goldfarb challenged the constitutionality of the statute in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York. He was represented by Nadine H. Taub, Rutgers Law School professor and attorney at the Women's Rights Litigation Clinic of Rutgers Law School-Newark and the American Civil Liberties Union Foundation. The lower court ruled in Goldfarb's favor, holding that the provision of the Social Security Act that denied benefits to widowers was unconstitutional as discriminating against widowers on the basis of sex. The Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare appealed the decision to the Supreme Court.
Goldfarb was represented by future Supreme Court justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, who at the time was co-founder and general counsel of the Women's Rights Project at the American Civil Liberties Union. This case was one of several gender discrimination cases that Ginsburg successfully argued in front of the Supreme Court between 1973 and 1976. Similar to her arguments in Frontiero v. Richardson, Ginsburg argued in her brief that a reliance on gender stereotypes which served to devalue women's roles as breadwinners constituted gender-based discrimination in violation of equal protection. She argued that the social security statute in question "assume[d] gainful employment as a domain in which men come first, women second," and that the statute favored "one type of marital unit over another."
 Court Decision 
In a 5–4 decision, the Supreme Court upheld the decision of the District Court. Justice Brennan's opinion, which was joined by Justice White, Justice Marshall, and Justice Powell, determined that the gender-based distinction violates the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment. The Court agreed with Ginsburg's arguments, noting that the distinction in the federal requirements "deprive[s] women of protection for their families which men receive as a result of their employment." The Court based its decision on the precedent established in prior cases Frontiero and Weinberger v. Wiesenfeld:Weinberger v. Wiesenfeld, like the instant case, presented the question in the context of the [Old-Age, Survivors and Disability Insurance] program. There the Court held unconstitutional a provision that denied father's insurance benefits to surviving widowers with children in their care, while authorizing similar mother's benefits to similarly situated widows... Precisely the same reasoning condemns the gender-based distinction made by § 402(f)(1)(D) in this case. For that distinction, too, operates ‘to deprive women of protection for their families which men receive as a result of their employment’: social security taxes were deducted from Hannah Goldfarb's salary during the quarter century she worked as a secretary, yet, in consequence of § 402(f)(1)(D), she also ‘not only failed to receive for her (spouse) the same protection which similarly situated male worker would have received (for his spouse) but she also was deprived of a portion of her own earnings in order to contribute to the fund out of which benefits would be paid to others.’ The Court rejected the government's argument that the Court should focus solely on the distinction drawn between widowers and widows, based on the notion that the statute discriminates not against the covered wage earning female, but rather against her surviving widower, who was burdened with proof of dependency. The Court disagreed, stating that Mrs. Goldfarb "worked and paid social security taxes... at the same rate as her male colleagues" yet received narrower insurance protection than a male colleague. The Court found that this distinction requires the equal protection challenge in the case to focus on the gender-based discrimination against women and not only the distinction between widowers and widows.
Based on an examination of the legislative history of the statute, the Court found that there existed "an intention to aid the dependent spouses of deceased wage earners, coupled with a presumption that wives are usually dependent" in the statute. Rejecting the "archaic and overbroad" generalizations that a wife is more likely to be dependent on her husband than a husband on his wife, the Court concluded that these presumptions cannot justify a gender-based discrimination when distributing employment-related benefits.
 Justice Stevens’ concurrence 
Justice Stevens wrote in concurrence with the majority. Rejecting that the rationale behind the statutory scheme was justifiably based on administrative convenience or based on a 'policy of cushioning the financial impact of spousal loss upon the sex for which that loss imposes a disproportionately heavy burden,' he concurs with the Court's judgment as to the lack of justification for the disparate treatment of genders, but is "persuaded that the relevant discrimination in this case is against surviving male spouses, rather than against deceased female wage earners."
 Justice Rehnquist's Dissent 
In his dissent, which was joined by Chief Justice Burger, Justice Stewart and Justice Blackmun, Rehnquist disagreed that the classification was discriminatory. Rehnquist argued that Congress' purpose in adopting these provisions for dependency was "to avoid the burden and expense of specific case-by-case determination in the large number of cases where dependency is objectively probable." Because of the likelihood that a widow would be dependent on her husband, and not the other way around, Rehnquist argued that such a justifiably rational basis is permissible under the Fifth Amendment for the purpose of aiding administrative functions.
 Implications 
This ruling required an amendment to the Social Security Act in order to eliminate the burden of proof for widowers. The new language provided equal protection for both genders.
 See also 
 Gender equality
 List of gender equality lawsuits
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 430
 Ruth Bader Ginsburg
 Weinberger v. Wiesenfeld (1975)
 Further reading 
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:Social Security lawsuits
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
Category:Ruth Bader Ginsburg
"""

From "Califano v. Webster" ==> """
Califano v. Webster, 430 U.S. 313 (1977), was a case before the United States Supreme Court that was decided per curiam.
Background
Statute
Under § 215 of the Social Security Act (42 USCS 415), old-age insurance benefits are computed on the basis of the wage earner's "average monthly wage" earned during his "benefit computation years," which are the "elapsed years" (reduced by five) during which his covered wages were highest. 
Pre-1972 version
Under the pre-1972 version, the computation for old age insurance benefits was such that a woman obtained larger benefits than a man of the same age having the same earnings record. 
"Elapsed years" depended upon the wage earner's sex:  § 215 (b)(3) prescribed that the number of "elapsed years" for a male wage earner would be three higher than for an otherwise similarly situated female wage earner; for a male, the number of "elapsed years" equaled the number of years that elapsed after 1950 and before the year in which he became 65, whereas for a female the number of "elapsed years" equaled the number of years that elapsed after 1950 and before the year in which she became 62. Accordingly, a female could exclude from the computation of her "average monthly wage" three more lower earning years than a similarly situated male could exclude, and this would result in a slightly higher "average monthly wage" and correspondingly higher monthly old-age benefits for the retired female wage earner.
The statutory scheme embodied in the former version of § 415 resulted in a higher "average monthly wage" and a correspondingly higher level of monthly old-age benefits for the retired female worker. 
1972 amendment
The 1972 amendment altered the formula for computing benefits so as to eliminate the previous distinction between men and women, but only as to men reaching the age of 62 in 1975 or later; it was not given retroactive application.
Parties
After he had pursued his administrative remedies, a man who had reached the age of 62 before 1975 (The 1972 amendment did not apply to him because he reached age 62 before its effective date), and who was dissatisfied with the amount of his benefits under 215 as amended, brought an action in district court to challenge the constitutionality of 215.
The retired worker requested that the more favorable, prior formula be used to compute his retirement benefits.
District court
The single-judge District Court (United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York) held that the statutory scheme for determining old age benefits under 215 violated the equal protection component of the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment, on the grounds that
(1) to give women who reached age 62 before 1975 greater benefits than men of the same age and earnings record was irrational, and
(2) in any event the 1972 amendment was to be construed to apply retroactively because otherwise it would be irrational.
(413 F Supp 127)
Certiorari and arguments
Appellant, the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, sought review of the District Court's order reversing an administrative decision against appellee retired worker. 
Opinion of the court
On direct appeal, the United States Supreme Court reversed.  The per curiam opinion was joined by Brennan, White, Marshall, Powell, and Stevens.
The per curiam Court held that old-age benefit payments were not constitutionally immunized against alterations of the kind at issue in the case and that Congress was authorized to replace one constitutional computation formula with another and to make the new formula prospective only. The former version of the challenged statute operated directly to compensate women for past economic discrimination and was deliberately enacted to compensate women for the particular economic disabilities they suffered. The subsequent amendment of § 415 was not a Congressional admission that its previous policy was invidiously discriminatory. The retired male worker's Fifth Amendment rights were not violated by the prospective application of § 415, as the Constitution did not forbid statutory changes to have a beginning and thus to discriminate between the rights of an earlier and later time.
(1) the sex distinction of 215 permitting old age insurance benefits obtained by women reaching the age of 62 before 1975 to be greater than those obtained by men of the same age with the same earnings record did not violate Fifth Amendment equal protection, since the more favorable treatment of female wage earners was not the result of archaic and overbroad generalizations about women, or of the role-typing society had long imposed upon women, but rather served the permissible purpose of redressing society's longstanding disparate treatment of women, operating directly to compensate women for past economic discrimination, and (2) the age distinction of 215 whereby a man reaching the age of 62 in 1975 or later receives the same benefits as a similarly situated woman, while an older man continues to receive less benefits than a woman of the same age with the same earnings record, did not violate Fifth Amendment equal protection, since old age benefit payments were not constitutionally immunized against alterations such as that made by the 1972 amendment of 215, Congress had expressly reserved the right to alter, amend, or repeal any provision of the Social Security Act, and the Fifth Amendment did not forbid statutory changes to have a beginning and thus discriminate between the rights of an earlier and later time.
1. "[Classifications] by gender must serve important governmental objectives and must be substantially related to the achievement of those objectives," Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190, 197. 
2. The statutory scheme itself, and the legislative history of former § 215(b)(3), demonstrate that the statute was deliberately enacted to "[redress] our society's long-standing disparate treatment of women," Califano  v. Goldfarb, ante, at 209 n. 8, and was not "the accidental by-product of a traditional way of thinking about females." Ante,  at 223 (STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment). The statute operated directly to compensate women for past economic discrimination by allowing them to eliminate additional low-earning years from the calculation of their retirement benefits, and in no way penalized women wage earners. 
3. The failure to make the 1972 amendment retroactive does not constitute discrimination on the basis of date of birth. Old-age benefits are not constitutionally immunized against alterations of this kind, but Congress may replace one constitutional computation formula with another and make the new formula prospective only. 
The Court reversed the order overturning the administrative decision that refused to use the calculations from a former version of the Social Security Act to compute the retired male worker's retirement benefits.
Concurrence
Burger, joined by Stewart, Blackmun, and Rehnquist, concurred in the judgment on the ground that the challenged classification was rationally justifiable on the basis of administrative convenience.
References
 Califano v. Webster, 430 U.S. 313 (1977) (per curiam)
External links
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Social Security lawsuits
Category:United States affirmative action case law
"""

From "Califano v. Yamasaki" ==> """
Califano v. Yamasaki, 442 U.S. 682 (1979), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court decided an issue of Federal statutory hearing rights.
Under section 204(a)(1) of the Social Security Act, the Secretary of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare  was allowed to make recoupments of erroneous overpayments of old age, survivors' or disability benefits by deducting from future payments. Section 204(b) allowed the Secretary to preclude the recoupment if the disability recipient was without fault and adjustments or recovery would "defeat the purposes" of the Act or "be against equity and good conscience."
Under the Department's procedures, after a recipient was notified of the ex parte determination that an overpayment had been made, the recipient could file a written request either seeking reconsideration of that determination or asking the Secretary to waive recovery in accordance with 204(b). The recoupment would start if the agency's decision on the request went against the recipient, and an oral hearing would be granted only if the recipient continued to object to recoupment.
A number of beneficiaries challenged the Department's procedure under the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment to the US Constitution.
In an opinion written by Justice Blackmun, the court held that because individual rights were at stake, the procedures did not satisfy the requirements of due process.
 See also 
 United States v. Florida East Coast Railway Co., 
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 442
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:1979 in United States case law
Category:Social Security lawsuits
"""

From "California Artificial Stone Paving Co. v. Molitor" ==> """
California Artificial Stone Paving Co. v. Molitor, 113 U.S. 609 (1885), involved a bill that was filed by the appellant against the appellee complaining that the latter was infringing on a letters patent granted to one John J. Schillinger, and which had been assigned for the State of California to the complainant.. 
The patent was for an improvement in concrete pavement was originally issued July 19, 1870, and reissued May 2, 1871. The improvement, as described in the reissued patent, consisted in laying the pavement in detached blocks separated from each other by strips of tar paper or other suitable material so as to prevent the blocks from adhering to each other. As stated in the specification:
The case of Wilson v. Barnum was especially worthy of note in this connection. The question certified in that case was whether, upon the evidence given, the defendant infringed the complainant's patent. Chief Justice Taney, delivering the opinion of the Court, said:
The case was dismissed, with directions to the circuit court to proceed therein according to law.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:Concrete
"""

From "California Bankers Assn. v. Shultz" ==> """
California Bankers Assn. v. Shultz, 416 U.S. 21 (1974), was a US Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the Bank Secrecy Act, passed by Congress in 1970 requiring banks to record all transactions and report certain domestic and foreign transactions of high dollar amounts to the United States Treasury, did not violate the First, Fourth, and Fifth Amendments of the US Constitution..
 Background 
The Bank Secrecy Act of 1970 was passed as Congress had come to recognize that bank records had a high value in criminal investigations and regulatory actions from both domestic and foreign sources. The Act at passage had two key titles: Title I requiring banks to record all bank transactions and Title II to report certain events triggered by these transactions to appropriate government authorities, such as domestic transactions that totaled more than  within a single day or the transfer of funding in or out of the United States exceeding .
After the Act was passed and the processes used to enforce it were established by the United States Department of the Treasury, several groups sought to challenge the Act on several constitutional counts and filed suit in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California around June 1972, requesting a restraining order from implementation of the Act. The groups included bank customers, the Security National Bank, the California Bankers Association, and the American Civil Liberties Union. Their primary complaint identified that the record keeping and reporting requirements of the Act violated Fourth Amendment protections against unreasonable search and seizure; other complaints included challenges based on the First, Fifth, Ninth, Tenth, and Fourteenth Amendments.
The District Court granted the order while it reviewed the case. Ultimately, the three-judge panel ruled that nearly all of the Act was constitutional, but it found that the Title II reporting requirements on domestic transactions represented an unconstitutional violation of Fourth Amendment protection since it could allow the Treasury to obtain under subpoena all bank records of a person.
Supreme Court
Both the plaintiffs and the government filed appeals on the mixed conclusion from the District Court to the Supreme Court. The Court opted to combine the three separate petitions into a single case:
 The California Bankers Association, which represented banks operating in California, argued that the Title I record-keeping requirements violated the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment, as it placed an unreasonable expectation on the banks, and that this also violated the rights of privacy offered by the First Amendment.
 The Security National Bank, the ACLU, and the various bank customers asserts, in addition to the California Bankers Association, that the Title II reporting requirements related to foreign transactions violated the First and Fourth Amendments, as well as creating compulsory self-incrimination against the Fifth Amendment.
 The United States Government appealed on the constitutionality of the Title II reporting requirements for domestic transactions, arguing that the Court should have reviewed the Treasury's process for any Fourth Amendment violations, and not the Act itself.
Oral hearings were given on January 26, 1974. The Court issued its opinion on April 1, 1974. Justice William Rehnquist delivered the majority opinion, which was joined by Justices Burger, Stewart, White, Blackmun, and Powell. The decision ruled across ten points from the three petitions but effectively found that neither the recordkeeping requirements of Title I nor the reporting requirements of Title II of the Act violated First, Fourth, or Fifth Amendment rights or due process rights under the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments.
The decision affirming the constitutionality of the law also expressed concern that some of the parties, such as the bank customers, the California Bankers Association, and the ACLU, did not show any direct harm from the Act and so lacked Article III standing to challenge the law. Justice Powell wrote a concurring opinion, joined by Justice Blackmun, which affirmed that having a reasonably-high amount, , requiring recording and reporting did not violate privacy rights, but he expressed concern that more government intrusion into bank records could impact privacy rights.
Justice Douglas wrote a dissenting opinion. He was joined in part by Justice Brennan on points related on his opinion that the California Bankers Association had standing in the case and that there were significant privacy rights that could be violated by having banks record every transaction of their customers, which the government could have the capability to pull. Justice Douglas continued in his dissent concerns that through the Act, Congress gave the Secretary of the Treasury powers at their discretion that could violate the Fourth Amendment.
Justice Brennan also wrote a dissenting opinion, further expressing on Justice Douglas' opinion about the Act giving Secretary of the Treasure excessive powers that would invade privacy rights. Justice Marshall wrote another dissenting opinion that stated Katz v. United States allowed the records to be kept by banks under the Act to be seen as an intangible extension of a person's private property and so the Act violated the Fourth Amendment.
 References 
External links
Category:1974 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "California Coastal Comm'n v. Granite Rock Co." ==> """
California Coastal Comm'n v. Granite Rock Co., 480 U.S. 572 (1987), is a United States Supreme Court case addressing the question of whether United States Forest Service regulations, federal land use statutes and regulations, or the Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972, preempt the California Coastal Commission's imposition of a permit requirement on operation of an unpatented mining claim in a national forest. The court ruled that even if federal land is not included in the Coastal Zone Management Act's interpretation of "coastal zone," the act does not automatically preempt all state regulation of activities on federal lands.
 Facts 
Granite Rock Company of Watsonville, California purchased the property and mineral rights to a large deposit of white limestone on Mount Pico Blanco in the Los Padres National Forest on the Big Sur coast of California in 1963. The limestone deposit is made up of two large, pharmaceutical grade limestone bodies known as the Pico Blanco body and the Hayfield body. It is the only high-grade deposit on the Pacific Coast outside Alaska within three miles of potential marine transportation. Reserves have been estimated to be from 600 million to a billion tons, reportedly the largest in California, and the largest west of the Rocky Mountains.
In 1980, Granite Rock submitted to the Forest Service a five-year plan to remove substantial amounts of limestone from a quarry on the south face of Pico Blanco within the National Forest boundary. The Forest Service prepared an Environmental Assessment of the plan and recommended some modifications, which Granite Rock implemented. When Graniterock obtained the permit in 1983, it began to excavate a  open pit mine. The California Coastal Commission required Granite Rock to apply for a coastal development permit for any mining undertaken after the date of notification.
The Coastal Commission did not seek to prohibit mining of the unpatented claim, only to regulate mining activity in accordance with the detailed requirements of the California Coastal Act. Granite Rock filed an action in U.S. District Court claiming that the Coastal Commission permit requirement was preempted by Forest Service regulations, by the Mining Act of 1872, and by the Coastal Zone Management Act. The District Court denied Granite Rock's motion for summary judgment, and dismissed the action. The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed the lower court's decision, holding that the Coastal Commission permit requirement was preempted by the Mining Act of 1872 and Forest Service regulations. 
The California Coastal Commission appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States. The state sought to change the division of power between the federal government and the states over control of land-use decisions. California sought to enforce stricter state standards over mining operations on federal land. It was joined in its appeal by nine other Western states, including Arizona, Utah, Montana, New Mexico and Wyoming. California sought a ruling on the constitutionality of the 1872 mining law that made it impossible to enforce state environmental standards.
 Opinion 
Granite Rock suggested that the Property Clause not only vests unlimited power in Congress over the use of federally owned lands, but also exempts federal lands from state regulation, whether or not those regulations conflict with federal law. The Supreme Court previously held that "the State is free to enforce its criminal and civil laws" on federal land so long as those laws do not conflict with federal law. The court held that because Congress specifically disclaimed any intention to preempt preexisting state authority in the Coastal Zone Management Act, even if all federal lands are excluded from the Coastal Zone Management Act definition of "coastal zone", the act does not automatically preempt all state regulation of activities on federal lands. They ruled in favor of the Coastal Commission.
 Results 
Although Granite Rock's five-year plan of operations had expired by the time the case reached the Supreme Court, it still had the right to reapply for a forest service permit and request review of the permit by the coastal commission. It did not reapply and has not indicated if it will. It still owns the land.
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:Big Sur
Category:Limestone industry
"""

From "California Democratic Party v. Jones" ==> """
California Democratic Party v. Jones, 530 U.S. 567 (2000), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that California's blanket primary violates a political party's First Amendment freedom of association..
Prior history
In California, candidates for public office could gain access to the general ballot by winning a qualified political party's primary. In 1996, voter-approved Proposition 198 changed California's partisan primary from a closed primary, in which only a political party's members can vote on its nominees, to a blanket primary, in which each voter's ballot lists every candidate regardless of party affiliation and allows the voter to choose freely among them. The candidate of each party who wins the most votes is that party's nominee for the general election.  A blanket primary differs from an open primary in that in an open primary, even though voters are not required to declare party affiliation and are given a ballot listing all candidates of all parties, the voter is restricted to voting for the candidates of only one party for all races on the ballot.  In a blanket primary, the voter is free to cross party lines from one race to the next.  The California Democratic Party, the California Republican Party, the Libertarian Party of California, and the Peace and Freedom Party have historically prohibited nonmembers from voting in their party's primary. Each political party filed suit against Bill Jones, the California Secretary of State, alleging that the blanket primary violated their First Amendment right of association. Jones countered that a blanket primary will intensify the election and allow for better representation in elected office. Siding with Jones, District Judge David F. Levi held that the primary's burden on the parties' associational rights was not severe and was justified by substantial state interests. The Court of Appeals affirmed.
Supreme Court
California Democratic Party v. Jones presented the following question: Does California's voter-approved Proposition 198, which changes its partisan primary from a closed primary to a blanket primary, violate political parties' First Amendment right of association?
In a 7-2 opinion delivered by Justice Antonin Scalia, the Court held that California's blanket primary violated a political party's First Amendment right of association. "Proposition 198 forces political parties to associate with—to have their nominees, and hence their positions, determined by—those who, at best, have refused to affiliate with the party, and, at worst, have expressly affiliated with a rival," wrote Justice Antonin Scalia for the majority.Jones, 530 U.S. at 577. "A single election in which the party nominee is selected by nonparty members could be enough to destroy the party."Jones, 530 U.S. at 579. Justice Scalia went on to state for the Court that Proposition 198 takes away a party's "basic function" to choose its own leaders and is functionally "both severe and unnecessary."Jones, 530 U.S. at 586.
Justices John Paul Stevens and Ruth Bader Ginsburg dissented. Stevens wrote: "This Court's willingness to invalidate the primary schemes of 3 States and cast serious constitutional doubt on the schemes of 29 others at the parties' behest is an extraordinary intrusion into the complex and changing election laws of the States."Jones, 530 U.S. at 598 (Stevens, J., dissenting).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 530
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 Nonpartisan blanket primary
References
External links
  Washington State Grange v. Washington State Republican Party
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States presidential primaries
Category:United States elections case law
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:California Democratic Party
Category:Democratic Party (United States) litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "California Federal Savings and Loan Association v. Guerra" ==> """
California Federal S. & L. Assn. v. Guerra, 479 U.S. 272 (1987), is a US labor law case of the United States Supreme Court about whether a state may require employers to provide greater pregnancy benefits than required by federal law, as well as the ability to require pregnancy benefits to women without similar benefits to men. The court held that The California Fair Employment and Housing Act §12945(b)(2), which requires employers to provide leave and reinstatement to employees disabled by pregnancy, is consistent with federal law.
Facts
An amendment to the California Fair Employment and Housing Act §12945(b)(2) passed in 1978 required that employers must grant a job-protected reasonable leave of absence for employees disabled by pregnancy. Lillian Garland had worked for California Federal Savings and Loan for about 4 years before needing to take time out to have her baby. She ultimately trained the woman to take her place during her time off as indicated by her doctor and upon her return, was to be told that the person that she had trained was given the job. She filed suit alleging violations of the Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978, which prohibited discrimination on the basis of pregnancy in employment. Cal Fed argued that the California statute requiring employers to grant leave for pregnant employees constituted discrimination under the Pregnancy Discrimination Act.
Judgment
Marshall J held that the California statute was not preempted. Brennan, Blackmun, Stevens, O'Connor concurred. Marshall J said the following.
Scalia J wrote a separate concurrence.
White J (joined by Rehnquist J, Powell J) dissented.
See also
US labor law
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States reproductive rights case law
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:Parental leave in the United States
Category:Legal issues in pregnancy
Category:History of women in California
"""

From "California Motor Transport Co. v. Trucking Unlimited" ==> """
California Motor Transport Co. v. Trucking Unlimited, 404 U.S. 508 (1972), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court involving the right to make petitions to the government. The right to petition is enshrined in the First Amendment to the United States Constitution as: "Congress shall make no law...abridging...the right of the people...to petition the Government for a redress of grievances." This case involved an accusation that one group of companies was using state and federal regulatory actions to eliminate competitors. The Supreme Court ruled that the right to petition is integral to the legal system but using lawful means to achieve unlawful restraint of trade is not protected.
Antitrust law
Antitrust law is the body of laws that exist in order to prevent companies from suppressing market competition from other companies. The Sherman Antitrust Act was a landmark piece of federal legislation passed in 1890 and "intended to prevent all contracts, combinations, and conspiracies which restrain or monopolize trade." The Clayton Antitrust Act followed in 1914 and allowed parties injured by anti-competitive actions to sue the violators for both injunctive relief (meaning the anti-competitive action had to stop) and treble damages (meaning the actual monetary damages suffered by the injured party would be multiplied by three times when determining the award granted). In two cases interpreting these laws (Eastern Railroad Conference v. Noerr Motor Freight Inc.. and United Mine Workers v. Pennington.), the Supreme Court had created the Noerr–Pennington doctrine. Because of the rights in the First Amendment, the Court had ruled in these cases that attempts to influence the passage or enforcement of laws were not antitrust law violations if such lobbying had the incidental effect of restricting competition.
Prior history
This case originated in a business dispute between two groups of trucking companies operating in California. Trucking companies in that state are regulated by the state's Public Utilities Commission (PUC) and the federal Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC). In order to legally operate as a trucking company, both regulatory authorities needed to grant operating rights to a business. Trucking Unlimited was the named plaintiff for a group of fourteen companies that accused the California Motor Transport Co. and eighteen others of forming a joint war chest. This fund was then used to oppose any applications by other companies to the PUC and ICC for operating rights and also court cases stemming from PUC or ICC decisions. In this way, the established companies were accused of using government regulators to enforce restraint of trade against potential new competitors. This scheme was alleged to have pursued regulatory and court delays in such applications regardless of the merit of opposing those applications just to increase costs and deter competitors.
The initial action in the federal District Court was dismissed for "failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted". This is a pretrial motion available under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure which means that, even if everything the plaintiffs said is true, the court agrees that there is no breach of any duty owed to the plaintiff or violation of the plaintiff's rights.
This ruling was appealed to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. The appeals court considered that the Noerr and Pennington cases did not apply to "...a conspiracy to unreasonably restrain or monopolize trade through the use of judicial and administrative adjudicative proceedings."Trucking Unlimited, 432 F.2d at 759. It ruled that the dismissal was improper and directed the case back to the district court for trial but California Motor Transport appealed to the Supreme Court.
Decision
The decision by William O. Douglas started by reviewing the Noerr-Pennington doctrine and reiterating the importance of the Right to Petition:  We conclude that it would be destructive of rights of association and of petition to hold that groups with common interests may not, without violating the antitrust laws, use the channels and procedures of state and federal agencies and courts to advocate their causes and points of view respecting resolution of their business and economic interests vis-a -vis their competitors.. 
The Court went on to say that, like other First Amendment rights, the right to petition is not absolute. In Noerr, the Court had said in passing that this right would not protect companies when the lobbying actions were "a mere sham" to conceal activities intended to directly interfere with competitors. Douglas went on to distinguish between influencing public officials, which was allowed, and denying competitors access to government decision-makers and usurping regulatory processes for commercial ends. Both the plaintiffs and the defendants had a right to access the judiciary and regulatory tribunals. First amendment rights could not be used as a pretext to inflict direct harm. The allegations made by Trucking Unlimited should not have been dismissed because they accused California Motor Transport Co. of making exactly this type of subversion of the regulatory process. The Court affirmed the judgment of the Ninth Circuit and remanded it back to the District Court for trial.
Effects of decision
This case both extended and modified the Noerr-Pennington doctrine:
 The Court extended the protection of that doctrine to all departments of the government, including the Article I and Article III tribunals
 The Court established the First Amendment right to petition as the origin of the antitrust exception allowing companies to lobby for governmental action that might cause disadvantages to competitors
 The Court modified this exception to exclude cases where a competitor does not try to influence public officials but instead tries to deny others meaningful access to tribunals
Noerr-Pennington immunity from the Sherman Act would not apply to California Motor Transport Co. and its co-conspirators because their actions before the PUC, the ICC, and the courts were not an actual exercise of their right to petition, but a fraudulent attempt to prevent Trucking Unlimited and others from accessing those same governmental bodies.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 404
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1972 in United States case law
"""

From "California Retail Liquor Dealers Ass'n v. Midcal Aluminum, Inc." ==> """
California Retail Liquor Dealers Assn. v. Midcal Aluminum, Inc., 445 U.S. 97 (1980), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court created a two-part test for the application of the state action immunity doctrine that it had previously developed in Parker v. Brown.
Background
A California statute required all wine producers and wholesalers to file fair trade contracts or price schedules with the State. If a producer has not set prices through a fair trade contract, wholesalers must post a resale price schedule and are prohibited from selling wine to a retailer at other than the price set in a price schedule or fair trade contract. A wholesaler selling below the established prices faces fines or license suspension or revocation.
After being charged with selling wine for less than the prices set by price schedules and also for selling wines for which no fair trade contract or schedule had been filed, respondent wholesaler filed suit in the California Court of Appeal asking for an injunction against the State's wine-pricing scheme.  The Court of Appeal ruled that the scheme restrains trade in violation of the Sherman Act, and granted injunctive relief, rejecting claims that the scheme was immune from liability under that Act under the "state action" doctrine of Parker v. Brown, 317 U.S. 341, and was also protected by § 2 of the Twenty-first Amendment, which prohibits the transportation or importation of intoxicating liquors into any State for delivery or use therein in violation of the State's laws.
Opinion of the Court
1. California's wine-pricing system constitutes resale price maintenance in violation of the Sherman Act, since the wine producer holds the power to prevent price competition by dictating the prices charged by wholesalers. And the State's involvement in the system is insufficient to establish antitrust immunity under Parker v. Brown. While the system satisfies the first requirement for such immunity that the challenged restraint be "one clearly articulated and affirmatively expressed as state policy," it does not meet the other requirement that the policy be "actively supervised" by the State itself. Under the system the State simply authorizes price setting and enforces the prices established by private parties, and it does not establish prices, review the reasonableness of price schedules, regulate the terms of fair trade contracts, monitor market conditions, or engage in any "pointed reexamination" of the program. The national policy in favor of competition cannot be thwarted by casting such a gauzy cloak of state involvement over what is essentially a private price-fixing arrangement. Pp. 102–106.
2. The Twenty-first Amendment does not bar application of the Sherman Act to California's wine-pricing system.  Pp. 106–114.
(a) Although under that Amendment States retain substantial discretion to establish liquor regulations over and above those governing the importation or sale of liquor and the structure of the liquor distribution system, those controls may be subject to the federal commerce power in appropriate situations. Pp. 106-110.
(b) There is no basis for disagreeing with the view of the California courts that the asserted state interests behind the resale price maintenance system of promoting temperance and protecting small retailers are less substantial than the national policy in favor of competition. Such view is reasonable and is supported by the evidence, there being nothing to indicate that the wine-pricing system helps sustain small retailers or inhibits the consumption of alcohol by Californians. Pp. 110-114.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 445
References
External links
Connecticut Law Review, 1981 14: 135
Content adapted from the case syllabus at 
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Twenty-first Amendment case law
Category:1980 in United States case law
Category:United States state sovereign immunity case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "California v. Acevedo" ==> """
California v. Acevedo, 500 U.S. 565 (1991), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court, which interpreted the Carroll doctrine to provide one rule to govern all automobile searches. The Court stated, "The police may search an automobile and the containers within it where they have probable cause to believe contraband or evidence is contained." The decision also overruled the distinctions in United States v. Chadwick (1977) and Arkansas v. Sanders (1979) which had previously held that, if probable cause existed to search an automobile, the police may perform a warrantless search of the automobile and the containers within it, but if the police only had probable cause to search a container in the automobile, the police first had to obtain a warrant before searching the container.
It thereby confirmed Carroll v. United States (1925), which held that a warrantless search of an automobile based upon probable cause to believe that the vehicle contained evidence of crime in the light of an exigency arising out of the vehicle's likely disappearance did not contravene the Fourth Amendment's Warrant Clause.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 500
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
Arizona v. Gant, 
United States v. Chadwick, 433 U.S. 1 (1977)
Arkansas v. Sanders, 442 U.S. 753 (1979)
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1991 in United States case law
Category:1991 in California
Category:Legal history of California
"""

From "California v. Byers" ==> """
California v. Byers, 402 U.S. 424 (1971), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States decided that providing personal information at the scene of an accident does not infringe on one's Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination.. 
 Prior history 
Jonathan Byers proceeded for writ of prohibition to restrain the Justice Court from proceeding further on a complaint of violation of California's "hit and run statute.".  The Superior court granted the writ and the People appealed.  The Supreme Court of California held that the state's "hit and run statute" was valid, but prosecution was precluded from using information disclosed as a result of compliance, or the fruits of such information.  Compliance confronted Byers with "substantial hazards of self-incrimination" in violation of his Fifth Amendment privilege.  California appealed to the US Supreme Court, which granted certiorari.
Plurality opinion of the Court
In a plurality opinion of four, Chief Justice Burger concluded that "hit and run" statutes were not criminal, but regulatory in nature.  Such statutes put the burden of compliance on the public at large rather than on a group of suspected criminals, and the possibility of self-incrimination was not substantial.  Therefore, there was no significant infringement on Byers' privilege against self-incrimination.  Relying on United States v. Sullivan, 274 U.S. 259 (1927), the Chief Justice wrote that even with the possibility that compliance under the statute were an incrimination per se, an extension of Fifth Amendment protection would be an "extreme if not extravagant application."  The Chief Justice analogized that just as there is no constitutional right to refuse to file a tax return, there is no constitutional right to flee the scene of an accident.
Concurring opinion by Justice Harlan
Justice Harlan concurred in the result.  He wrote that the purpose of the "hit and run" statute was non-criminal and the fear of self-incrimination was not enough to create actual self-incrimination in violation of the privilege.  He noted that the state received very little information from the requirement and still endured a burden of proof at trial for all elements of the criminal offense.  The risk of self-incrimination was not the same as actual incrimination.  Justice Harlan noted that there were a line of cases that restricted the use of compulsory, self-reporting information for prosecutorial purposes, but they should be limited and not overruled.
 Black dissent 
Justice Black's dissent noted that the compulsory information from the "hit and run" statute was used to satisfy a material element of the offense.  The requirement applied to those "involved in an accident resulting in damage," satisfying the material elements of the crime of property damage.   Although the statute applied to a broad class of all California drivers, as applied in this particular case it violated Byers Fifth Amendment privilege.  Justice Black found Byers self-report to be testimonial in nature.
 Brennan dissent 
Justice Brennan concluded that it was the position of the court to make the Bill of Rights "relevant to contemporary conditions" (as opposed to traditional or historical interpretations of the Bill of Rights).  He criticized the plurality for making broad determinations on the tension between state law and constitutional protections writing, "only rivers of confusion can flow from lakes of generalities."  Justice Brennan found that the record in the instant case resulted in a conviction from self-incrimination and that it was unnecessary to address any broader issues.  He concluded that an individual could only be compelled to comply with the statute if given full immunity for prosecution.  This differed substantially from the California Supreme Court ruling that would merely make such information inadmissible.
See also
Hit and run (vehicular)
Road rage
Actus reus
Exclusionary rule
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:1971 in California
Category:Legal history of California
"""

From "California v. Cabazon Band of Mission Indians" ==> """
California v. Cabazon Band of Mission Indians, 480 U.S. 202 (1987), was a United States Supreme Court case involving the development of Native American gaming. The Supreme Court's decision effectively overturned the existing laws restricting gaming/gambling on U.S. Indian reservations.
Background
The Cabazon and Morongo Bands of Mission Indians are two small Cahuilla Indian tribes that occupy reservation lands near Palm Springs in Riverside County, California.  During the mid-1980s, both the Cabazon and Morongo Bands each owned and operated on their reservation lands small bingo parlors. In addition, the Cabazon Band operated a card club for playing poker and other card games. Both the bingo parlors and the Cabazon card club were open to the public and frequented predominantly by non-Indians visiting the reservations. In 1986, California State officials sought to shut down the Cabazon and Morongo Band's games, arguing that the high-stakes bingo and poker games violated state regulations. The case made it all the way to the Supreme Court before a decision was rendered on February 25, 1987.
Arguments and ruling
The State of California contended that the Bands’ high-stakes bingo and poker games violated state law and requested that the Court recognize its statute governing the operation of bingo games. Riverside County additionally sought legal recognition of its ordinances regulating bingo play and prohibiting the operation of poker and other card games. California argued that under Public Law 280 (1953) Congress had granted six states – Alaska, California, Minnesota, Nebraska, Oregon, and Wisconsin – criminal jurisdiction over Native American tribal lands within the state's borders. 
If California's regulatory laws prohibited gambling on a criminal basis, then it is likely Public Law 280 would have given the State of California the authority to enforce them on tribal lands. However, as the Cabazon Band argued, California's laws on gambling were civil regulatory laws, and therefore the tribal lands would not in fact fall under the lawful jurisdiction of the state.
The Supreme Court held, as the Cabazon band argued, that because California state law did not prohibit gambling as a criminal act – and in fact encouraged it via the state lottery – they must be deemed regulatory in nature. As such, the authority to regulate gaming activities on tribal lands was found to fall outside those powers granted by the Public Law 280.
Cabazon had lasting implications regarding the sovereignty of Native American tribes in the United States. The ruling established a broader definition of tribal sovereignty and set the precedent that if the few states that with some lawful jurisdiction over tribal lands could not impose state regulations on reservation gaming, then no state could have such a right. Indian gaming could thus only be called into question in states where gambling was deemed criminal by state law.
Effect on Native American gaming
Cabazon coincided with a period of rapid growth in the reservation gambling industry. What just years before had been a modest and relatively isolated phenomenon of reservation bingo and card games saw steady growth following the Supreme Court decision. Congress responded by passing the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act (IGRA) in 1988, which expanded the kinds of games that tribal casinos could offer, and provided a framework for regulating the industry. As part of the act, the National Indian Gaming Commission (NIGC) was formed and Indian gaming was divided into 3 classes: Class I, Class II, and Class III. Class I encompasses charitable and social gaming with nominal prizes; Class II includes bingo and other punch-board/pull-tab style games; and Class III includes high-stakes bingo, casinos, slot machines, and other commercial gaming.
As of 1996, there were 184 tribes operating 281 gaming facilities. These facilities were spread across a total of 24 states, 14 of which have physical casinos on Indian reservations. In 1995, Class III gaming revenues totaled over $4.5 billion, with an additional $300 million in revenues from food sales, hotel accommodations and other services. After expenses, this amounted to $1.9 billion in net income, $1.6 billion of which went straight to the tribes on which the casinos were operating.  As of 2007, the tribal gaming industry had become a $25 billion industry generated by over 350 tribal casinos in 28 states. 
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 480
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Native American gaming case law
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:1987 in California
Category:Legal history of California
Category:Abrogated United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Casinos in California
Category:Cahuilla
Category:Native American history of California
"""

From "California v. Carney" ==> """
California v. Carney, 471 U.S. 386 (1985), was a United States Supreme Court case which held that a motor home was subject to the automobile exception to the search warrant requirement of the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution because the motor home was readily movable.
Background
Carney was suspected of trading marijuana for sexual intercourse. Police were watching him, and a youth he was talking to walked with him to his motor home on a parking lot in downtown San Diego. Both of them entered, and the youth emerged a little over an hour later. The officers stopped him, and he told them that Carney traded him marijuana for sexual contacts. The officers went back to the motor home with the youth and had him knock on the door. Carney opened the door and stepped out. One officer entered without a warrant and searched the vehicle, finding marijuana. Carney's motions to suppress were denied by the magistrate and trial court. The California Court of Appeal affirmed, finding that the automobile exception applied to a motor home. The California Supreme Court reversed, holding that there is a greater expectation of privacy in a motor home when also used for living quarters, so the automobile exception did not apply.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court reversed.
"The capacity to be 'quickly moved' was clearly the basis of the holding in Carroll, and our cases have consistently recognized ready mobility as one of the principal bases of the automobile exception." In addition, "'[b]esides the element of mobility, less rigorous warrant requirements govern because the expectation of privacy with respect to one's automobile is significantly less than that relating to one's home or office.'" The Court noted that the automobile exception has been applied several times by the Court even when the vehicle is no longer readily movable, if it was readily movable at the time of seizure.
This vehicle, the Court found, had all the attributes of "ready mobility" to satisfy the automobile exception. It was on a downtown parking lot, "a place not regularly used for residential purposes--temporary or otherwise." It could still quickly be driven away. Also, it had the reduced expectation of privacy of a vehicle. "[T]he vehicle was so situated that an objective observer would conclude that it was being used not as a residence, but as a vehicle." The Court declined to draw distinctions as to which types of motor homes would or would not be subject to the automobile exception.
Dissent
Justices Stevens, Brennan, and Marshall dissented on two grounds. First of all, the case should never have been heard at all because of a lack of development of the law and conflicts in the appellate courts. Second, the Court should have found a heightened expectation of privacy in Carney's motor home because of the nature of motor home living.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 471
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:1985 in California
Category:Legal history of California
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "California v. Ciraolo" ==> """
California v. Ciraolo, 476 U.S. 207 (1986), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States in which the Court held that aerial observation of a person's backyard by police, even if done without a search warrant, does not violate the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
In the case, police in Santa Clara, California flew a private airplane over the property of Dante Ciraolo and took aerial photographs of his backyard after receiving an anonymous tip that he was growing marijuana plants.
Background
Dante Carlo Ciraolo grew marijuana plants in his backyard, shielded from view by two fences. After receiving an anonymous tip, the Santa Clara police sent officers in a private airplane to fly over and take aerial photographs of his property at an altitude of 1,000 feet. Based on an officer's naked eye observation, a search warrant was granted. After the trial court rejected Ciraolo's motion to suppress the evidence (under the exclusionary rule), he pleaded guilty. The California Court of Appeal reversed the decision, holding that the aerial observation was an intrusion into the curtilage of his home and therefore the Fourth Amendment.
Opinion of the Court
Chief Justice Warren Burger wrote for the 5-4 majority, referring to Katz v. United States. He concluded, "The Fourth Amendment simply does not require the police traveling in the public airways at this altitude to obtain a warrant in order to observe what is visible to the naked eye."
Dissenting opinion
Justice Powell wrote a dissenting opinion, in which Justices Brennan, Marshall, and Blackmun joined. Also citing Katz, Powell argued that the decision ignored that case's two-part test.
In arguing that Ciraolo did have a reasonable expectation of privacy, Powell notes:
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 476
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 California v. Greenwood, 
 Curtilage
 Dow Chemical Co. v. United States, 
 Florida v. Riley, 
 Kyllo v. United States, 
 Open-fields doctrine
References
 References
 Sources
 California v. Ciraolo, 476 U.S. 207 (1986)
External links
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:1986 in California
Category:Legal history of California
"""

From "California v. Greenwood" ==> """
California v. Greenwood, 486 U.S. 35 (1988), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the Fourth Amendment does not prohibit the warrantless search and seizure of garbage left for collection outside the curtilage of a home.
 Background 
In early 1984, Investigator Jenny Stracner of the Laguna Beach Police Department learned from various sources that Billy Greenwood might be selling illegal drugs out of his single-family home. In April, Stracner asked the neighborhood's regular trash collector to pick up the plastic garbage bags that Greenwood left on the curb in front of his house. In the garbage, she found evidence of drug use. She used that information to obtain a warrant to search Greenwood's home.  When officers searched the house, they found cocaine and marijuana. Greenwood and Dyanne Van Houten were arrested and released on bail.
In May, another investigator again had the garbage collectors pick up the garbage bag left on the curb.  The garbage again contained evidence of drugs, the police obtained another search warrant, and they found more drugs and evidence of drug trafficking in the house.
The California Superior Court dismissed the charges against Greenwood and Van Houten on the ground that unwarranted trash searches violated the U.S. Constitution's Fourth Amendment, as well as the California Constitution. The Court of Appeal affirmed.  The Supreme Court of California refused to hear the appeal.  The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari and reversed the judgment of the California Court of Appeal.
 Opinion of the Court        
By a 6–2 vote (Justice Kennedy took no part in the case), the Court held that under the Fourth Amendment, no warrant was necessary to search the trash because Greenwood had no reasonable expectation of privacy in it.  Although Greenwood had hidden the trash from view by putting it in opaque plastic bags and expected it to be on the street only a short time before it would be taken to the dump, the Court believed it to be “common knowledge” that garbage at the side of the street is “readily accessible to animals, children, scavengers, snoops, and other members of the public.”  Moreover, Greenwood had left the trash there expressly so that the trash collector, a stranger, could take it. Quoting Katz v. United States, the court concluded that "[w]hat a person knowingly exposes to the public, even in his own home or office, is not a subject of Fourth Amendment protection."
Greenwood argued that the evidence should be excluded under the California Constitution, which the California Supreme Court had interpreted to prohibit warrantless searches of garbage left at the curb (People v. Krivda, 1971). However, the Constitution had been amended in 1982 by the passage of Proposition 8, also known as the "Victims' Bill of Rights." One of its provisions, the Truth-in-Evidence Act, eliminated the exclusionary rule for unconstitutionally obtained evidence. The Court rejected Greenwood's claim that the amendment violated the Due Process Clause. It held that so long as the police conduct did not violate federal law, "California could permissibly conclude that the benefits of excluding relevant evidence of criminal activity do not outweigh the costs."
Dissent
Justice Brennan reasoned that the possibility the police or other “unwelcome meddlers” might rummage through the trash bags “does not negate the expectation of privacy in their contents any more than the possibility of a burglary negates an expectation of privacy in the home.”  Under United States v. Chadwick, the bags could not have been searched without a search warrant had Greenwood been carrying them in public.  Merely leaving them on the curb for the garbage man to collect, Brennan argued, should not be found to remove that expectation of privacy, for “scrutiny of another's trash is contrary to commonly accepted notions of civilized behavior!”
See also
 California v. Ciraolo, 
 Curtilage
 Dow Chemical Co. v. United States, 
 Expectation of privacy
 Florida v. Riley, : No warrant needed for observations from public airspace.
 Kyllo v. United States, 
 Open-fields doctrine
 Surreptitious DNA collecting
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 Garbage theft
References
External links
 ThinkQuest - California v. Greenwood
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1988 in United States case law
Category:Waste in the United States
Category:1988 in California
Category:Legal history of California
Category:Laguna Beach, California
Category:Law enforcement in California
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
"""

From "California v. Hodari D." ==> """
California v. Hodari D., 499 U.S. 621 (1991), was a United States Supreme Court case where the Court held that a fleeing suspect is not "seized" under the terms of the Fourth Amendment unless the pursuing officers apply physical force to the suspect or the suspect submits to officers' demands to halt.California v. Hodari D., . Consequently, evidence that is discarded by a fleeing suspect prior to the point in time at which they are seized is not subject to the Fourth Amendment's exclusionary rule.California v. Hodari D., 499 U.S. at 624, 627-29.
Background
In April 1988, police officers on patrol in Oakland, California encountered "four or five youths huddled around a small red car." When the youths saw the officers' car approaching, the youths "panicked" and ran down the street.California v. Hodari D., 499 U.S. at 622-23. Hodari D. and a companion ran west through an alley, while the others fled south.California v. Hodari D., 499 U.S. at 623. One of the officers chased Hodari D. on foot down an adjoining street, while the other officer chased another youth in the car on a different street. Although Hodari D. "[looked] behind as he ran," he did not see the officer until the officer "was almost upon him, whereupon he tossed away what appeared to be a small rock." A moment later, the officer tackled and handcuffed Hodari D. and placed a radio call for assistance. The rock Hodari D. discarded was later found to be crack cocaine.
Juvenile court proceedings
During proceedings in juvenile court, Hodari D. moved to suppress the rock of cocaine. He argued that officers conducted an unlawful seizure when officers began running toward him and that the evidence was inadmissible because it was obtained in violation of his Fourth Amendment rights. The juvenile court denied the motion but on appeal, the California Court of Appeal ruled in favor of Hodari D., concluding that Hodari D. was unlawfully seized at the moment officers began the chase. The California Supreme Court denied California's petition for review, but the Supreme Court of the United States granted certiorari on October 1, 1990.California v. Hodari D.,  (granting certiorari).
Opinion of the Court
Writing for a 7-2 majority, Justice Antonin Scalia held that the discarded rock of crack cocaine was admissible because Hodari D. was not seized until he was tackled by officers, and he discarded the contraband before he was seized by officers. Justice Scalia concluded that under the Fourth Amendment, seizure traditionally meant "taking possession" of the person or thing being seized.California v. Hodari D., 499 U.S. at 624 (citing 2 N. Webster,  67 (1828); 2 J. Bouvier,  510 (6th ed. 1856);  2057 (1981)). He noted that "at common law, the word connoted not merely grasping, or applying physical force to, the animate or inanimate object in question, but actually bringing it within physical control."California v. Hodari D., 499 U.S. at 624 (1991). Consequently, he held that a seizure does not occur unless officers apply force to a fleeing suspect or the fleeing suspect yields to an officer's "show of authority" in which the officer orders the fleeing suspect to halt.California v. Hodari D., 499 U.S. at 625-27. In other words, a seizure occurs upon the application of physical force by officers or a submission to an officer's assertion of authority. Justice Scalia ruled that Hodari D. was not seized until he was tackled, and the rock of cocaine was therefore "abandoned" property that was not obtained as a result of an unlawful seizure.California v. Hodari D., 499 U.S. at 624, 629. 
Dissenting opinion of Justice Stevens
Justice John Paul Stevens wrote a dissenting opinion in which he criticized the majority's "narrow construction" of seizures under the Fourth Amendment.California v. Hodari D., 499 U.S. at 629-30 (Stevens, J., dissenting). Additionally, Justice Stevens criticized the potential consequences of the majority's opinion, writing that the majority "assumes, without acknowledging, that a police officer may now fire his weapon at an innocent citizen and not implicate the Fourth Amendment—as long as he misses his target."California v. Hodari D., 499 U.S. at 630 (Stevens, J., dissenting). He argued that the majority's interpretation of the word "seizure" was a radical departure from the Court's earlier Fourth Amendment jurisprudence and that the officers' demands to halt "adequately conveyed the message that respondent was not free to leave."California v. Hodari D., 499 U.S. at 635-43 (Stevens, J., dissenting).
See also
 Commonwealth v. Matos (1996)
 Torres v. Madrid (2021)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 499
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
Notes
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1991 in United States case law
"""

From "California v. Texas" ==> """
California v. Texas, 593 U.S. ___ (2021), was a United States Supreme Court case that dealt with the constitutionality of the 2010 Affordable Care Act (ACA), colloquially known as Obamacare. It was the third such challenge to the ACA seen by the Supreme Court since its enactment. The case in California followed after the enactment of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 and the change to the tax penalty amount for Americans without required insurance that reduced the "individual mandate" () to zero, effective for months after December 31, 2018.Internal Revenue Code sec. 5000A(c)(2)(B)(iii), as amended by sec. 11081(a)(1) and (a)(2) of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, Pub. L. No. 115-97 (Dec. 22, 2017). The District Court of the Northern District of Texas concluded that this individual mandate was a critical provision of the ACA and that, with a penalty amount equal to zero, some or all of the ACA was potentially unconstitutional as an improper use of Congress's taxation powers.
Under the Donald Trump administration, the federal government had declined to challenge the lower court ruling, leading California and several other states to intervene and appeal the ruling, which the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals granted. The Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit upheld the ruling that the individual mandate was unconstitutional, but determined that the mandate might be severable from the rest of the ACA. Both California and Texas petitioned review of the Fifth's decision to the Supreme Court; the Court consolidated both California v. Texas and Texas v. California under the same case.
In a 7–2 decision issued on June 17, 2021, the Supreme Court ruled that Texas and other states that initially challenged the individual mandate did not have standing, as they had not shown past or future injury related to the provision. The Supreme Court otherwise did not rule on the constitutionality of the individual mandate in this case.
Background
The ACA (Obamacare) was passed in 2010 under Democratic leadership in both houses of Congress and signed by President Barack Obama. Among much of its provisions, it provided programs for states to provide free or low-cost health insurance to low-income residents through programs like Medicare and Medicaid. ACA encouraged all Americans to have health insurance and as part of this, created an income tax penalty for those that did not have health insurance, otherwise known as the "individual mandate". Passage of the ACA was controversial, and remained an issue that was divided along political lines, with Democrats seeing the law as promoting the public good and Republicans seeing it as a tax burden. The law had been challenged in courts multiple times, with the Supreme Court having seen two cases previously. In 2012, the Court ruled 5–4 in National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius that the individual mandate was constitutional as a granted power of Congress under the Taxing and Spending Clause.
In 2016, the Republican Party held control of both the House and Senate and gained control of the Executive branch with the election of President Donald Trump. Trump had campaigned on the promise of replacing the ACA once in office, and repealing the law was one of the early targets of the Republicans, but early efforts failed by mid 2017 due to in-party disputes, specifically the deciding vote which was to come from Senator John McCain who denied the Republican Party due to the fact that a promised replacement plan was not forthcoming.
Case history
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017
By December 2017, President Trump signed into law a large tax relief bill, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017. Among many other tax cuts, the Act eliminated the individual mandate requirement from the ACA by reducing penalty amount related to the required amount of health coverage to  starting in 2019. The elimination of the penalty was estimated by the Congressional Budget Office to save more than  in federal spending, although it would cause premium rates to go up for some individual taxpayers. Political commentators recognized that the removal of the individual mandate penalty was a partial victory for the Republicans who were trying to repeal the ACA.
District Court
In February 2018, Texas led 19 other states in a federal lawsuit in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Texas challenging the constitutionality of the ACA following the removal of the individual mandate from the Internal Revenue Code. The plaintiffs in the suit, Texas v. Azar, argued that since the penalty related to the individual mandate was seen as core provision of the ACA as determined by the Supreme Court in Sebelius, its removal should make the entire law became an unconstitutional exercise of Congressional taxing power. The United States Department of Justice told the district court in June 2018 that it mostly agreed with the general basis of the lawsuit, in that without the individual mandate, certain provisions of the ACA were invalidated such as the protections it had provided for those with pre-existing conditions, and would not defend those factors in court. However, the Justice Department still believed certain provisions of the ACA were valid.
On December 14, 2018, District Judge Reed O'Connor released his opinion on the case, affirming that without the individual mandate, the whole of the ACA was unconstitutional, going farther than the Justice Department had even indicated. O'Connor wrote that the "Individual Mandate can no longer be fairly read as an exercise of Congress's Tax Power and is still impermissible under the Interstate Commerce Clause—meaning the Individual Mandate is unconstitutional."Texas v. United States,  He then further reasoned that the individual mandate is an essential part of the entire law, and thus was not severable, making the entire law unconstitutional. O'Connor's decision rendered the ACA unconstitutional but did not immediately overturn the law, granting a stay pending the resolution of the case on appeal.Texas v. United States,  Among reaction to this decision was California and several other states, vowing to lead a challenge to the ruling.
Fifth Circuit
By early January 2019, 17 states led by California filed an appeal of O'Connor's decision to the Fifth Circuit, as the Justice Department had indicated it would not challenge the ruling. At this point, it was recognized that the case was likely bound for the Supreme Court, and would land in the midst of the 2020 elections, making it a critical issue for either party. Four additional states joined California's challenge by February 2019, bringing the number to 21. The Democrat-controlled House of Representatives following the 2018 election also joined in the defense. The Department of Justice filed a brief in support of the defendants (Texas et al.) in March 2019, now in full agreement with O'Connor's decision that the ACA as a whole was unconstitutional without the individual mandate, and would support Texas in defending the challenge. Briefs were also filed by the Association of American Physicians and Surgeons, American Center for Law and Justice, Foundation for Moral Law, and Citizens United.
Prior to the July 2019 oral hearings, the judges in the Fifth Circuit raised the question of whether California and the other states had standing to bring the challenge to the original suit. The oral hearings before Judges Carolyn Dineen King, Jennifer Walker Elrod, and Kurt Engelhardt focused on the constitutional challenge, the intent of Congress when they wrote and passed the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, and on the matter of standing. Observers believed the case would be decided upholding O'Connor's ruling due to how the questioning fell, with Judges Elrod and Engelhardt, both appointed under Republican presidents, asking the bulk of the questions, while Senior Judge King, appointed under Democrat Jimmy Carter, was relatively silent.
The Fifth Circuit issued its ruling on December 18, 2019.Texas v. United States,  The 2–1 decision, joined by Judges Elrod and Engelhardt, upheld in principle District Judge O'Connor's decision that with the elimination of the individual mandate, parts of the ACA were potentially unconstitutional. However, the decision remanded the case back to the district court, arguing that O'Connor's conclusion that the whole of the ACA was unconstitutional may be flawed. The Fifth Circuit decision asked the District Court to consider the concept of severability, since the individual mandate aspect was not apparently tied to other parts of the ACA like the health insurance marketplace. The Fifth Circuit also asked the District Court to consider a suggestion that the Justice Department had included in one of its briefs where the ACA may be invalid only in those states that had challenged it. As questions remained to the degree to which the ACA was unconstitutional, the ACA remained in enforcement following the decision.
Supreme Court
upright=1.8|thumb|Map of states involved after cases were consolidated   
The California-led group filed a petition for writ of certiorari to the Supreme Court by January 3, 2020, in response to the Fifth Circuit's decision. The filing asked for the case to be heard on an expedited schedule, "because of the practical importance of the questions presented for review and the pressing need for their swift resolution by this Court". Texas and the other states also filed a petition in February 2020 for the Supreme Court, asking them to deny the expedited review of the case as it was not ripe and allow it to proceed through the normal judicial process, but that should it accept the case, to review and affirm the ruling that the ACA is now unconstitutional.
On June 25, the Trump administration's Solicitor General of the United States, Noel J. Francisco, filed a brief arguing that the individual mandate is unconstitutional and that, because of this, the rest of the law must be struck down, too.https://www.supremecourt.gov/DocketPDF/19/19-840/146332/20200625125830531_Affidavit%20of%20Service_brief.pdf 
The Supreme Court refused to hear the case on an expedited schedule for the 2019–2020 term, but did agree, on March 2, 2020, to hear the case during the 2020–2021 term, reviewing not only the severability factors but the standing issue raised by the Fifth Circuit. The Court consolidated both California's and Texas's petitions (Dockets 19-840 and 19-1019, respectively) under California v. Texas.
Oral arguments were heard on November 10, 2020. Observers to the arguments believed that Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Brett Kavanaugh, along with the three more liberal Justices, appeared to accept the severability arguments of the individual mandate that would leave the rest of the ACA in place.
After Democrats won control of Congress through the 2020 elections (and associated runoffs in 2021), speculation arose that the Democratic-controlled Congress would follow President Joe Biden's desire to reinstate the individual mandate. This would effectively nullify any ruling against Obamacare, as the case is predicated upon a $0 individual mandate penalty. The Department of Justice under Biden did submit a new amicus brief in February 2021 following the oral hearings asserting that they now believe the ACA is constitutional and the mandate is severable from the rest of the ACA.
 Decision 
The Court issued its decision on June 17, 2021. In a 7–2 ruling, the Court reversed the Fifth Circuit's ruling and remanded the case for further review. In the majority opinion written by Justice Stephen Breyer and joined by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justices Clarence Thomas, Sonia Sotomayor, Elena Kagan, Brett Kavanaugh, and Amy Coney Barrett, the Supreme Court concluded that Texas and other plaintiff states did not have standing to bring the initial challenge of the individual mandate, as those states could not show a past or future injury related to the mandate provision. The Court's decision did not address the constitutionality question of the individual mandate. Breyer wrote in the majority opinion that Texas and the other plaintiff states had failed to show standing as "Unsurprisingly, the states have not demonstrated that an unenforceable mandate will cause their residents to enroll in valuable benefits programs that they would otherwise forgo".
Justice Thomas also wrote a concurring opinion. While Thomas agreed with the dissenting opinion that the Court had erred in how it handled the ACA in the past, he wrote that the decision in California was correct as Texas and the other states did not show any injury pending from the individual mandate.
Justice Samuel Alito wrote the dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Neil Gorsuch. Alito stated that the individual mandate was "clearly unconstitutional" and criticized the majority opinion for "judicial inventiveness".
 Reactions 
Legal experts believed that the decision based on lack of standing would make it difficult for any other party to challenge the ACA further. Law professor Steve Vladeck said that by avoiding the constitutional question of the individual mandate and instead deciding on standing, the Supreme Court "made it much harder for anyone to get that issue into the courts going forward. In essence, they sucked the oxygen out of the ACA's continuing constitutional fire."
President Joe Biden in a statement called the ruling "a major victory for all Americans," affirming that "healthcare is a right and not a privilege" and that "it is time move forward and keep building on this landmark law." HHS Secretary Xavier Becerra stated that “[the] decision means that all Americans continue to have a right to access affordable care, free of discrimination." Barack Obama stated that "The principle of universal coverage has been established," and that the law "is here to stay." House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer also heralded the ruling, with Schumer stating "For more than a decade, the assault on our health care law was relentless from Republicans in Congress, from the executive branch itself and from Republican attorneys general in the courts."
Texas attorney general Ken Paxton, whose office brought one of the original lawsuits leading to the Supreme Court appeal, said that he will continue to seek legal means to challenge the ACA. "If the government is allowed to mislead its citizens, pass a massive government takeover of healthcare, and yet still survive after Supreme Court review, this spells doom for the principles of Federalism and limited government." Republicans such as Sen. John Barrasso criticized the decision and the ACA, suggesting that Republicans would focus on policymaking. In a joint statement, Reps. Kevin McCarthy, Steve Scalise and Elise Stefanik criticized the ACA and called on Congress to improve healthcare.
References
 External links 
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Affordable Care Act lawsuits
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:Taxing and Spending Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Caliga v. Inter Ocean Newspaper Co." ==> """
Caliga v. Inter Ocean Newspaper Co., 215 U.S. 182 (1909), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held a person cannot file a second copyright claim to amend the first, even if the first was determined to be invalid..
 References 
External links
Category:1909 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Callaghan v. Myers" ==> """
Callaghan v. Myers, 128 U.S. 617 (1888), was a United States Supreme Court ruling dealing with copyright. The firm of Eugene B. Myers & Chandler, composed of Myers and Horace P. Chandler, purchased the copyright of the arrangement of a number of Illinois Supreme Court records compiled by Norman L. Freeman. They printed these works, the Illinois Reports volumes 32 through 38, from 1865 to 1867. Myers alone held the copyright to Freeman's arrangements of volumes 39 through 46 and printed those as well.
The conflict began when Myers made some changes to the arrangement of volumes 37 and 38 and published them, observing the procedure to procure copyright on these alternative works. The defendants, Callaghan & Company, offered to purchase licenses to publish these new versions of 37 and 38, but would not pay Myers's price. Instead, they made very minor changes to Myers's version, copying essentially verbatim the portions of the book that were actually copyrightable, and published it as their own work. Myers sued them for copyright infringement and the case eventually went to the Supreme Court.
The Court upheld earlier case law, such as Banks v. Manchester, that said court documents belonged to the public domain. In regards to the case at hand, they ruled that the elements of the books that organized or summarized those judicial works constituted intellectual effort and therefore Myers did hold the copyright because he did follow the copyrighting procedures in all cases except one. The Court found that the copies of Volume 32 required for formally copyrighting the work had arrived late, so that volume was not copyrighted. Nonetheless, the plaintiff, Myers, was entitled to compensation in full for the infringement damages, if he chose to collect them..
References
External links
Category:1888 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Camara v. Municipal Court of City and County of San Francisco" ==> """
Camara v. Municipal Court, 387 U.S. 523 (1967), is a United States Supreme Court case that overruled a previous case (Frank v. Maryland, 1959). and established the ability of a resident to deny entry to a building inspector without a warrant.
 Background
In 1963, a housing inspector from San Francisco's health department entered an apartment building to conduct a routine inspection to locate possible code violations. The building manager informed the inspector that a tenant might be using his space contrary to permitted policy. The inspector approached the tenant to enter the area, but the tenant denied entrance for lack of a search warrant. The inspector returned twice more, again without a search warrant, and was again denied entry. A complaint was subsequently filed against the tenant, and he was arrested for violating a city code. He filed suit under the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments.
The California district court of appeal, relying on the previous case of Frank v. Maryland (1959), upholding a conviction in similar circumstances, ruled against the tenant. The tenant then appealed to the Supreme Court, arguing that the decision in Frank v. Maryland should be overruled.
 Decision
Writing for the Court, Justice White wrote that, “having concluded that Frank v. State of Maryland, to the extent that it sanctioned such warrantless inspections, must be overruled, we reverse.”. He first reviewed principles of the Fourth Amendment, noting that “the basic purpose of this Amendment...is to safeguard the privacy and security of individuals against arbitrary invasions by governmental officials.”
He then reviewed Frank'''s reasoning, “re-examin[ing] of the factors which persuaded the Frank majority to adopt”Camara, 387 U.S. at 529. its approach. He disagreed with Frank that routine inspections are peripheral and that “it is surely anomalous to say that the individual and his private property are fully protected by the Fourth Amendment only when the individual is suspected of criminal behavior.”Camara, 387 U.S. at 530. He reviewed other aspects of Frank, and found that “administrative searches of the kind at issue here are significant intrusions upon the interest protected by the Fourth Amendment.”Camara, 387 U.S. at 534.
White then discussed “whether some other accommodation between public need and individual rights is essential” when dealing with public health and safety. He noted that routine inspections are necessary to ensure health and safety compliance with public codes, and that such inspections are well within common law history. Therefore, “area inspection is a ‘reasonable’ search of private property within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment.”Camara, 387 U.S. at 538.
Because the inspection is reasonable, when government officials are inspecting premises for health and safety compliance, “it seems likely that warrants should normally be sought only after entry is refused unless there has been a citizen complaint or there is other satisfactory reason for securing immediate entry. Similarly, the requirement of a warrant procedure does not suggest any change in what seems to be the prevailing local policy, in most situations, of authorizing entry, but not entry by force, to inspect.” Camara, 387 U.S. at 539-40.
However, because the tenant had refused entry, a warrant was necessary, so charging the tenant for refusing entry without a warrant was unconstitutional. The ruling of the lower court was vacated and remanded.
Dissent
In a dissent to two cases (See v. City of Seattle and this case), Justice Clark wrote, “Today, the Court renders this municipal experience [to inspect buildings], which dates back to Colonial days, for naught by overruling Frank v. Maryland and by striking down hundreds of city ordinances throughout the country and jeopardizing thereby the health, welfare, and safety of literally millions of people. But this is not all. It prostitutes the command of the Fourth Amendment...and sets up in the health and safety codes area inspection a newfangled ‘warrant’ system that is entirely foreign to Fourth Amendment standards.”Camara, 387 U.S. at 547 (Clark, J., dissenting).
 See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 387
 Frank v. Maryland (1959)
 See v. City of Seattle'' 387 U.S. 541 (1967) the same rule applies to commercial properties.
 References
External links
Google Scholar collection of other court cases citing this case
Google Scholar collection of academic articles and works citing this case
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:1967 in United States case law
"""

From "Cameron v. EMW Women's Surgical Center, P.S.C." ==> """
Cameron v. EMW Women’s Surgical Center, P.S.C., 595 U.S. ___ (2022), was a United States Supreme Court case related to the ability of state officials to intervene to defend the constitutionality of state laws.
 Background 
Governor of Kentucky Matt Bevin directed his secretary of health to defend Kentucky's dilation and evacuation abortion law in court. Andy Beshear defeated him in 2019, and ceased defending the statute after a divided panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit invalidated it on June 2, 2020, a few weeks before June Medical Services, LLC v. Russo was decided. Attorney General of Kentucky Daniel Cameron sought permission to intervene in defense of the law, but the court of appeals denied the motion and subsequent request to file a petition for rehearing en banc by a 2–1 vote. Judge John K. Bush dissented.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case on March 29, 2021, limited to the question of whether Cameron could intervene in defense of the law. The question presented of whether to remand the case in light of June Medical Services, LLC v. Russo was not granted. The Court heard oral arguments on October 12, 2021. On March 3, 2022, it reversed the Sixth Circuit by an 8–1 vote, holding that it should not have denied the Attorney General from intervening.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court leaks
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Caminetti v. United States" ==> """
Caminetti v. United States, 242 U.S. 470 (1917), was a United States Supreme Court case involving Farley Drew Caminetti and the Mann Act. The Court decided that the Mann Act applied not only to purposes of prostitution but also to other noncommercial consensual sexual liaisons. Thus, consensual extramarital sex falls within the definition of "immoral sex."
Plain meaning rule
The case has an historic place in American jurisprudence in that it was one of the first where the court embraced the idea of the "plain meaning rule".  This is a form of legislative interpretation that focuses strongly on the literal text of a statute.  In its most extreme form the plain meaning rule does not look outside of the statutory text at any additional sources to find the legislative intent if the rule is "plain" from the text.  Critics of using the plain meaning rule argue that a court may find or not find an ambiguity in a statute depending on the result that a court sees fit.
The issue in the case that caused the Court to interpret using the plain meaning rule was whether the Mann Act's inclusion of the phrase "...or for any other immoral purpose..." included Caminetti's actions.  The Court found that Caminetti had been convicted of transporting a woman across state lines for an immoral purpose which, according to the majority opinion, was well within the plain meaning of the statute.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 242
United States v. Bitty (1911)
Athanasaw & Sampson v. United States, 
Notes
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:1917 in United States case law
Category:Mann Act
Category:Sex case law
Category:Abrogated United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "Cammarano v. United States" ==> """
Cammarano v. United States, 358 U.S. 498 (1959), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that business may not deduct expenses they incurred for the "promotion or defeat of legislation" as "ordinary and necessary" business expenses on their federal income tax filing.Cammarano v. United States, 358 U.S. 498, 505-07 (1959) 
Opinion of the Court
In a unanimous opinion written by Justice John Marshall Harlan II, the Court held that "purchased publicity can influence the fate of legislation which will affect, directly or indirectly, all in the community," and therefore "everyone in the community should stand on the same footing as regards its purchase".Cammarano, 358 U.S. at 513. Justice William O. Douglas filed a concurring opinion; he criticized the argument that "First Amendment rights are somehow not fully realized unless they are subsidized by the State", noting that the argument "may indeed conflict with the underlying premise that a complete hands-off policy on the part of government is at times the only course consistent with First Amendment rights."Cammarano, 358 U.S. at 515 (Douglas, J., concurring).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 358
References
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1959 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Camp v. United States" ==> """
Camp v. United States, 113 U.S. 648 (1885), was an action brought by the appellant on April 13, 1869 to recover a balance alleged to be due as compensation for collecting and delivering to the United States a large amount of cotton in bales which was captured and abandoned property within the meaning of the acts of Congress. He claimed to have performed the services in question under an arrangement or agreement with an agent of the US Treasury Department which the Secretary of the Treasury subsequently recognized as a valid contract with the government. He admits certain payments on his claim, and asks judgment for the further sum of $80,000. The court below dismissed his petition..
 Background 
The precise form in which appellant's claim for compensation was presented at the Treasury Department is not shown by the findings of fact. The orders given in 1865 by the assistant Secretary for the statement of an account and a requisition in favor of the claimant discloses the fact that Camp had collected the cotton "for an interest therein," and that the payment of $30,000 was intended as an advance to him on account of his expenditures in relation to the cotton, while the payment of $15,000 to Smith was "on account of his joint interest with Camp in said cotton." But this falls far short of an agreement by the Department to make further payment. 
These facts, at most, imply necessarily nothing more than that the Department was willing under the circumstances to compensate him to the extent of the foregoing sums. Whether he should receive any compensation or how much should be awarded him were matters which depended, as we have seen, upon the discretion of the Secretary of the Treasury. No one acting by his authority had bound the government to make compensation. If the Secretary refused to pay anything, the claimant had no remedy except to apply to Congress for a special appropriation in his behalf. The mere payment of $45,000 on a claim for a much larger sum as compensation for services rendered in delivering captured or abandoned property to the government—for which services it was under no legal obligation, express or implied, to make compensation—cannot be deemed a recognition of a legal liability to make further payments on such claim. We find in the record no evidence of any purpose or agreement upon the part of the Secretary of the Treasury to make compensation to claimant beyond that already allowed, and to say that the court may award such compensation as it deems just and proper is to impose upon the government the obligations of a contract in respect of captured or abandoned property which, under the acts of Congress, only the Secretary of the Treasury or such agents of the Department as he designated for that purpose had authority to make.
Judgment
These views made it unnecessary to consider other questions argued by counsel, and lead to an affirmance of the judgment.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Cotton industry in the United States
"""

From "Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc." ==> """
Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569 (1994), was a United States Supreme Court copyright law case that established that a commercial parody can qualify as fair use.. This case established that the fact that money is made by a work does not make it impossible for fair use to apply; it is merely one of the components of a fair use analysis.
History
The members of the rap music group 2 Live Crew—Luke Skyywalker (Luther Campbell), Fresh Kid Ice, Mr. Mixx and Brother Marquis—composed a song called "Pretty Woman," a parody based on Roy Orbison's rock ballad, "Oh, Pretty Woman." The group's manager asked Acuff-Rose Music if they could get a license to use Orbison's tune for the ballad to be used as a parody. Acuff-Rose Music refused to grant the band a license but 2 Live Crew nonetheless produced and released the parody.
Almost a year later, after nearly a quarter of a million copies of the recording had been sold, Acuff-Rose sued 2 Live Crew and its record company, Luke Skyywalker Records, for copyright infringement. A federal district court in Nashville, Tennessee granted summary judgment for 2 Live Crew, reasoning that the commercial purpose of the parody did not bar it from fair use under section 107 of the Copyright Act of 1976 (17 U.S.C. § 107). The ruling pointed out that 2 Live Crew's parody "quickly degenerates" from the original and only used no more than was necessary of the original to create the parody. For those reasons, the court decided it was "extremely unlikely that 2 Live Crew's song could adversely affect the market for the original."754 F. Supp. 1150, 1154-1155, 1157-1158 The United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit reversed and remanded, holding that the commercial nature of the parody rendered it presumptively unfair under the first of four factors relevant under § 107; that, by taking the "heart" of the original and making it the "heart" of a new work, 2 Live Crew had taken too much under the third § 107 factor; and that market harm for purposes of the fourth § 107 factor had been established by a presumption attaching to commercial uses.
Holding
The Supreme Court held that 2 Live Crew's commercial parody may be a fair use within the meaning of § 107.
Justice Souter began by describing the inherent tension created by the need to simultaneously protect copyrighted material and allow others to build upon it, quoting Lord Ellenborough: "While I shall think myself bound to secure every man in the enjoyment of his copyright, one must not put manacles upon science."
The Court elaborated on this tension, looking to Justice Story's analysis in Folsom v. Marsh, 9 F. Cas. 342 (C.C.D. Mass. 1841), where he stated, "look to the nature and objects of the selections made, the quantity and value of the materials used, and the degree in which the use may prejudice the sale, or diminish the profits, or supersede the objects, of the original work." This analysis was eventually codified in the Copyright Act of 1976 in § 107 as follows:
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 106 and 106A, the fair use of a copyrighted work, including such use by reproduction in copies or phonorecords or by any other means specified by that section, for purposes such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching (including multiple copies for classroom use), scholarship, or research, is not an infringement of copyright. In determining whether the use made of a work in any particular case is a fair use the factors to be considered shall include—
(1) the purpose and character of the use, including whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes;
(2) the nature of the copyrighted work;
(3) the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the copyrighted work as a whole; and
(4) the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the copyrighted work.
The Supreme Court then found the aforementioned factors must be applied to each situation on a case by case basis. '"The fact that parody can claim legitimacy for some appropriation does not, of course, tell either parodist or judge much about where to draw the line. Like a book review quoting the copyrighted material criticized, parody may or may not be fair use, and petitioner's suggestion that any parodic use is presumptively fair has no more justification in law or fact than the equally hopeful claim that any use for news reporting should be presumed fair."
When looking at the purpose and character of 2 Live Crew's use, the Court found that the more transformative the new work, the less significant the other three factors. The court found that, in any event, a work's commercial nature is only one element of the first factor enquiry into its purpose and character, quoting Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 464 U.S. 417. The Supreme Court found the Court of Appeals analysis as running counter to this proposition.
Justice Souter then moved onto the second § 107 factor, "the nature of the copyrighted work", finding it has little merit in resolving this and other parody cases, since the artistic value of parodies is often found in their ability to invariably copy popular works of the past.
The Court did find the third factor integral to the analysis, finding that the Court of Appeals erred in holding that, as a matter of law, 2 Live Crew copied excessively from the Orbison original. Souter reasoned that the "amount and substantiality" of the portion used by 2 Live Crew was reasonable in relation to the band's purpose in creating a parody of "Oh, Pretty Woman". The majority reasoned "even if 2 Live Crew's copying of the original's first line of lyrics and characteristic opening bass riff may be said to go to the original's 'heart,' that heart is what most readily conjures up the song for parody, and it is the heart at which parody takes aim." The Supreme Court then looked to the new work as a whole, finding that 2 Live Crew thereafter departed markedly from the Orbison lyrics, producing otherwise distinctive music.
Looking at the final factor, the Supreme Court found that the Court of Appeals erred in finding a presumption or inference of market harm (such as there had been in Sony). Parodies in general, the Court said, will rarely substitute for the original work, since the two works serve different market functions. While Acuff-Rose found evidence of a potential "derivative" rap market in the very fact that 2 Live Crew recorded a rap parody of "Oh, Pretty Woman" and another rap group sought a license to record a rap derivative, the Court found no evidence that a potential rap market was harmed in any way by 2 Live Crew's parodic rap version. In fact, the Court found that it was unlikely that any artist would find parody a lucrative derivative market, noting that artists "ask for criticism, but only want praise."
The Supreme Court reversed the court of appeals and remanded the case. On remand, the parties settled the case out of court.  According to press reports, under terms of the settlement, Acuff-Rose dismissed its lawsuit, and 2 Live Crew agreed to license the sale of its parody of the song.  Although Acuff-Rose stated that it was paid under the settlement, the terms were not otherwise disclosed.Acuff-Rose Settles Suit with Rap Group, The Commercial Appeal (Memphis), June 5, 1996.
Notably, Justice Souter attached the lyrics of both songs as appendixes to his majority opinion for the Court.  As a result, both songs were reproduced in the United States Reports along with the rest of the opinion, and may now be found in every major American law library.
See also
 Berlin v. E.C. Publications, Inc.  
 NXIVM Corp. v. The Ross Institute  
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 510
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
Further reading
External links
Luke Skyywalker Goes to the Supreme Court, animated film on the case
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:1994 in United States case law
Category:Fair use case law
Category:Roy Orbison
"""

From "Campbell-Ewald Co. v. Gomez" ==> """
Campbell-Ewald Co. v. Gomez, 577 U.S. ___ (2016), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States clarified whether a case becomes moot when a party provides a settlement offer that satisfies a named plaintiff's claims in a class action suit and whether a government contractor is entitled to "derivative sovereign immunity".Campbell-Ewald Co. v. Gomez, No. 14–857, 577 U.S. ___, slip op. at 1-2 (2016).
Background
Telephone Consumer Protection Act
The Telephone Consumer Protection Act of 1991 prohibits individuals from sending unsolicited telephonic communications.47 U.S.C. §227 (introduced in 1991 as Pub. L. 102–243, § 3(a), Dec. 20, 1991, 105 Stat. 2395). Specifically, the Act prohibits individuals from "mak[ing] any call" or "using any automatic telephone dialing system" to contact a telephone number assigned to a cellular telephone service without the prior consent.Campbell-Ewald, slip op. at 2 (citing 47 U.S.C. §227(b)(1)(A)(iii)) (internal quotations omitted) (modifications in slip opinion). A text message is considered the equivalent of a "call" under the Act.Campbell-Ewald, slip op. at 2 (internal citation omitted). Private citizens may file a lawsuit against individuals who violate the act.Campbell-Ewald, slip op. at 2 (citing 47 U.S.C. §227(b)(3)). If successful, plaintiffs may recover $500 for each violation or their "actual monetary loss" (whichever is greater), and damages may be tripled if the defendant "knowingly" or "willfully" violated the Act.Campbell-Ewald, slip op. at 2 (internal quotations omitted).
Gomez's class action claim
In the year 2000, the United States Navy contracted with the Campbell-Ewald Company to develop a multimedia military recruiting campaign.Campbell-Ewald, slip op. at 2. Beginning in 2005, Campbell proposed a campaign where young adults would receive text messages; the Navy agreed to implement the program on the condition that the messages would only be sent to "individuals who had 'opted in' to receipt of marketing solicitations on topics that included service in the Navy."Campbell-Ewald, slip op. at 2 (noting that young adults were "the Navy’s target audience"). Campbell then generated a list of 100,000 cellular phone numbers that they believed were owned by young adults "between the ages of 18 and 24 who had consented to receiving solicitations by text message."Campbell-Ewald, slip op. at 2-3. In May 2006, Campbell authorized the transmission of a text message to those phone numbers, which encouraged individuals to learn more about service in the Navy.Campbell-Ewald, slip op. at 2-3. The full text of the text message read: “Destined for something big? Do it in the Navy. Get a career. An education. And a chance to serve a greater cause. For a FREE Navy video call [phone number].” Id. at 2 (internal citations omitted) (modification in slip opinion) Jose Gomez received the text message, but he alleged that he never consented to receive the message.Campbell-Ewald, slip op. at 3. Gomez also alleged that he was nearly 40" years old when he received the message. Ibid. He then filed a class action lawsuit in the United States District Court for the Central District of California on behalf of a nationwide class of individuals who had received the text message, but had not previously consented to its delivery.Campbell-Ewald, slip op. at 3. The suit alleged that Campbell's transmission of the text message violated the Telephone Consumer Protection Act of 1991.
Gomez's lawsuit claimed costs and attorneys fees, which he claimed should be tripled in light of Campbell's conduct, as well as an injunction to prevent future unsolicited messaging. Before Gomez's class was certified, Campbell proposed a settlement (pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 68), which offered to pay Gomez's costs and $1503.00 for every text message that he could prove that he received, but they did not agree to pay attorneys fees.Campbell-Ewald, slip op. at 3-4. After Gomez rejected this settlement offer, Campbell filed a motion to dismiss on the basis that the case was now moot because the settlement offer provided Gomez complete relief.Campbell-Ewald, slip op. at 4. The district court denied the motion and allowed class action claims to proceed.Campbell-Ewald, slip op. at 4 (noting that the district court treated the motion to dismiss as a motion for summary judgment because Campbell had already filed an answer to the complaint). Prior to trial, Campbell filed a separate motion for summary judgment, claiming that it was entitled to sovereign immunity "as a contractor acting on the Navy's behalf."Campbell-Ewald, slip op. at 4-5. The district court granted the motion, but on appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit revered the district court's ruling.Campbell-Ewald, slip op. at 5. In 2015, the Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve a circuit split about whether a complete settlement offer can cause a case to become moot.Campbell-Ewald, slip op. at 5-6.
Opinion of the Court
In a majority opinion written by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, the Court held that "an unaccepted settlement offer has no force" and, under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 68, it does not render a lawsuit moot.Campbell-Ewald, slip op. at 1, 6-12. Additionally, Justice Ginsburg held that the government contractor in this case was not entitled to derivative sovereign immunity.Campbell-Ewald, slip op. at 1, 12-14.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States communications regulation case law
Category:United States Navy in the 21st century
Category:United States sovereign immunity case law
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:Military recruitment
Category:Text messaging
Category:United States class action case law
"""

From "Camreta v. Greene" ==> """
Camreta v. Greene, 563 U.S. 692 (2011), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that in the general case the Court may review a lower court's constitutional ruling at the behest of government officials who have won final judgment on qualified immunity grounds but could not for this case due to details specific to it. ("This Court generally may review a lower court's constitutional ruling at the behest of a government official granted immunity.  But we may not do so in this case for reasons peculiar to it.")
See also
Saucier v. Katz
Ashcroft v. al-Kidd
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 563
References
Further reading
External links
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "C&A Carbone, Inc. v. Town of Clarkstown" ==> """
C&A Carbone, Inc. v. Town of Clarkstown, New York, 511 U.S. 383 (1994), was a case before the United States Supreme Court in which the plaintiff, a private recycler with business in Clarkstown, New York, sought to ship its non-recyclable waste to cheaper waste processors out-of-state. Clarkstown opposed the move, and the company then brought suit, raising the unconstitutionality of Clarkstown's "flow control ordinance," which required solid wastes that were not recyclable or hazardous to be deposited at a particular private company's transfer facility. The ordinance involved fees that were above market rates. The Supreme Court sided with the plaintiff, concluding that Clarkstown's ordinance violated the Dormant Commerce Clause.
Furthermore, the Supreme Court held, "Discrimination against interstate commerce in favor of local business or investment is per se invalid," with a very narrow exception where the city can show, under rigorous scrutiny, that there are no other means to advance a legitimate local interest. In the case at hand, the city could have subsidized the waste disposal plant, which was at least one alternative to the discriminatory law that the city tried to use.
Justice Anthony Kennedy delivered the opinion of the Court.
It was held that the ordinance: (1) regulated interstate commerce, because (a) the company's recycling center processed waste from places other than the town, including from out of state, and (b) the ordinance: (i) drove up the cost for out-of-state interests to dispose of their solid waste, and 			(ii) deprived out-of-state businesses of access to a local market; and (2) violated the commerce clause by depriving competitors, including out-of-state firms, of access to a local market, because: (a) the ordinance: (i) discriminated by allowing only the favored operator to process waste within the town, (ii) hoarded solid waste, and the demand to get rid of it, for the benefit of the preferred processing facility, and (iii) squelched competition in waste-processing service, and (b) the town: (i) had nondiscriminatory alternatives, such as uniform safety regulations enacted without the object to discriminate, for addressing the health and environmental problems alleged to justify the ordinance, (ii) could not justify the ordinance as a way to steer solid waste away from out-of-town disposal sites that the town might deem harmful to the environment, where to do so would extend the town's police power beyond its jurisdictional bounds, and (iii) could subsidize the facility through general taxes or municipal bonds.
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, in an opinion concurring with the judgment of the Court, agreed with the majority that the ordinance violated the commerce clause, but rejected the view that the ordinance discriminated against interstate commerce. Instead, she believed that the ordinance was unconstitutional since it imposed an excessive burden on interstate commerce. 
See also
 United Haulers Assn. v. Oneida-Herkimer Solid Waste Mgmt. Auth.
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 511
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1994 in United States case law
"""

From "Caniglia v. Strom" ==> """
Caniglia v. Strom, 593 U.S. ___ (2021), was a United States Supreme Court case related to the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution's "community caretaking" exception.
 Background 
During a heated argument in their home on August 20, 2015, Edward Caniglia grabbed a pistol from a bedroom and threw it on the dining room table. He then asked his wife, Kim, to shoot him with the gun.Caniglia v. Strom Writ of Certiorari Although whether the gun was loaded or not was in dispute, Kim hid the gun and the magazine while Edward left for a "ride" after the fight due to concern for his mental condition. As conflict brewed up after Edward returned home, Kim stayed at a hotel. At the hotel, she phoned a furious Edward that night, who brought up topics from the fight. The next day, Kim was unable to reach Edward through any means of contact. She then decided to contact the Cranston, Rhode Island Police Department's non-emergency line because Kim feared he harmed himself after the tirades. Talking with Officer Mastrati, she mentioned the argument, Edward's behavior, and the firearm. Kim clarified that she was not in danger but worried that her husband was in danger. She was further afraid of what she might discover if she returned home. Mastrati called Edward, who agreed to meet with the police. Officers Mastrati, Smith, Russell, and Sergeant Barth met with him outside the Caniglia household.  Kim was waiting nearby in her car. Barth observed Caniglia as appearing "agitated" and "angry" while Mastrati and Russell noted "calm," "cooperative," and "normal" behavior. Kim also remarked that Edward was upset that police were called. Sergeant Barth ultimately concluded that Edward posed a danger to himself and others. He then agreed with Barth's request to receive a psychiatric evaluation at a nearby hospital. According to Edward, he complied with the request only because the officers promised they would not confiscate his weapons if he sought treatment. On that same morning, one of the Caniglias informed police that another firearm was present in the home. Barth asked his superiors to confiscate the firearms, with Captain Henry approving the proposal. Kim directed the officers to the locations of the weapons, along with the magazines and associated ammunition. Police knew that Edward owned the items and did not want them seized. After multiple attempts to retrieve the firearms back from the police department, his lawyer requested in October 2015 that the guns be returned to Edward. Two months later, the firearms were returned. Shortly before getting the guns back, Edward sued the City of Cranston and the police department for violating his 4th Amendment rights.
District Court and Court of Appeals
In its decision, the United States District Court for the District of Rhode Island analyzed Edward Caniglia's case on ten factors (Fourth Amendment law, the community caretaking exception, qualified immunity, the Second Amendment of the United States Constitution, Article I, § 22 of the Constitution of Rhode Island, Fourteenth Amendment Due Process, Fourteenth Amendment Equal Protection, the Rhode Island Firearms Act, the Rhode Island Mental Health Law, and Caniglia's claim of conversion).Caniglia v. Strom, 396 F. Supp. 3d 227 - Dist. Court, D. Rhode Island 2019 Issuing a summary judgement, the district court ruled that Caniglia 's due process rights were infringed because the police failed to return his property or instruct him on retrieving his firearms after he was deemed safe. However, the court denied his other claims of conversion, violation of the RIMHL, and violation of 4th Amendment rights. Additionally, the district court judges decided that the officers acted reasonably based on the reports from Kim Caniglia. Rebutting Edward Caniglia's claim that the community caretaking exception only applies to vehicles, qualified immunity was granted to the officers because case law and judicial attitudes towards community caretaking involving the home were ambiguous at best and poorly defined at worst. Furthermore, Caniglia's right to bear arms was not violated because police reasonably asserted he was suicidal and his guns were eventually returned; his Equal Protection claim also faltered because merely speculated about the fate of gun owners in Cranston rather than pointing out the treatment of a specific individual. Claims for compensation were denied under the RIFA because the police returned the guns to Caniglia without a court order. Caniglia was neither stopped nor arrested for law enforcement purposes; he was only detained as part of community caretaking duties. Finally, the police department did not violate the RIMHL because there was no evidence of a conspiracy to admit Caniglia, and that he was briefly evaluated and released without law enforcement encouraging staff to have him stay.
The United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit affirmed the district court's decision by declaring, "Police officers play an important role as community caretakers.... Here, the actions of the defendant officers, though not letter perfect, did not exceed the proper province of their community caretaking responsibilities."Caniglia v. Strom, 953 F. 3d 112 - Court of Appeals, 1st Circuit 2020
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case on November 20, 2020. The case was argued on March 24, 2021, and decided on May 17, 2021. In a unanimous decision (9-0), Justice Clarence Thomas delivered the majority opinion.Oyez article about the case In Caniglia's case, the community caretaking exception was used far beyond the bounds of the 4th Amendment:Thomas' majority opinion 
 The First Circuit's "community caretaking" rule, however, goes beyond anything this Court has recognized. The decision below assumed that respondents lacked a warrant or consent, and it expressly disclaimed the possibility that they were reacting to a crime. The court also declined to consider whether any recognized exigent circumstances were present because respondents had forfeited the point. Nor did it find that respondents' actions were akin to what a private citizen might have had authority to do if petitioner's wife had approached a neighbor for assistance instead of the police.
 Neither the holding nor logic of Cady justified that approach. True, Cady also involved a warrantless search for a firearm. But the location of that search was an impounded vehicle—not a home—" 'a constitutional difference' " that the opinion repeatedly stressed. 413 U. S., at 439; see also id., at 440–442. In fact, Cady expressly contrasted its treatment of a vehicle already under police control with a search of a car "parked adjacent to the dwelling place of the owner." Id., at 446–448 (citing Coolidge v. New Hampshire, 403 U.S. 443 (1971)).
 Cady's unmistakable distinction between vehicles and homes also places into proper context its reference to "community caretaking." This quote comes from a portion of the opinion explaining that the "frequency with which . . . vehicle[s] can become disabled or involved in . . . accident[s] on public highways" often requires police to perform noncriminal "community caretaking functions," such as providing aid to motorists. 413 U. S., at 441. But, this recognition that police officers perform many civic tasks in modern society was just that—a recognition that these tasks exist, and not an open-ended license to perform them anywhere.
Chief Justice Roberts' concurrence
Chief Justice John Roberts (joined by Justice Stephen Breyer) declares that the court unanimously recognized in Brigham City v. Stuart that the role of the police is to prevent violence and restore order rather than merely rendering aid to casualties.Roberts' concurrence A warrant is not required when there is a need to assist those who are seriously injured or threatened with such injury. Although warrantless entry is justified if there is an objectively reasonable basis that a party was in need of medical assistance or in serious danger, the facts described in the opinion do not contradict case law. Therefore, Roberts fully agrees with the majority.
Justice Alito's concurrence
While Justice Samuel Alito agreed that there is no broad 4th Amendment rule for community caretaking, he opines that specific scenarios such as conducting a search and seizure on a suicidal person, red flag laws, and warrantless searches to check on a resident's medical condition were not properly addressed.Alito's concurrence  He further writes:
  One additional category of cases should be noted: those involving warrantless, nonconsensual searches of a home for the purpose of ascertaining whether a resident is in urgent need of medical attention and cannot summon help. At oral argument, The Chief Justice posed a question that highlighted this problem. He imagined a situation in which neighbors of an elderly woman call the police and express concern because the woman had agreed to come over for dinner at 6 p.m., but by 8 p.m., had not appeared or called even though she was never late for anything. The woman had not been seen leaving her home, and she was not answering the phone. Nor could the neighbors reach her relatives by phone. If the police entered the home without a warrant to see if she needed help, would that violate the Fourth Amendment? Tr. of Oral Arg. 6–8.
 Petitioner's answer was that it would. Indeed, he argued, even if 24 hours went by, the police still could not lawfully enter without a warrant. If the situation remained unchanged for several days, he suggested, the police might be able to enter after obtaining "a warrant for a missing person." Id., at 9.
 The Chief Justice's question concerns an important real-world problem. Today, more than ever, many people, including many elderly persons, live alone.[3] Many elderly men and women fall in their homes,[4] or become incapacitated for other reasons, and unfortunately, there are many cases in which such persons cannot call for assistance. In those cases, the chances for a good recovery may fade with each passing hour.[5] So in The Chief Justice's imaginary case, if the elderly woman was seriously hurt or sick and the police heeded petitioner's suggestion about what the Fourth Amendment demands, there is a fair chance she would not be found alive. This imaginary woman may have regarded her house as her castle, but it is doubtful that she would have wanted it to be the place where she died alone and in agony.
 Our current precedents do not address situations like this. We have held that the police may enter a home without a warrant when there are "exigent circumstances." Payton v. New York, 445 U.S. 573, 590 (1980). But circumstances are exigent only when there is not enough time to get a warrant, see Missouri v. McNeely, 569 U.S. 141, 149 (2013); Michigan v. Tyler, 436 U.S. 499, 509 (1978), and warrants are not typically granted for the purpose of checking on a person's medical condition. Perhaps States should institute procedures for the issuance of such warrants, but in the meantime, courts may be required to grapple with the basic Fourth Amendment question of reasonableness.
 The three categories of cases discussed above are simply illustrative. Searches and seizures conducted for other non-law-enforcement purposes may arise and may present their own Fourth Amendment issues. Today's decision does not settle those questions.
 In sum, the Court properly rejects the broad "community caretaking" theory on which the decision below was based. The Court's decision goes no further, and on that understanding, I join the opinion in full.
Justice Kavanaugh's concurrence
Justice Brett Kavanaugh concurred that although he agrees with the Court fully, he argues that the decision clarifies labeling more than ramifications. While the community caretaking doctrine applies to primarily vehicles, the exigent circumstances doctrine could very well apply to Caniglia.Kavanaugh's concurrence
 This case does not require us to explore all the contours of the exigent circumstances doctrine as applied to emergency-aid situations because the officers here disclaimed reliance on that doctrine. But to avoid any confusion going forward, I think it important to briefly describe how the doctrine applies to some heartland emergency-aid situations....
 Suppose that a woman calls a healthcare hotline or 911 and says that she is contemplating suicide, that she has firearms in her home, and that she might as well die. The operator alerts the police, and two officers respond by driving to the woman's home. They knock on the door but do not receive a response. May the officers enter the home? Of course.
 Consider another example. Suppose that an elderly man is uncharacteristically absent from Sunday church services and repeatedly fails to answer his phone throughout the day and night. A concerned relative calls the police and asks the officers to perform a wellness check. Two officers drive to the man's home. They knock but receive no response. May the officers enter the home? Of course.
 To be sure, courts, police departments, and police officers alike must take care that officers' actions in those kinds of cases are reasonable under the circumstances. But both of those examples and others as well, such as cases involving unattended young children inside a home, illustrate the kinds of warrantless entries that are perfectly constitutional under the exigent circumstances doctrine, in my view.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
"""

From "Cannon v. United States" ==> """
Cannon v. United States, 116 U.S. 55 (1885), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held compacts for sexual non-intercourse, easily made and easily broken, when the prior marriage relations continue to exist, with the occupation of the same house and table and the keeping up of the same family unity, is not a lawful substitute for the monogamous family which alone the statute tolerates.
 References 
External links
Category:United States law and polygamy in Mormonism
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
"""

From "Cannon v. University of Chicago" ==> """
Cannon v. University of Chicago, 441 U.S. 677 (1979), was a United States Supreme Court case which interpreted Congressional silence in the face of earlier interpretations of similar laws to determine that Title IX of the Higher Education Act provides an implied cause of action.
Facts
Plaintiff Geraldine Cannon sued the University of Chicago, asserting that she was denied admission on the basis of her sex, and that she had a cause of action under Title IX, which bars sex discrimination by federally funded institutions, but does not expressly grant a private right of action. The United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois dismissed the case. The dismissal was affirmed by the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, which held that the statutory procedure for termination of federal funds was the exclusive remedy provided by Congress.
One issue, buried in footnotes, would be of importance in the subsequent Alexander v. Sandoval decision. The University of Chicago claimed that Cannon was denied admission because the medical university admissions departments had a policy of not admitting applicants over thirty years of age, at least not without an advanced degree. Northwestern Medical School absolutely disqualified applicants over 35. Cannon was 39 years old at the time. The policy had a disparate impact on women.
The plaintiff appealed, contending that Congress acted in light of similar language in Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which the Supreme Court had already found to imply a private remedy, and to which Congress had allowed attorney fees (which would be unnecessary absent a private right of action).
Issue
Did Congress intend a private remedy to be implied from the Title IX?  Are individuals allowed to sue under Title IX, or are they only allowed to participate in class-action suits by the HEW?
Holding
The Court, in an opinion by Justice Stevens, applied the four-part test set forth in Cort v. Ash, 422 U.S. 66 (1975), used in order to determine whether Congress had meant for a law to be able to be privately enforced:
  Is the plaintiff a member of a special class for whose benefit the statute was enacted? (The court notes that this can not be used to imply a right of action that is merely a criminal statute that prohibits all persons from engaging in a general prohibited behavior).
  Does legislative history express a legislative intent to create or deny a private right of action?
  Would creation of a private right of action frustrate legislative scheme, or is it in fact helpful to it?
  Does the right involve an area that historically has basically been of concern to the States?
The court determined that all of the Cort factors pointed to an implied right of action:
  Women are clearly in the special class protected by the statute, for the statute identifies persons who shall not be excluded.
  Title IX contained language which copied that of Title VI, for which a private cause of action had already been implied by the Fifth Circuit at the time Title IX was adopted; this was held to show legislative intent.
  The remedy was necessary, or at least helpful to accomplishing one of Congress’ two purposes: avoiding federal support for discriminators and protecting individual citizens from discrimination. Private suits make this second purpose easier to implement.
  This question is not left to states because the federal government is primarily responsible for protecting against discrimination.
The Court also recognized that while this new source of financial liability might affect universities badly, it was up to Congress to weigh that concern.
Dissent
A dissenting opinion by Justice Powell raised separation of powers concerns. He called the Court's decision legislation, noting that Congress knew how to make judicial remedies, and saying that three of the four factors invited judicial lawmaking—only the second factor, he argued, was really about congressional intent. Powell contended that the Court's decision would encourage Congress to be lax in their duty to create laws, expecting democratically unaccountable judges to do the job for them.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 441
References
 .
Category:1979 in United States case law
Category:Implied statutory cause of action case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:University and college admissions in the United States
Category:University of Chicago
