"""

From "Canton Railroad Co. v. Rogan" ==> """
Canton Railroad Company v. Rogan, 340 U.S. 511 (1951), is a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that a state franchise tax upon the services performed by a railroad in handling imported and exported goods did not violate the Import-Export Clause of the United States Constitution.. 
Background
The Canton Railroad is an industrial switching railroad operating in the port area of Baltimore, Maryland. The State of Maryland imposed a franchise tax on the gross receipts of the railroad, apportioned based upon the percentage of the railroad trackage located within the state. A substantial portion of the freight handled by the Canton Railroad involved goods that were either being imported or exported into the United States. Canton Railroad for the tax year of 1946 claimed that $705,957.21 of its total receipts of $1,588,744.48 should be exempt from taxation because they were derived from operations in foreign commerce. The State Tax Commission rejected the railroad's claim of exemption, and imposed a tax of $39,029.34.
Canton Railroad appealed the State Tax Commission to the Baltimore City Circuit Court and then to the Court of Appeals of Maryland. The Court of Appeals upheld the imposition of the tax with two judges dissenting.
 Court's decision 
The majority opinion by Justice Douglas first noted that the Import-Export Clause of the Constitution of Article One, Section 10, Clause 2 provides that
No State shall, without the Consent of the Congress, lay any Imposts or Duties on Imports or Exports, except what may be absolutely necessary for executing its inspection Laws ...
The opinion then noted that the franchise tax was not similar to those state taxes the Supreme Court had struck down in cases that had taxed goods being exported or imported, in that this tax was a general tax on revenues from the handling of the goods and not on the goods themselves.  The opinion held that to import or export involve acts that begin and end at the water's edge (country's border), and that to use the railroad's argument that it was involved in exporting and importing would create a zone of tax immunity covering nearly every forest, mine, and factory in the country.  For this reasoning, the Court held that the Maryland franchise tax did not violate the Import-Export Clause.  Lastly, regarding a claim that the tax violated the Commerce Clause, the Court noted that prior cases had already held that a state franchise tax structured in this manner did not violate this clause.
The dissent by Justice Jackson, styled as an opinion reserving judgment on the case, discussed the history of the Import-Export Clause as one of the fundamental policies imbedded in the Constitution. The constitutional concern was that states with ports and their associated roads would exploit this advantage, causing inland states to pay tribute to the seaboard states for the privilege of exportation. The dissent considered this federal policy to go beyond simple direct taxation on goods, and that Maryland's franchise tax had the effect of directly increasing the cost of exports. However, the dissent noted that the effect of the federal policy on the validity of the state tax was not addressed before the state courts or by the railroad company's counsel before the Supreme Court, so the Justice did not wish to express a final view on this matter. This dissenting opinion was also to apply to the companion case decided on the same day, Western Maryland R. Co. v. Rogan, 340 U.S. 520 (1951).
Chief Justice Vinson did not take part in the consideration or decision of the case.
 Subsequent developments 
The holding of Canton Railroad was reaffirmed when it was cited in both the majority and dissenting opinions in United States v. International Business Machines Corp., 517 U.S. 843 (1996), a case involving a federal tax on the insurance coverage of goods to be exported.
The Maryland franchise tax has been recodified at Section 8-101 and 8-102 of the Tax-General Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:1951 in United States case law
Category:Railway litigation in 1951
"""

From "Cantwell v. Connecticut" ==> """
Cantwell v. Connecticut, 310 U.S. 296 (1940), is a landmark court decision by the United States Supreme Court holding that the First Amendment's federal protection of religious free exercise incorporates via the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and so applies to state governments too.. 
Background
The statute was an early type of consumer protection law: it required the Secretary, before issuing a certificate permitting solicitation, to determine whether the cause was "a religious one or is a bona fide object of charity or philanthropy" and whether the solicitation "conforms to reasonable standards of efficiency and integrity."
Upon determination of the cause's legitimacy, a solicitation certificate would be issued.
Newton Cantwell (a Jehovah's Witness) and his two sons, were preaching in a heavily Roman Catholic neighborhood in New Haven, Connecticut. The Cantwells were going door to door, with books and pamphlets and a portable phonograph with sets of records. Each record contained a description of one of the books.  One such book was "Enemies", which was an attack on organized religion in general and especially the Roman Catholic Church. Jesse Cantwell stopped two men on the street and requested permission to play a phonograph. They gave permission, and after hearing the recording, the two citizens were incensed; though they wanted to physically assault the Cantwells, they restrained themselves.
Cantwell and his two sons were arrested and charged with: (1) violation of a Connecticut statute requiring solicitors to obtain a certificate from the secretary of the public welfare council ("Secretary") before soliciting funds from the public, and (2) inciting a common-law breach of the peace.
Prior history
The Connecticut Supreme Court disagreed with the Cantwells, finding that the statute was an effort by the state of Connecticut to protect the public against fraud, and as such, the statute was constitutional.  The Connecticut Supreme Court upheld the conviction of all three on the statutory charge and affirmed one son's conviction of inciting a breach of the peace, but remanded the inciting a breach of peace charge against the other two for a new trial.
Issue
The issue presented before the court was whether the state's action in convicting the Cantwells of inciting a breach of the peace and violating the solicitation statute violated their First Amendment right to free exercise of religion.
Opinion of the Court
The Court found that Cantwell's action was protected by the First and Fourteenth Amendments.
Justice Owen Roberts wrote in a unanimous opinion that "to condition the solicitation of aid for the perpetuation of religious views or systems upon a license, the grant of which rests in the exercise of a determination by state authority as to what is a religious cause, is to lay a forbidden burden upon the exercise of liberty protected by the Constitution."
In general the court held with respect to the Establishment Clause and Free Exercise Clause and their embodiment in the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment:
We hold that the statute, as construed and applied to the appellants, deprives them of their liberty without due process of law in contravention of the Fourteenth Amendment. The fundamental concept of liberty embodied in that Amendment embraces the liberties guaranteed by the First Amendment. The First Amendment declares that Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof. The Fourteenth Amendment has rendered the legislatures of the states as incompetent as Congress to enact such laws. The constitutional inhibition of legislation on the subject of religion has a double aspect. On the one hand, it forestalls compulsion by law of the acceptance of any creed or the practice of any form of worship. Freedom of conscience and freedom to adhere to such religious organization or form of worship as the individual may choose cannot be restricted by law. On the other hand, it safeguards the free exercise of the chosen form of religion. Thus the Amendment embraces two concepts,—freedom to believe and freedom to act. The first is absolute but, in the nature of things, the second cannot be. Conduct remains subject to regulation for the protection of society.  The freedom to act must have appropriate definition to preserve the enforcement of that protection. In every case the power to regulate must be so exercised as not, in attaining a permissible end, unduly to infringe the protected freedom. No one would contest the proposition that a state may not, by statute, wholly deny the right to preach or to disseminate religious views. Plainly such a previous and absolute restraint would violate the terms of the guarantee. It is equally clear that a state may by general and non-discriminatory legislation regulate the times, the places, and the manner of soliciting upon its streets, and of holding meetings thereon; and may in other respects safeguard the peace, good order and comfort of the community, without unconstitutionally invading the liberties protected by the Fourteenth Amendment.Cantwell, 310 U.S. at 303-304.
Significance
Before the Cantwell decision, it was not legally clear that the First Amendment protected religious practitioners against restrictions at the state and local levels as well as federal. But the Supreme Court in Cantwell said it did, thereby ushering in an era of greatly strengthened religious freedom.
This case incorporated the First Amendment's Free Exercise Clause, thereby applying it to the states and protecting free exercise of religion from intrusive state action. The Establishment Clause was incorporated seven years later in Everson v. Board of Education..
See also
 Incorporation (Bill of Rights)
 R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul, 
References
Further reading
External links
 "Religion: Freedom of Faith", Time magazine, April 8, 1940, contemporaneous article on the case, Online
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:Incorporation case law
Category:1940 in United States case law
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:1940 in Connecticut
Category:Legal history of Connecticut
Category:History of New Haven, Connecticut
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
"""

From "Caperton v. A.T. Massey Coal Co." ==> """
Caperton v. A. T. Massey Coal Co., 556 U.S. 868 (2009), is a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment requires judges to recuse themselves not only when actual bias has been demonstrated or when the judge has an economic interest in the outcome of the case but also when "extreme facts" create a "probability of bias.".
 Background 
In 1998, Harman Mining Company president Hugh Caperton filed a lawsuit against A.T. Massey Coal Company alleging that Massey fraudulently cancelled a coal supply contract with Harman Mining, resulting in its going out of business. In August 2002, a Boone County, West Virginia jury found in favor of Caperton and awarded $50 million in damages.
While the case was awaiting hearing in the West Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals, A.T. Massey's Chief Executive Officer, Don Blankenship, became involved in the election campaign pitting incumbent Supreme Court Justice Warren McGraw against Charleston lawyer Brent Benjamin. Blankenship created a non-profit corporation called "And for the Sake of the Kids" in order to force McGraw off the court and replace him with Benjamin"'The Pellican Brief' in Reality?", Jan 24, 2009 paul-robinson.us  (Retrieved September 1, 2014) through which he contributed over $3 million in Benjamin's behalf, an amount which, if it had been contributed directly to his campaign, was about 3,000 times the maximum permissible direct contribution to an election campaign.  This amounted to more than the total amount spent by all other Benjamin supporters and Benjamin's own campaign committee. Much of the money went to an advertising campaign aimed at questioning McGraw's impartiality. McGraw further damaged his campaign during a speech at the 2004 United Mine Workers of America's Labor Day rally in Racine, West Virginia in which he alleged that Republican operatives were following him "looking for ugly". The speech, sometimes referred to as the "Scream at Racine" or the "Scream from Racine" was featured in several campaign advertisements sponsored by the West Virginia Republican Party and may have played a large role in McGraw's defeat in November 2004.
Caperton Appeal
In 2007, when the case came before the West Virginia Supreme Court, Caperton petitioned for Justice Benjamin to recuse himself because of Blankenship's contributions during the campaign.  Benjamin declined and was ultimately part of the 3 to 2 majority that overturned the $50 million verdict.
Blankenship also petitioned for Justice Larry Starcher's recusal due to a perceived public feud in which Starcher allegedly called Blankenship "stupid" and "a clown," and accused Blankenship of buying a seat on the West Virginia Supreme Court. Starcher also refused to withdraw from the case, prompting a lawsuit from Massey Energy over the West Virginia Supreme Court's recusal procedures.  Caperton then asked for and was granted a rehearing of the case. Justice Starcher eventually recused himself from the case and decided not to run for reelection.
Around the same time, Justice Spike Maynard (who had also been part of the 3 to 2 majority) recused himself when photos of him vacationing with Blankenship in the French Riviera while the case was pending appeared in the media. Although Maynard was heavily favored to win reelection in 2008, the photos were featured heavily in the campaign and Maynard was defeated in the primary.
In April 2008, the West Virginia Supreme Court again ruled in favor of Massey, with Benjamin again joining the 3 to 2 majority.
Represented by former U.S. Solicitor General Theodore Olson, Caperton filed a petition with the United States Supreme Court arguing that Blankenship's 2004 campaign expenditures on behalf of Benjamin's election raised an appearance of partiality on Benjamin's part, and due process required his recusal. Justice Benjamin countered that he was not biased and that because there was no direct financial or other connection between him and Blankenship, there was no obligation for him to recuse himself.
 Opinion of the U.S. Supreme Court 
The United States Supreme Court heard oral arguments in March 2009. In June 2009, the Court found for Caperton and Harman Mining, remanding the case back to the West Virginia Supreme Court. Justice Anthony M. Kennedy wrote for the majority, joined by Justices Stevens, Souter, Ginsburg, and Breyer. Chief Justice John G. Roberts wrote the dissent and was joined by Justices Scalia, Thomas, and Alito. Justice Scalia also filed a separate dissenting opinion.
 Majority decision 
Writing for the majority, Justice Kennedy called the appearance of a conflict of interest so "extreme" that Benjamin's failure to recuse himself constituted a violation of the plaintiff's Constitutional right to due process under the Fourteenth Amendment. Justice Kennedy noted that not every campaign contribution by a litigant creates a probability of bias that requires a judge's recusal. Justice Kennedy wrote, "We conclude that there is a serious risk of actual bias — based on objective and reasonable perceptions — when a person with a personal stake in a particular case had a significant and disproportionate influence in placing the judge on the case by raising funds or directing the judge's election campaign when the case was pending or imminent."
"The inquiry," Justice Kennedy wrote, "centers on the contribution's relative size in comparison to the total amount of money contributed to the campaign, the total amount spent in the election, and the apparent effect such contribution had on the outcome of the election." Applying that test, Justice Kennedy ruled for the Court that "Blankenship's significant and disproportionate influence—coupled with the temporal relationship between the election and the pending case—"' "offer a possible temptation to the average . . . judge to . . . lead him not to hold the balance nice, clear and true."' "On these extreme facts the probability of actual bias rises to an unconstitutional level."
In holding that Justice Benjamin's participation in the case was a violation of due process, the Court made no finding of actual bias by Justice Benjamin: "In other words, based on the facts presented by Caperton, Justice Benjamin conducted a probing search into his actual motives and inclinations; and he found none to be improper. We do not question his subjective findings of impartiality and propriety. Nor do we determine whether there was actual bias."
 Dissenting opinions 
In a vigorous dissent, Chief Justice Roberts wrote that the majority decision would have dire consequences for "public confidence in judicial impartiality." The dissent emphasized that the "probability of bias" standard formulated by the Court was excessively vague and "inherently boundless." In an effort to demonstrate that "probability of bias" is an unclear and unworkable standard which gives no guidance to lower courts, Chief Justice Roberts' dissent posed forty questions about the scope of the decision, including how large of a contribution should be considered "disproportionate," what type of support is disqualifying, whether the case had been pending at the time of the election, how long after an election should any putative bias on behalf of a particular judge be construed, whether a judge's vote has to be outcome determinative in order for his non-recusal to constitute a due process violation or whether the parties are entitled to discovery with respect to a judge's recusal decision, among many other questions.
Chief Justice Roberts noted that previously the Supreme Court had recognized only two situations in which the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause disqualified a judge (specifically when the judge has a financial interest in the outcome of the case and when the judge is trying a defendant for criminal contempt in his own court). Chief Justice Roberts contrasted the objective nature of these situations to the completely subjective inquiry required by the "probability of bias" standard.
In a separate dissent, Justice Scalia notes that the uncertainty described by Chief Justice Roberts would permit Fourteenth Amendment Due Process claims asserting judicial bias "in all litigated cases in (at least) those 39 States that elect their judges." Justice Scalia predicted, "Many billable hours will be spent in poring through volumes of campaign finance reports, and many more in contesting nonrecusal decisions through every available means."
 Subsequent developments 
In September 2009, the case was reheard before the Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia, with retired Putnam County Circuit Judge James O. Holliday replacing Justice Benjamin. Massey's lawsuit over Justice Starcher's refusal to recuse himself was dropped in July 2009 when Starcher departed from the court. Justice Joseph Albright, who had sided with Caperton, took a leave of absence in July 2008, after being diagnosed with esophageal cancer before dying on March 20, 2009, in Pittsburgh while undergoing treatment. That left Justice Robin Davis as the only remaining justice on the West Virginia Supreme Court who had previously heard the case.
On November 12, 2009, the West Virginia Supreme Court once again overturned the cases, ruling 4 to 1 that Caperton should have pursued his claims in Virginia under a clause in the contract at issue; Massey Energy is based in Richmond, Virginia.  Caperton's attorneys requested the State Supreme Court to reconsider its decision, but the court declined the request. 
The original case involving contributions to judges on the West Virginia Supreme Court drew national attention and ultimately became the basis for the best-selling 2008 novel The Appeal by John Grisham.
 Criticisms 
Legal scholars believe the ramifications from this case could be significant. Michael Zuckerman and Andrey Spektor have written that, taken together with the Court's decision in Republican Party of Minnesota v. White (2002), in which the Court held that elected judges have a First Amendment right to make their political views known, Caperton "provide[s] the makings of a constitutional crisis. On one hand, judges have a First Amendment right to say almost anything even if it seems to effectively bind them in future cases. On the other hand, litigants have a due process right not to face a judge whom a reasonable person may deem biased given his previously advertised views."See, e.g., Judicial Recusals & Evolving Notions of Due Process, Univ. of Penn. Journal of Constitutional Law (2011) (authors:  Andrey Spektor & Michael Zuckerman) That door was later closed by Nevada Commission on Ethics v. Carrigan..
See also
Aetna Life Ins. Co. v. Lavoie
 References 
External links
 The Caperton v Massey case: Not for sale (The Economist)
 The Pelican Brief in Reality? (Paul-Robinson.us, January 24, 2009)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:United States civil due process case law
Category:Massey Energy
Category:Political scandals in West Virginia
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Coal in the United States
"""

From "Hurst v. Florida" ==> """
Hurst v. Florida, 577 U.S. 92 (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court, in an 8–1 ruling, applied the rule of Ring v. Arizona. to the Florida capital sentencing scheme, holding that the Sixth Amendment requires a jury to find the aggravating factors necessary for imposing the death penalty. In Florida, under a 2013 statute, the jury made recommendations but the judge decided the facts.
Background
Timothy Hurst was charged with killing Cynthia Harrison, a co-worker at Popeyes Chicken. The 1998 murder was part of a botched robbery at the Escambia County restaurant. Under Florida law, the maximum sentence a capital felon may receive on the basis of a conviction alone is life imprisonment. He may be sentenced to death only if an additional sentencing proceeding "results in findings by the court that such person shall be punished by death" (Fla. Stat. §775.082(1)). In that proceeding, the sentencing judge first conducts an evidentiary hearing before a jury (§921.141(1)). Next, the jury, by majority vote, renders an "advisory sentence" (§921.141(2)). The court must still independently find and weigh the aggravating and mitigating circumstances before entering a sentence of life or death (§921.141(3)). This procedure was adopted from 2013 when Governor Rick Scott signed the Timely Justice Act (HB 7101) which overhauled the processes for capital punishment.
A Florida jury convicted petitioner Hurst of first-degree murder. The jury recommended the death penalty, and the court sentenced Hurst to death, but he was granted a new sentencing hearing on appeal. At resentencing, the jury again recommended death, and the judge again found the facts necessary to sentence Hurst to death. The Florida Supreme Court affirmed, rejecting Hurst's argument that his sentence violated the Sixth Amendment in light of Ring v. Arizona 536 U. S. 584, in which case the Court found unconstitutional an Arizona capital sentencing policy permitting a judge, rather than the jury, to find the facts necessary to sentence a defendant to death.
Opinion
Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote the majority opinion of the Court. Florida's capital sentencing scheme, requiring that a judge instead of a jury to make the critical findings necessary to impose the death penalty, violated the Sixth Amendment in light of Ring v. Arizona. The Court also rejected Florida's counterarguments. Firstly, Florida argued that the jury's recommendation necessarily included an aggravating circumstance finding but still violated Ring because the jury's function was still advisory only. Secondly, Florida's reliance on Blakely v. Washington. is misplaced: Florida alleges that Hurst's counsel allegedly admitted the existence of a robbery, but Blakely applied Apprendi v. New Jersey. to facts admitted in a guilty plea, in which the defendant necessarily waived his right to a jury trial, but Florida had not explained how Hurst's alleged admissions accomplished a similar waiver. In any event, Hurst never admitted to either aggravating circumstance alleged. Thirdly, although the Court had repeatedly upheld Florida's capital sentencing scheme in the past (such as Hildwin v. Florida and Spaziano v. Florida.), it did not mean that stare decisis compelled the Court to do so again. Instead, time and subsequent cases had "washed away" the logic of Spaziano and Hildwin. Finally, the Court normally leaves it to state courts to consider whether an error is harmless.
Justice Stephen Breyer wrote a concurring opinion stating that he cannot join the majority's opinion because of the reasons he explained in his concurring opinion in Ring. (Since he did not fully agree with the majority opinion in Ring, he could not support the majority's rationale here in Hurst.) However, he agreed with striking Florida's scheme, referring back to Justice John Paul Stevens' concurring opinion in Spaziano, among others, that he believes that any imposition of the death penalty by a single government official instead of a jury violates the Eighth Amendment.
Justice Samuel Alito dissented. He disagreed with the majority on basically overruling Hildwin and Spaziano. Instead, he would have preferred for the Court to reconsider Ring directly. He also wrote that Arizona's sentencing scheme is very different from Florida's because under the former, a jury plays no role in the process. However, in Florida, "the jury plays a critically important role. Our decision in Ring did not decide whether this procedure violates the Sixth Amendment, and I would not extend Ring to cover the Florida system."
Aftermath
At the time of the decision, Florida had about 400 inmates on death row, the most of any state except California. It was unclear how many might receive new re-sentencing hearings as a result of this decision. In late January 2016, about 40 inmates had appeals pending. 
The Florida legislature passed a new statute to comply with the judgement in March 2016, changing the sentencing method to require a 10-juror supermajority for a sentence of death with a life sentence as the alternative. 
This new sentencing scheme was struck down by the Florida Supreme Court in a 5–2 ruling in October 2016. The court held that a death sentence must be issued by a unanimous jury. The court ruled that the law "cannot be applied to pending prosecutions" which means that until the Florida legislature acts, there is no procedure or law allowing a prosecutor to seek the death penalty; it leaves open, however, as in the aftermath of the Hurst ruling, the status of sentences passed under the now twice-struck-down provisions. Nevertheless, the court granted Hurst a new sentencing hearing following the U.S. Supreme Court ruling.
The U.S. Supreme Court had received over 83 petitions from inmates on death row in Florida who believed that their cases had been decided incorrectly based on Hurst, in that the jury had unanimously recommended the death sentence while the judge had made the actual decision; these petitions followed after the Florida Supreme Court refused to re-hear these cases, on the basis that in all cases, there was beyond reasonable doubt that the juries would have decided on the death sentence. In November 2018, the US Supreme Court denied all these petitions, ruling broadly the Hurst decision only affects those whose sentences were applied post-2002, following the court's decision in Ring v. Arizona, were eligible for the Hurst clarification.
 See also 
 Ring v. Arizona
 Capital punishment in Florida
 Capital punishment in the United States
 List of death row inmates in the United States
 References 
External links
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Capital punishment in Florida
Category:Legal history of Florida
Category:United States death penalty case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Escambia County, Florida
"""

From "Capitol Square Review & Advisory Board v. Pinette" ==> """
Capitol Square Review & Advisory Board v. Pinette, 515 U.S. 753 (1995), is a United States Supreme Court case that focused on First Amendment rights and the Establishment Clause. Vincent Pinette, an active member of the Ku Klux Klan in Columbus, Ohio, wanted to place an unattended cross on the lawn of the Capitol Square during the 1993 Christmas season. Pinette and his fellow members of the KKK submitted their request. The advisory board originally denied this request. However, Pinette and the other members of the Ohio Chapter of the Klan fought this decision in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Ohio. The court found in favor of the Klan and the Advisory Board issued the permit. The Board appealed to the United States Court of Appeals, which affirmed the decision of the district court. The board made one last petition to the Supreme Court where the decision was made, by a vote of seven to two, that the Klan was permitted to display the cross at the public forum..
Background
Historical context
The land in question was the Capitol Square in Columbus, Ohio. The ten acre area had always been "available for discussion of public questions and for public activities an advisory board was responsible for regulating public access to the square, and to use the square a group simply had to submit an application to the board and meet several criteria that were neutral as to the speech content of the proposed use." In the past, the advisory board approved displays had included Christmas trees, menorahs, and various other religious-based decorations.
Beneath the surface, there was an issue that was more worrisome than the religious implications of the cross itself. The cross's association with the Ku Klux Klan was a concern to the State of Ohio. In 1993, racial tensions between whites and blacks in the United States were high. There were race riots in Los Angeles, the KKK had several active chapters across the country, and the United States was struggled to maintain equality and peace for all citizens. These underlying tensions accounted for much of the conflict in Capitol Square. Allowing the Ku Klux Klan to erect one of their white crosses on the lawn of the Statehouse in Ohio went much deeper than religion. However, as recognized by the Justices, "the facts before us and the opinions address only the Establishment Clause issue, and that is the sole question before us to decide." The Advisory Board could do nothing to prevent the Klan from displaying their cross on state-owned land.
The conflict
The case surrounded the issue of the interpretation of both the First Amendment and the Establishment Clause in the United States Constitution. The Capitol Square in Columbus, Ohio was a state-owned piece of land and any and all unattended displays had to be approved by the Advisory Board. However, over the years the area had become a public forum where people were permitted to hold public gatherings and leave unattended displays that were both secular and religious in nature. 
The job of the Advisory Board was to issue permits and regulate the content of the displays that took place in the Square. They were to make their decisions within the bounds of the First Amendment and the Establishment Clause. The Establishment Clause states that Congress cannot make a law "respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof,"  so the Board had to follow the same protocol in their decisions as well. The Board denied the Ku Klux Klan's permit request "on the grounds that the permit would violate the Establishment Clause," on the same day that they approved the display of a menorah on the square. Pinette and the other Klansmen appealed this decision.
Opinion of the court
Summary of majority opinion
Justice Antonin Scalia delivered the majority opinion of the court on June 22, 1995. He was joined by Justice Anthony Kennedy and Chief Justice William Rehnquist. The court held that:
 Private religious speech is protected under the free speech clause of the First Amendment
 Although the state has the right to make content-based restrictions on speech, the board's denial of the Klan's application to display the cross on the statehouse square was not justified on the grounds of the establishment clause.
Traditionally, the square had been recognized as a public forum by the general population and because the display of religion was purely private it could not violate the Establishment Clause.
The Advisory Board was still responsible for the content displayed on the square, but they could not intentionally block a religious display from being set up.
Concurrence
Justice Clarence Thomas concurred with the Court's ruling on the Establishment Clause, but felt that the Klan's primary goal with the cross did not exclusively serve a religious purpose, but also included political motive. He wanted to make the note that the KKK was likely using the cross as both a religious display as well as an obvious political statement.
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor concurred in part and concurred "in the judgment," but recognized the benefit of a sign disclaiming government sponsorship or endorsement on the Klan cross, which would make the State's role clear to the community. The state would benefit from prominently displaying signs that tell the public that they have no direct connection to anything displayed on the square.
Justice David Souter concurred with the court's ruling, but he also wanted to add that he felt it was in the best interest of the State of Ohio to place a permanent sign that served as a disclaimer for any and all government sponsorship or endorsement of the display.
Dissenting opinion
Justice John Paul Stevens dissented from the majority opinion, and was joined by Justice Ginsburg.
Stevens felt that the situation violated the establishment clause under the Endorsement Test. Even though Capitol Square in Ohio had turned into a public forum and it had allowed other various private groups to place unattended displays on the property, that did not prove that it was not in violation of the Establishment Clause. Stevens wanted to strengthen the separation of church and state. 
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg also dissented. She stated that if the Establishment Clause is truly intended to separate church and state then the government can neither permit, and the court cannot order, any religious items to be displayed. She felt that, if based on the Constitution, the board was not permitted to not allow certain displays to be shown, then by the same interpretation the court cannot force any particular display to be shown either.
Historical significance
Capital Square Review v. Pinette is an important case because of its relationship to the various other cases dealing with the Establishment Clause and the First Amendment.
Cases such as Lemon v. Kurtzman, Lynch v. Donnelly, and County of Allegheny v. ACLU are similarly themed situations. All of these cases showcase the Supreme Court's unclear stance on issues involving the First Amendment and the Establishment Clause.
In Lemon v. Kurtzman, , the Establishment of Religion Clause was brought into question. This 1971 case was one of the earlier cases, which involved the Supreme Court ruling that Pennsylvania's 1968 Nonpublic Elementary and Secondary Act violated the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment. The act established a system that had the public school system financially aiding nonpublic, and usually Catholic, schools for their school's expenses. The court decided that the act was unconstitutional, and their decision established the "Lemon Test" which offered a three-pronged approach to religion related cases..
In Lynch v. Donnelly,  the Supreme Court was faced with another issue with the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment. It was alleged that the seasonal Christmas display that included a crèche in Pawtucket, Rhode Island was unconstitutional and in violation of the Establishment Clause. Daniel Donnelly filed suit against Pawtucket mayor, Dennis Lynch and won in both the District Court and the Court of Appeals. However the U.S Supreme Court overturned the past decisions and ruled that the Christmas display was not a government endorsement of any particular message and did not violate the Establishment Clause..
In County of Allegheny v. ACLU,  two separate holiday displays in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania were challenged by the American Civil Liberties Union. The first display was a Christian nativity scene inside the Allegheny County Courthouse. The other display was a large Hanukkah menorah placed outside the City-County building. The court found the crèche in violation of the Establishment Clause because they felt the main purpose of the display was to endorse religion. However, the same court ruled that the menorah was within constitutional appropriateness because of its "particular physical setting.".
All of these court cases, along with the numerous others, show that American courts have not articulated a consistent, clear rule explaining the government's relationship to religious expression, particularly if that expression occurs in government-supported settings. The Supreme Court is still searching for a consistent rationale for deciding cases in which the First Amendment's speech and establishment clauses intersect.
See also
Lemon v. Kurtzman
Lynch v. Donnelly
County of Allegheny v. ACLU
Endorsement test
With God, all things are possible
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:1995 in United States case law
Category:History of racism in Ohio
Category:Ku Klux Klan
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Capron v. Van Noorden" ==> """
Capron v. Van Noorden, 6 U.S. (2 Cranch) 126 (1804), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court allowed a plaintiff to dismiss a case that he had lost at trial because of a lack of diversity jurisdiction, leaving the plaintiff free to bring the case again in North Carolina..
Capron sued Van Noorden for negligently injuring him.
The plaintiff Capron argued that the federal court wasn't the proper court to hear the case. This argument ensued the decision of the federal court in favor of the defendant Van Noorden.
References
Further reading
.
External links
Category:1804 in United States case law
Category:Diversity jurisdiction case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
"""

From "Carbice Corp. v. American Patents Development Corp." ==> """
Carbice Corp. v. American Patents Development Corp., 283 U.S. 27 (1931), is a decision of the United States Supreme Court extending the patent misuse doctrine against tie-ins to cases in which patents were used to tie the purchase of unpatented elements of patented combinations.Carbice Corp. v. Am. Patents Dev. Corp., . The Court had previously held that it was unlawful to require the purchase of supplies as a condition of a patent license, where the supplies were not claimed as part of the patented combination..
Background
thumb|right|300px|Cross-sectional drawings of inner and outer containers of device of U.S. Pat. No. 1,595,426
American Patents Development Corp. (APDC) held a patent for a dry iceDry ice is solid, frozen carbon dioxide (CO2). Its temperature is –110 °F (78 °C) or below. It does not liquefy under atmospheric pressure at temperatures above –110 °F but turns directly into gaseous CO2 transport enclosure (shipping container), in which a smaller container of dry ice was surrounded by a freezable material (such as ice cream) being refrigerated; this arrangement was contrary to the usual packaging practice of surrounding the material being refrigerated with regular ice.U.S. Pat. No. 1,595,426 The patent was not on dry ice itself, which was well known as a refrigerant, nor on the container itself, but on the combination of the container and dry ice and the freezable material. A typical claim of the patent provided:
6. A transportation package consisting of a protective casing of insulating material having packed therein a quantity of frozen carbon dioxide in an insulating container and a quantity of freezable product in freezing proximity to said frozen carbon dioxide and the gas evaporated therefrom, arranged so that said frozen carbon dioxide is less accessible for exterior heat than said freezable products.
APDC licensed the patent exclusively to Dry Ice Corp. (DIC). DIC made and sold only dry ice. It designated other firms to make and sell the patented transportation devices (see diagram of box within a box). Each invoice for the dry ice that DIC sold had this notice:
 The merchandise herein described is shipped upon the following condition: That DryIce shall not be used except in DryIce cabinets or other containers or apparatus provided or approved by the DryIce Corporation of America, and the DryIce Cabinets or other containers or apparatus provided or approved by the DryIce Corporation of America shall be refrigerated or used only with DryIce.
Carbice manufactured and sold dry ice to a Mr. Marchiony (and other persons) who combined the dry ice with containers he originally bought from a supplier approved by DIC, but then he reused the containers without the consent of DIC.See  APDC then sued Carbice, but that court dismissed the suit on the grounds that no infringement occurred because the dry ice was a perishable supply used in practicing the patent.25 F.2d at 733.
APDC appealed to the Second Circuit, which reversed the judgment of the district court. The Second Circuit said that the doctrine of the Motion Picture Patents case did not apply, because the tied product (the dry ice) was a claimed element of the patented combination. That made the case different from prior tie-in cases in which the tied product was an unpatented supply (such as ink or film) used together with the patented device. The Second Circuit said:
 It is only unpatented materials which form no part of the patented machine which the Supreme Court held the purchaser of the machine may use at will. The solid carbon dioxide forms the most vital part of plaintiffs' patented package. Marchiony might legally use defendant's carbice in any way not covered by the patent in suit, but he could not manufacture the patented package without the plaintiffs' consent, a consent which they withheld, unless the vital ingredient of its manufacture was purchased from them. To extend the doctrine of the Motion Picture Case as defendant contends would completely destroy the monopoly of plaintiffs' patent.
Carbice then appealed to the Supreme Court.
Ruling of Supreme Court
thumb|150px|right|Justice Brandeis
Justice Brandeis wrote for a unanimous Court, reversing the Second Circuit and reinstating the judgment of the district court. After explaining the factual setting, the Court said: "Whether the transportation package described is a patentable invention we need not determine. For even if it is, no relief can be granted."
The Court cited Motion Picture Patents Co. v. Universal Film Mfg. Co. for the proposition that a patentee "may not exact as the condition of a license that unpatented materials used in connection with the invention shall be purchased only from the licensor, and if it does so, relief against one who supplies such unpatented materials will be denied. The limited monopoly to make, use, and vend an article may not be 'expanded by limitations as to materials and supplies necessary to the operation of it.' "283 U.S. at 31. The Court added, "The relief here sought is indistinguishable from that denied in the Motion Picture Case."
The Court rejected the patentee's attempt to distinguish Motion Picture Patents on the theory that the dry ice was a claimed element of the patented combination while earlier tie-in cases involved supplies that were not part of the patented invention. That was "without legal significance," because:
The Dry Ice Corporation has no right to be free from competition in the sale of solid carbon dioxide. Control over the supply of such unpatented material is beyond the scope of the patentee's monopoly, and this limitation, inherent in the patent grant, is not dependent upon the peculiar function or character of the unpatented material or on the way in which it is used. 283 U.S. at 33.
Further developments
Dry Ice Corporation (DIC) remained defiant despite the ruling of the Supreme Court. and it inaugurated "a campaign of intimidation against customers of the Carbice Corporation."Carbice Corp. v. Am. Patents Dev. Corp., . DIC released
to the public press a statement that the validity of the patent as sustained by the Court of Appeals had not been disturbed; that the true patent monopoly had in no way been limited by this Court; that we had indicated that the proper way to enforce the patent monopoly is by directly suing those who use solid carbon dioxide in the patent combination without a license; and that the Dry Ice Corporation would immediately bring such a suit.
The Supreme Court ordered a re-argument and rehearing, limited to the question of the validity of the patent.Carbice Corp. v. Am. Patents Dev. Corp., .
U.S. Patent No. 1,595,426, claims a refrigerating transportation package, consisting of an outer, insulating container, with the food substance to be refrigerated (e.g., ice cream) so packed therein as to surround a quantity of solid carbon dioxide in its separate insulating container, and thus to act, with the evolved gaseous dioxide, as a protection for the solid dioxide against exterior heat, the gas also serving to displace air from the food and refrigerate it. The alleged invention is thus "for the locational arrangement of materials within a container."283 U.S. at 321. The Court said that it did not need to determine whether "a locational arrangement within a structure can ever be patented," because this patent "lacks patentable invention and novelty":
 Each of the elements—refrigerant, material to be refrigerated, and container—performs its function in a known way. Long prior to the date of the claimed invention, it was known that solid carbon dioxide, which has a temperature of 110 degrees below zero, is a refrigerant; that, when it "melts," it passes directly into a dry gas heavier than air, of like low temperature, which may serve as a refrigerant until its temperature rises to that of the outside air. It was known also that a frozen article—be it ice cream or solid carbon dioxide—will remain frozen longer if insulated, and that paper is an insulator. It was not invention to conclude that a cake of the solid dioxide wrapped in paper would remain solid longer if also surrounded by ice cream than if placed in more immediate proximity to the walls of the container, and thus to the outer air, or to conclude that the gas, being heavier than air, would, as generated, drive the air out of the container, and thus serve as an additional insulator.
Moreover, the structural device of surrounding the refrigerant by the article to be refrigerated had been shown in the Mosler and Ladewig refrigerating butter-box . . . and in Rumpel's portable lunch box.283 U.S. at 421-22.
The invalidation of the patent thus terminated the "campaign of intimidation against customers" by threats of patent infringement suits.
Commentary
Patent lawyers have been critical of the Carbice decision. For example, George Sirilla called it a pioneer example of the "Supreme Court's conspicuous anti-patent bent."George M. Sirilla, 35 U.S.C. § 103: From Hotchkiss To Hand To Rich, The Obvious Patent Law Hall-Of-Famers, 32 J.  437, 475 (1999)
References
External links
Category:1931 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States misuse law
"""

From "Carcieri v. Salazar" ==> """
Carcieri v. Salazar, 555 U.S. 379 (2009), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the federal government could not take land into trust that was acquired by the Narragansett Tribe in the late 20th century, as it was not federally recognized until 1983. While well documented in historic records and surviving as a community, the tribe was largely dispossessed of its lands while under guardianship by the state of Rhode Island before suing in the 20th century.
The Court ruled that the phrase of tribes "now under Federal jurisdiction" in the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934 referred only to those tribes that were federally recognized when the act was passed.Wheeler-Howard Act of 1934, 48 Stat. 988 It ruled that the federal government could not take land into trust for the Narragansett or other tribes that were federally recognized and acquired land after 1934.Donald L. Carcieri, et al. v. Ken L. Salazar, et al., 
Background
Historical tribal relationship
The Narragansett tribe was recorded as having first contact with Europeans in 1524 at Narragansett Bay, Rhode Island. Following King Philip's War, an armed conflict between several Native American tribes and New England colonists, the Narragansett absorbed several smaller tribes, such as the Niantic. In 1709 it came under the guardianship of the colony of Rhode Island. From 1880 to 1884, Rhode Island attempted to dissolve the tribe, selling off all but  of tribal communal land.
The tribe resisted, requesting repeatedly to be dealt with as a tribe. It filed suit against the state in January 1975, accusing the state of mismanagement of its lands.
In the resulting settlement, Rhode Island placed  of land into trust for the tribe, with the condition that, with the exception of hunting and fishing regulations, state law would apply on the land.Rhode Island Indian Claims Settlement Act of 1978, 25 U.S.C. §§ 1701-1716
Following this, the tribe applied for federal recognition in 1979, which was granted in 1983. At that time, its land was taken into trust by the federal government on the tribe's behalf. The tribe and the state have disagreed on a number of issues, including the collection of taxes on cigarettes sold at a reservation smoke shop and the proposed building of a gaming casino on reservation land. In 1991, the tribe purchased  to be used for housing for elderly tribal members, and petitioned the Secretary of the Interior to take the land into trust as provided for under the Indian Reorganization Act, thus removing it from state jurisdiction.
Action by the Department of the Interior and U.S. District Court
In March 1998, the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) notified Rhode Island of its intent to take the  parcel into Federal Trust status.  The state appealed this decision to the Interior Board of Indian Appeals, which ruled in favor of the tribe and the BIA.Town of Charlestown v. E. Area Dir., Bureau of Indian Affairs, 35 IBIA 93 (2000)
The state filed suit in U.S. District Court, with the governor of the state, Donald Carcieri, named as plaintiff, and the Secretary of the Interior, Ken Salazar, named as defendant.  The District Court ruled in favor of the BIA and the tribe.
U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals
Rhode Island appealed the District Court decision to the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit. A three-judge panel heard the appeal and affirmed the summary judgment of the District Court. The state requested a rehearing en banc by the full court, which was granted. On rehearing, the full court affirmed the decision of the District Court. The state appealed to the Supreme Court.
Opinion of the US Supreme Court
Justice Clarence Thomas delivered the opinion of the court, reversing the judgment of the First Circuit.
Thomas determined that the authority of the BIA to take Indian land into a trust status hinged on the phrase "now under Federal jurisdiction" in 25 U.S.C. § 479. Using rules of statutory construction, he determined that this phrase limited the BIA to take Indian Land into trust only if the tribe was federally recognized in 1934 at the time of the law's enactment. This holding excluded the Narrangansett tribe from transferring land to the BIA as trust lands, since the tribe was not federally recognized until 1983.
Concurrence
Justice Stephen Breyer issued a concurring opinion, joined by Justice David Souter. He argued that the majority opinion was correct, but due to the legislative history of the bill, not based on statutory construction. Breyer allowed that even if a tribe was not formally recognized in 1934, they could still be under federal jurisdiction due to an earlier treaty or agreement.
Concurrence in part and dissenting in part
Justice Souter issued an opinion that concurred in part and dissented in part, joined by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg. Souter argued that the notion of under federal jurisdiction and being federally recognized were not one and the same, even if that is how the BIA and the tribe both understood it. He would have remanded for a determination of the jurisdictional issue.
Dissent
Justice John P. Stevens dissented, arguing that "now" meant "at the time the land was turned over to the BIA," and would have affirmed the lower court's decision.
Subsequent developments
The decision caused an immediate reaction in both the Native American and the legal communities. The American Bar Association newsletter quickly pointed out possible adverse consequences for Indian gaming and tribal sovereignty. Many tribes have achieved federal recognition since 1934, particularly since the late 20th century, as a result of renewed activism and assertion of their cultures.  Activists worked to "fix" the decision by Congressional legislative action in order to allow the BIA to continue to take Indian lands into trust. United States Senate bill S.676 was scheduled to be taken up before the end of the 112th Congress to amend language in the Indian Reorganization Act.  If enacted into law, the changes would allow the BIA to take lands into trust on behalf of tribes recognized after 1934.
Elected officials in states with existing Indian gaming operations and tribes recognized prior to 1934 oppose such legislation, as they believe it will lead to more gaming activity on newly acquired land by more recently recognized tribes.Supreme Insult, Carcieri Decision, WampaLeaks blog, September 11, 2010. Additionally, in 2009 17 state attorneys general wrote a legal opinion opposing such legislation.A Communication from the Chief Legal Officers of the following states and territories, April 24, 2009.
On June 19, 2014, the United States Senate voted to the pass the Gun Lake Trust Land Reaffirmation Act (S. 1603; 113th Congress), a bill that would reaffirm the status of lands taken into trust by the Department of the Interior (DOI) for the benefit of the Match-E-Be-Nash-She-Wish Band. The bill explicitly provided that the Match-E-Be-Nash-She-Wish Band's land trust could not be challenged in court under this Supreme Court decision.
In 2015, the BIA approved the taking of 321 acres of land in Taunton, Massachusetts, into federal trust for the Mashpee Wampanoag tribe.ashpee Wampanoag Receive 321 Acres: First Land Trust Decision" , Indian Country Today, 09-18-2015] The tribe announced plans to build a gaming casino on that property.
A group of Taunton property owners filed a federal lawsuit in February 2016, contending that the BIA was wrong to designate the casino site as a Native American reservation, because the tribe did not gain federal recognition until 2007. Both sides have said that they will appeal an adverse ruling to the U.S. First Circuit Court of Appeals, and if necessary to the U.S. Supreme Court.
See also
Match-E-Be-Nash-She-Wish Band of Pottawatomi Indians v. Patchak (2012)
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:Narragansett tribe
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Native American history of Rhode Island
"""

From "Cardwell v. American Bridge Co." ==> """
Cardwell v. American Bridge Co., 113 U.S. 205 (1885), was a bill in equity, for the removal of a bridge erected by the defendant over the American River in northern California, downriver from the property of the plaintiff on that navigable section of the river..
The doctrine that, in the absence of legislation by Congress, a state may authorize a navigable stream within its limits to be obstructed by a bridge or highway reasserted, and the former cases to that effect referred to.  The provision in the act admitting California
That all the navigable waters within the said state shall be common highways and forever free, as well to the inhabitants of said state as to the citizens of the United States, without any tax, impost, or duty therefor
does not deprive the state of the power possessed by other states, in the absence of legislation by Congress, to authorize the erection of bridges over navigable waters within the state. That provision aims to prevent the use of the navigable streams by private parties to the exclusion of the public and the exaction of tolls for their navigation.
The American River is a tributary of the Sacramento River in California. It is entirely within the state, and navigable for small steamboats and barges from its mouth on the Sacramento River to the town of Folsom, a distance of . From its confluence with the Sacramento River, vessels starting upon it can proceed to  San Francisco Bay and the Pacific Ocean, and thence to adjoining states and foreign countries. It is therefore a navigable water of the United States and, as such, is under the control of the general government in the exercise of its power to regulate foreign and interstate commerce so far as may be necessary to insure its free navigation.
The defendant was a corporation organized under the laws of California, and pursuant to the authority conferred by an act of its legislature, has constructed a bridge over the American River, of  wide and  long, and was used as a roadway across the river. Its floor is about  above lowest water and about  above highest water, was without a draw or opening for the passage of vessels. Steamboats and other craft were therefore obstructed by it in the navigation of the river.
The complainant alleged that he was the owner of a large tract of land, bordering on the river below Folsom, and raises many tons of grain each year; that he was also the owner of a steamboat and other vessels by which he could ship his grain down the river but for the obstruction caused by the bridge; that there are also large quarries of granite on his land sufficient to supply the markets of Sacramento and San Francisco for years, and also large deposits of cobblestone which have a value for paving, and, but for the obstruction, he could ship the granite and cobblestone by his vessels and sell them at a profit, whereas the expense of sending them by rail or other means open to him are such as to deprive him of all profit on them. He therefore files his bill against the company and prays that it may be enjoined from maintaining the bridge across the river until a draw shall have been placed in it sufficient to allow steamboats, vessels, and watercraft capable of navigating the stream to pass and repass freely and safely.
A demurrer to the bill was sustained and the bill dismissed, and the case is brought here on appeal.
The decree was affirmed.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in California
Category:1885 in the environment
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:American River (California)
Category:Bridges in Sacramento County, California
"""

From "Carey v. Brown" ==> """
Carey v. Brown, 447 U.S. 455 (1980), is a decision of the United States Supreme Court dealing with freedom of speech under the First Amendment. A law passed by the state of Illinois had banned picketing in front of residences, but it had made an exception for labor disputes. A group of activists challenged the law after being convicted for protesting in front of the home of the mayor of Chicago regarding a lack of racial integration. The Court found that the law's distinction–based on the subject matter of a protest–was unjustified and unconstitutional.
 Background 
The Illinois Residential Picketing Statute had been passed in 1967; the Chicago Tribune commented at the time that "Chicago Mayor Daley's home has been a prime target" of past protests.
In 1977, a group called the Committee Against Racism ("CAR") wanted to protest in Chicago against racism, and they were particularly upset at Mayor Michael Bilandic for not supporting busing as a way to speed up racial integration of Chicago schools.Brown v. Scott, 462 F.Supp. 518 (1978, ND Illinois) On September 6, they held a protest in front of the mayor's home over this issue, and about 20 people were arrested under the law, which stated:
Members of the group then sued the government (including the city of Chicago, Cook County, and the state of Illinois) to block the law's enforcement and to have it declared unconstitutional.
 Proceedings in lower courts 
 In the district court 
The lawsuit was filed in the federal Northern District of Illinois. The members of the Committee Against Racism made a number of legal arguments, including that the statue was vague or overbroad, and Judge Grady disagreed with these, and the judge similarly disagreed with a number of technical arguments made by the government, such as waiver of certain issues because of the prior criminal trial (those who had been arrested simply plead guilty).
Judge Grady also noted the plaintiff's argument that the law's exception for labor picketing made the law unconstitutional. In general, the combination of the First Amendment and the Equal Protection clause prohibits most attempts to regulate the content of speech, and making distinctions between subject matters is one way to regulate content. The Supreme Court had ruled in the 1972 case Chicago Police Dept. v. Mosley that an anti-picketing law was unconstitutional because it had an exception allowing labor-related picketing, and their reasoning was that the law made a content-based regulation.Chicago Police Dept. v. Mosley, 408 U.S. 92 (1972)
However, the judge thought the argument didn't work in this case because the mayor's house was not a place of employment (he implicitly assumed that labor protestors would not picket a residence that was unrelated to their work). In other words, the law regulated "the 'neutral' ground of place rather than the impermissible ground of subject matter." Finding no constitutional problem with the law, the court ruled against the plaintiffs, and they appealed.
 In the Court of Appeals 
The Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit reversed, overturning the statute.Brown v. Scott, 602 F.2d 791 (7th Cir. 1979) The appeals court thought the district judge had misread the statute:
Consequently, the state of Illinois must have believed when passing the law that labor picketing at a residence "'is not an undue interference' with the peace and privacy of the home." Lacking any evidence that it would be more disruptive, picketing on other subjects could not be prohibited under this statute.
 Decision of the Supreme Court 
By a vote of 6–3, the Supreme Court affirmed the Court of Appeals and held that the statute was unconstitutional.
 Majority opinion 
Justice Brennan, writing for the majority, explained that the court was applying the same reasoning it had used in Mosley:
In its argument before the Supreme Court, the defendants had asserted that the state of Illinois was trying to provide "special protection for labor protests," and this justified the way the statute was written. The majority responded that, while this concern for labor picketing was "commendable", it in no way justified a content-based restriction on speech, and the argument even acknowledged that the law intended to distinguish speech based on its content.
 Stewart's concurrence 
Justice Stewart wrote a brief concurrence to emphasize that he thought the outcome of the case was simply a matter of applying "the basic meaning of the constitutional protection of free speech," rather than applying the Equal Protection clause.
 Rehnquist's dissent 
Justice Rehnquist wrote a dissent that was joined by Chief Justice Burger and Justice Blackmun. The dissent expressed frustration that, while the Supreme Court had many "hymns of praise in prior opinions celebrating carefully drawn statutes," in cases like this, the state would have been better off including no exceptions at all in its law. The law effectively had four exceptions:
 "First, if the residence is used as a "place of business" all peaceful picketing is allowed."
 "Second, if the residence is being used to "hol[d] a meeting or assembly on premises commonly used to discuss subjects of general public interest" all peaceful picketing is allowed."
 "Third, if the residence is also used as a "place of employment" which is involved in a labor dispute, labor-related picketing is allowed."
 "Finally, the statute provides that a resident is entitled to picket his own home."
Since it was uncontested that states were allowed to prohibit picketing of residences in general, the dissent felt that the majority's focus on the third exception was excessive.
 See also 
 Chicago Police Dept. v. Mosley
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:1980 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Illinois
Category:1980 in Illinois
"""

From "Carey v. Musladin" ==> """
Carey v. Musladin, 549 U.S. 70 (2006), is a United States Supreme Court case involving the standard for when a federal court can grant habeas corpus relief to overturn a criminal conviction based on the state court's misapplication of established federal law..  At issue was whether a criminal defendant's constitutional right to a fair trial was violated when relatives of the alleged victim were permitted to sit in the courtroom as spectators during trial, wearing buttons that displayed the victim's image.
The Supreme Court ruled that the state court did not unreasonably apply clearly established federal law when it upheld the conviction.  The Court's prior rulings on when courtroom practices prejudiced the right to a fair trial were limited to state-sponsored conduct, and had consequently left it an open question regarding the conduct of spectators.
 Background 
In 1994 Mathew Musladin shot and killed Tom Studer. Musladin admitted to killing Studer during the trial, but claimed he did so in self-defense. The jury rejected Musladin's self-defense claim and convicted him of murder. During the trial, members of Studer's family sat in the front row of the gallery wearing buttons with pictures of Studer. Musladin's attorney objected to the buttons, but the trial court refused to order the buttons removed, saying it saw "no possible prejudice to the defendant." Musladin appealed the decision to the California Court of Appeal, which affirmed the trial court's decision.
Musladin then filed a habeas corpus petition in federal court, which the court denied. The Ninth Circuit appeals court reversed, finding that the state court's decision on the buttons was in violation of the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996,. because it "was contrary to, or involved an unreasonable application of, clearly established Federal law."Musladin v. LaMarque, 403 F.3d 1072 (9th Cir.); rehearing denied, 427 F.3d 647 (9th Cir.); op. withdrawn and superseded, 427 F.3d 653 (9th Cir. 2005).  The federal law in question was a test for inherent prejudice established by the Supreme Court in Estelle v. Williams. and Holbrook v. Flynn.. The test indicated prejudice against the defendant must be justified by an essential "state" interest. The appeals court found the test was applicable to behavior by private spectators and that the decision to permit the buttons unfairly prejudiced the defendant. The state appealed to the United States Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
In his brief majority opinion, Justice Clarence Thomas began by indicating that Williams v. Taylor. limits the phrase "clearly established federal law" to the holdings instead of the dicta of previous decisions. In both Williams and Flynn, the two cases cited by the appeals court, the holdings were regarding government-sponsored action, whereas the buttons were worn by private spectators. Thomas pointed out that there is no clear court holding on the test for inherently prejudicial action by private spectators. Lacking such a holding, it couldn't be said that there was any "clearly established federal law" that the trial court violated by permitting the buttons.
 Concurring opinions 
Three justices wrote opinions concurring in the judgment but disagreeing with parts of the reasoning. Justice Souter indicated that prior precedent on prejudice in the courtroom applied generally, including to spectators. However, due to prior decisions specifically regarding similar spectator actions and a concern about free speech, Souter didn't find the trial judge had acted unreasonably in permitting the buttons. Justice Stevens embraced much of Souter's opinion, but disagreed that the First Amendment would trump concerns about prejudice. The bulk of his concurring opinion endorsed the importance of dicta in guiding lower courts. Justice Kennedy also agreed that prior cases would apply generally to spectator behavior, but didn't find the precedent necessary to indicate that the buttons were coercive or intimidating to the defendant. He endorsed the future creation of such a precedent to clarify matters.
References
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:2006 in United States case law
"""

From "Carey v. Population Services International" ==> """
Carey v. Population Services International, 431 U.S. 678 (1977), was a landmark decision of the U.S. Supreme Court in which the Court held that it was unconstitutional to prohibit anyone other than a licensed pharmacist to distribute nonprescription contraceptives to persons 16 years of age or over, to prohibit the distribution of nonprescription contraceptives by any adult to minors under 16 years of age, and to prohibit anyone, including licensed pharmacists, to advertise or display contraceptives.
The Court held that the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution does not allow a state to intrude on an individual's decisions on matters of procreation which is protected as privacy rights.
Background
The appellants were New York state officials whose job was to enforce the revisions of the Education Law, including then-governor Hugh Carey. The Education Law stated that it was a crime:
a) for any person to sell or distribute any contraceptive of any kind to a minor under the age of 16 years
b) for anyone other than a licensed pharmacist to distribute contraceptives to persons 16 or over
c) for anyone, including licensed pharmacists, to advertise or display contraceptives
The main appellee was Population Services International, a nonprofit corporation that spread birth control knowledge and services.  Population Services International owned the North Carolina corporation Population Planning Associates, Inc. This corporation sold and advertised contraceptives to New York primarily through mail-order retail sale of nonmedical contraceptive devices from their offices in North Carolina which was a violation of the enforced Education Laws in New York at the time.
Other appellees were:
a) Rev. James B. Hagen who was a minister and director of a venereal disease prevention program that gave out nonprescription contraceptive devices.
b) Physicians who specialized in family planning, pediatrics, and obstetrics-gynecology.
c) An adult resident of New York held that the current law hindered his ability to access nonprescription contraceptive devices and information and his freedom to distribute them to his minor children.
The appellees challenged the constitutionality of NY CLS Educ § 6811. The District Court assented with the appellees and declared the law unconstitutional in respect to where it applied to nonprescription contraceptives and ordered it to be rephrased.
Holding
The Supreme Court held that the advertising restrictions violated the First Amendment.
The Court further held that :
a) the prohibitions on the distribution of nonprescription contraceptives violated the due process clause of Amendment XIV.
b) minors were entitled to the same constitutional protections as adults.
c) each state has somewhat broader authority to regulate the activities of children than of adults.
d) the protection of the right of privacy included the right of an individual, married or single, to be free of unwarranted governmental intrusion in the area of personal decisions regarding intimate relations.
Majority opinion
In the Court vote, there were 7 votes for Population Services International and 2 votes against. Justice William Brennan delivered the majority opinion of the court in five parts in which it affirmed the determination by a three-judge District Court for the Southern District of New York. Only three other justices (Stewart, Marshall and Blackmun) joined his opinion in full, and the reasoning in Part IV of his opinion did not command a majority of the Court. The Court declared the New York Educ. Law  § 6811(8)unconstitutional in its entirety under Amendment I and Amendment XIV where it applies to nonprescription contraceptives.
The majority concluded that:
Part I
Appellee Population Planning Associates, Inc. (PPA) has standing to challenge the Education Law in not only its own right, but also on behalf of its potential customers which was settled by Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190 (1976). Craig held that PPA is among the vendors who have been permitted to resist efforts at restricting their operations by acting as advocates for the right of third parties who seek access to their market or function..
Part II
Regulations imposing a burden on a decision as fundamental as whether to bear or beget a child may be justified only by compelling state interests, and must be narrowly drawn to express only those interests.
Part III
The provision prohibiting distribution of nonprescription contraceptives to persons sixteen years or over except through licensed pharmacists clearly burdens the right of such individuals to use nonprescription contraceptives if they so desire. Moreover, the provision serves no convincing state interests. It cannot be justified by an interest in protecting health insofar as it applies to nonhazardous contraceptives or in protecting potential life. Nor can it be justified by a concern that young people not sell contraceptives. It cannot be categorized to serve as a quality control device or as enabling enforcement of the other provisions of the Education Law.
Part V
The prohibition of any advertisement or display of any contraceptives that seeks to suppress completely any information about the availability and price of contraceptives cannot be justified on the ground that advertisements of contraceptive products would offend and embarrass those exposed to them and that permitting them would legitimize sexual activity of young people. These are not justifications validating suppression of expression, which are protected by Amendment I. The advertisements in question simply state the availability of products that are not only entirely legal, but also constitutionally protected.
Plurality and concurring opinions
Part IV of Justice Brennan's opinion was a plurality opinion for four of the Justices, not joined by Justice Stevens.
Part IV
The right to privacy, which is protected by the Due Process Clause in Amendment XIV, in connection with decisions affecting procreation extends to minors as well as to adults, and since a state may not impose a blanket prohibition, or even a blanket requirement of parental consent, on the choice of a minor to terminate her pregnancy, the constitutionality of a blanket prohibition of the distribution of nonprescription contraceptives to minors is obviously illegal. Also, the argument that limiting exposure to advertisements of contraceptive products may discourage sexual activity has been rejected by the Court as a justification for restrictions on the freedom to choose whether to bear or beget a child.
Justices White, Powell and Stevens filed opinions concurring in parts of the Court's opinion and in the judgment.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Rehnquist, who was one of the two Justices to vote against the appellees, filed a brief dissenting opinion in the case. He said the following:
a) no religious beliefs, compelled allegiance to a secular creed or a married couple's decision to procreate was considered in this court case.
b) New York’s purpose of the Education Laws was to discourage minors under the age of sixteen from having premarital sexual intercourse with each other.
c) Women are given the right to choose to get an abortion, and the Education Laws were a way of avoiding this practice by not exposing minors to advertisement of contraceptives which promotes promiscuous sex.
d) The Court denied a fundamental power of self-government when it held that New York may not use its police power to legislate in the interests of its concept of the public morality as it pertains to minors.
e) New York's law that all contraceptive medicines are required to be made by licensed pharmacists did not significantly limit the access to these products if a person has a concrete intention to obtain them.
Justice Rehnquist declined to debate Justice Brennan's treatment of the Court's previous opinions with respect to privacy rights because to do so would "concede more validity to the result reached by the Court than I am willing to do."  He commented that if the Framers "could have lived to know that their efforts had enshrined in the Constitution the right of commercial vendors of contraceptives to peddle them to unmarried minors through such means as window displays and vending machines located in the men's room of truck stops, notwithstanding the considered judgment of the New York Legislature to the contrary, it is not difficult to imagine their reaction."
Chief Justice Burger dissented without opinion.
Conclusion
Justice William Brennan held that it was unconstitutional to prohibit anyone other than a licensed pharmacist to distribute nonprescription contraceptives to persons 16 years of age or over, to prohibit the distribution of nonprescription contraceptives by any adult to minors under 16 years of age, and to prohibit anyone, including licensed pharmacists, to advertise or display contraceptives.
Historical significance
As time goes by, and technology and medical developments continue, more forms of birth control are invented. Plan B became an over-the-counter back-up contraceptive, which raised the debate of whether it should also be available to minors in the same way. In Carey v. Population Services International the Court determined that minors have a right to privacy the same as adults. This also means that minors have protected privacy interests in their reproductive health decisions, which in the arguments over the availability of Plan B, minors have the right to be provided Plan B over-the-counter the same as adults.
In the debate over the woman's right to abortion, the right to privacy comes to play a role in the argument.  Each case determines whether the right to privacy in the Due Process Clause of Amendment XIV is expanded to encompass a larger range of citizens. This current case determined that minors were included in the freedom given to a woman to bear a child. Some argue that the prohibition for the distribution of contraceptives to minors was simply a blanket prohibition for the state to avoid abortion which it could not flatly make a law.
Related cases
The Court held that a right in the US Constitution that was used in favor of the appellees in the case was the right to privacy, and that it is protected by the Due Process Clause of Amendment XIV. The court had held that the protection of the right of privacy included the right of an individual, married or single, to be free of unwarranted governmental intrusion in the area of personal decisions regarding intimate relations. Future cases dealing with personal decisions concerning intimate relations that also used this defense were:
a) Lawrence v. Texas 539 U.S. 558 (2003) which challenged the Texas act that made it a crime for two persons of the same sex to participate in certain intimate sexual conduct. As in Carey v. Population Services International, the appellees used the right of privacy to state that the law was unconstitutional since citizens are entitled to respect for their private lives. This led to the Court holding criminal convictions for adult consensual sexual conduct in the home violated liberty and privacy interests protected by the Due Process Clause of the Amendment XIV..
b) Planned Parenthood v. Casey 505 U.S. 833 (1992), which challenged the husband notification provision of the Pennsylvania Abortion Control Act that put an undue burden on a woman's right to have an abortion.  In this case, the holdings balanced both the individual's rights, and the power of the state to intervene in respect to right of privacy. A state has the power to prohibit abortions after fetal viability, as long as the law holds exceptions for pregnancies, which endanger a women's life or health, but the case also retained and reaffirmed the right of privacy, which were determined in Griswold v. Connecticut (1965) and affirmed in the holding of Roe v Wade 410 U.S. 113 (1973)..
Another topic in the case was the prohibition of advertising suppressing commercial speech about any contraceptive device. The Court held that such speech is protected by Amendment I AND may not be prohibited because it concerns subjects offending the public's sensibilities. Future cases dealing with the prohibition of advertising suppressing commercial speech freedoms were:
a) Reno v. ACLU 521 U.S. 844 (1997) which challenged the Communications Decency Act of 1996 which criminalized the constitutionally-protected indecent speech as well as unprotected obscene speech. The court held that the law violated Amendment I by restricting the freedom of speech.
b) Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission 447 U.S. 557 (1980) which challenged a public service commission's regulation banning promotional advertising by an electric utility. The Court held that the regulation was a violation of Amendment I because the state interest in ensuring fair and efficient utility rates was not sufficiently linked to the ban. In the case of the electric company, the public service commission's concern over the equality and efficiency of utility rates did not provide a constitutionally acceptable reason for restricting protected speech. The ban on all promotional advertising by the company violated both Amendment I in respect to the freedom of speech, and the Amendment XIV in regards to the Due Process Clause.
References
External links
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1977 in United States case law
"""

From "Cargo of the Brig Aurora v. United States" ==> """
Cargo of the Brig Aurora v. United States, 11 U.S. (7 Cranch) 382 (1813), involved a forfeiture statute that Congress passed with a condition.  The 1809 trade prohibition against Great Britain was to be reinstated in 1810 unless the President declared, by proclamation, that Great Britain was no longer violating the neutrality of the United States.  The defendant argued unsuccessfully that such a conditional law unconstitutionally delegated congressional legislative authority to the President.  The Court unequivocally upheld "reviving the act...either expressly or conditionally, as their judgment should direct.".
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:1813 in United States case law
Category:United States nondelegation doctrine case law
"""

From "Carlisle v. United States" ==> """
Carlisle v. United States, 83 U.S. (16 Wall.) 147 (1872), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled, "The alien, whilst domiciled in the country, owes a local and temporary allegiance, which continues during the period of his residence.". The case has been cited in articles discussing the "culture defense" in criminal law.See Nicole A. King, "The Role of Culture in Psychology: A Look at Mental Illness and the 'Cultural Defense'", 7 Tulsa J Comp & Int'l L 199, 218 [1999].
Statement of the case
Prior to the American Civil War, the claimants were subjects of the Queen of Great Britain but had been residents in the United States prior and during the war.Carlisle v. United States, 83 U.S. at 149. In December 1861, the claimants began to manufacture saltpeter, an ingredient of gunpowder, in Santa Cave, a cave 7 miles (11.25 km) southwest of Scottsboro, Alabama. During the war, the saltpeter was sold to the Confederate States military.
In 1864, the Union Army in a campaign through Alabama, seized 65 bales of cotton that were valued at $43,232 and stored on the claimant's plantation.  On December 25, 1868, after the Confederate government surrendered, US President Andrew Johnson issued Proclamation 179, which unconditionally and without reservation pardoned and provided amnesty to all those who had supported the Confederate government.
After the pardon, the claimants attempted to recover from the US government the proceeds of the 65 bales of cotton.Carlisle v. United States, 83 U.S. at 148.
Court opinion
When the claimants presented their claim after the pardons, the United States Court of Claims denied the request proclaiming that the United States government had the right to confiscate the bales of cotton because the claimants gave aid and comfort to the rebellion, and for that reason were not entitled to recover the proceeds of the cotton seized.  However, in a unanimous decision, the Supreme Court reversed and held that:
 British subjects, if otherwise entitled, may prosecute claims against the United States in the Court of Claims.
 the claimants were allowed to make a claim and recover the proceeds because the pardon guaranteed that no offense connected with the rebellion could be imputed to the claimants.
 "[an] alien, whilst domiciled in the country, owes a local and temporary allegiance, which continues during the period of his residence."Carlisle v. United States, 83 U.S. at 154-155.
References
External links
Category:1873 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
Category:United States nationality law
"""

From "Carnival Cruise Lines, Inc. v. Shute" ==> """
Carnival Cruise Lines, Inc. v. Shute, 499 U.S. 585 (1991), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that United States federal courts will enforce forum selection clauses so long as the clause is not unreasonably burdensome to the party seeking to escape it..
Background
The plaintiffs, Eulala and Russel Shute, were passengers on a cruise ship operated by the defendant, Carnival Cruise Lines, Inc. The Shutes had bought tickets in Washington and signed a contract, with a forum selection clause mandating that injured parties would sue in Florida, to the exclusion of all other jurisdictions. The plaintiffs boarded the cruise ship in California, and one was injured in international waters off the coast of Mexico. The plaintiffs then filed a lawsuit in Washington, in violation of the contract clause.
The defendant sought summary judgment based on:
 the forum selection clause, and
 a lack of minimum contacts between the defendant and the forum state
The trial court dismissed based solely on the lack of sufficient contacts. The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed because the cruise line had reached into Washington via advertising, and held that but for the defendant's solicitation, there would be no cause of action. The Court of Appeals also held that forum selection clause was void because of unequal bargaining power between the parties, and because it would be an undue hardship for the Shutes to have to go all the way to Florida to sue. This decision was appealed to the Supreme Court based on that court's Admiralty jurisdiction.
Opinion of the Court
The Court, in an opinion by Justice Blackmun, held that forum selection clauses were generally enforceable in federal courts so long as they are "fundamentally fair", and that therefore the Shutes were held to the contract printed on the back of their ticket. The Court noted that Florida is not a random jurisdiction - Carnival is headquartered there and does much business there, and Washington does not necessarily make sense in the context of an accident off the coast of Mexico on a ship that left from California. The hardship on the plaintiffs mattered little, as they had bought the ticket, and no one forced them to go on a cruise. On the other hand, it made sense for the cruise industry, which carries passengers from all over, to have a single forum for lawsuits. The cruise line will thereby avoid defending itself in many different courts, which will save money, which the Court believes will translate to cheaper tickets.
Dissent
Justice Stevens filed a dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Marshall. Justice Stevens had several reasons for dissenting, including objections to contracts of adhesion created by parties who have unequal bargaining power, the fact that the notice of the forum selection clause was not made available to the purchaser until after payment was tendered and a lack of an opportunity for refunds at the point when the forum selection clause was disclosed.
Justice Stevens attached a copy of the original ticket to his dissent to show how only the most meticulous passenger would notice the clause and that notice might be in contention.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 499
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States contract law
Category:United States civil procedure case law
Category:United States forum selection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1991 in United States case law
Category:Carnival Cruise Lines
"""

From "Carpenter v. United States" ==> """
Carpenter v. United States, 138 S.Ct. 2206 (2018), is a landmark United States Supreme Court case concerning the privacy of historical cell site location information (CSLI). The Court held that the government violates the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution when it accesses historical CSLI records containing the physical locations of cellphones without a search warrant.Carpenter v. United States, 138 S. Ct. 2206 (2018).
Prior to Carpenter, government entities could obtain cellphone location records by claiming the information was required as part of an investigation. After Carpenter, government entities are required to obtain a search warrant to access that information. Recognizing the influence of new consumer communications devices in the 2010s, the Court expanded its conceptions of constitutional rights toward the privacy of this type of data. However, the Court emphasized that the Carpenter ruling was narrowly restricted to the precise types of information and search procedures that were relevant to Carpenter's complaint. 
Background
Cell site location information (CSLI)
Cellular telephone service providers are able to find the location of cell phones through either global positioning system (GPS) data or cell site location information (CSLI), in the process of connecting calls and data transmissions. CSLI is captured by nearby cell towers, and this information is used to triangulate the location of phones. Service providers capture and store this data for business purposes, such as troubleshooting, maximizing network efficiencies, and determining whether to charge customers roaming fees for particular calls. 
The data can also illustrate the historical movements of a cellphone. Thus, anyone with access to this data has the ability to know where the phone has been and what other cell phones were in the same area at a given time. When users travel with their cellphones, this data can theoretically illustrate every place a person has traveled, and possibly other people encountered via their corresponding data.
 The third-party doctrine 
Prior to Carpenter, the Supreme Court consistently held that a person had no reasonable expectation of privacy in regard to information voluntarily turned over to third parties such as telephone companies, and therefore a search warrant is not required when government officials seek this information. This legal theory is known as the third-party doctrine, established by the Supreme Court in Smith v. Maryland (1979), in which the Court determined that government can obtain a list of phone numbers dialed from a suspect's phone.
By the 2010s, cellphones and particularly smartphones had become important tools for nearly every person in the United States. Many applications, such as GPS navigation and location tools, require a cellphone to send and receive information constantly, including the exact location of the phone. As technology advanced in the 2010s, the Supreme Court began to modify its precedents on government searches of personal communications devices, given new consumer behaviors that may transcend the third-party doctrine.
 Facts of the case 
Between December 2010 and March 2011, several individuals in the Detroit, Michigan area conspired and participated in armed robberies at RadioShack and T-Mobile stores across the region. In April 2011, four of the robbers were captured and arrested. The petitioner, Timothy Carpenter, was not among the initial group of arrestees. One of those arrested confessed and turned over his phone so that FBI agents could review the calls made from his phone around the time of the robberies. The agents obtained a search warrant to inspect the information in the phone, in order to find additional contacts of the arrestee and compile more evidence about the crime ring. 
From the historical cell-site records, the agents confirmed that Timothy Carpenter was also part of the crime ring, and proceeded to compile information about the location of his phone over 127 days. In turn, this information revealed that Carpenter had been within a two-mile radius of four robberies at the times they were perpetrated. This evidence was used to support Carpenter's arrest. At criminal court, Carpenter was found guilty of several counts of aiding and abetting robberies that affected interstate commerce and another count of using a firearm during a violent crime. He was sentenced to 116 years in prison. 
 Appeal at the Sixth Circuit 
Carpenter appealed his conviction and sentence to the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, arguing that the CSLI evidence used against him should be suppressed because the police had not obtained a warrant before searching through it. In 2015, the Circuit Court upheld Carpenter's conviction. This ruling was largely based on the Smith v. Maryland precedent, stating that Carpenter used cellular telephone networks voluntarily, and per the third-party doctrine he had no realistic expectation that the data should be private. Thus, review of that information by the police did not constitute a "search" and did not require a warrant under the Fourth Amendment.
Carpenter appealed this ruling to the U.S. Supreme Court, which granted certiorari in 2016.
Opinion of the court
Twenty amicus curiae briefs were filed by interested organizations, scholars, and corporations for Carpenter's case. Some considered the case to be the most important Fourth Amendment dispute to come before the Supreme Court in a generation. The Court issued its decision in 2018, with the majority opinion written by Chief Justice John Roberts. 
The Court's ruling recognized that the Carpenter case revealed a contradiction between two Supreme Court precedents on the matter of police searches of personal communications information. In United States v. Jones (2012) the Court had ruled that GPS tracking could constitute a search under the Fourth Amendment as a violation of a person's reasonable expectation of privacy.US v. Jones, 565 US 400 (2012). Meanwhile, the Court had held in Smith v. Maryland (1979) that the third-party doctrine absolved the government from warrant requirements when searching through telephone records.. 
Ultimately, in Carpenter the court determined that the third-party doctrine could not be extended to historical cell site location information (CSLI). Instead, the Court compared "detailed, encyclopedic, and effortlessly compiled" CSLI records to the GPS information at issue in United States v. Jones, recognizing that both forms of data accord the government the ability to track individuals' past movements. Furthermore, the Court noted that CSLI could pose even greater privacy risks than GPS data, as the prevalence of cellphones could accord the government "near perfect surveillance" of an individual's movements. Accordingly, the Court ruled that, under the Fourth Amendment, the government must obtain a search warrant in order to access historical CSLI records. thumb|upright=1.35|The Supreme Court Justices presiding over the Carpenter case. Front row (left to right): Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Anthony Kennedy, John Roberts (Chief Justice), Clarence Thomas, and Stephen Breyer. Back row (left to right): Elena Kagan, Samuel Alito, Sonia Sotomayor, and Neil Gorsuch.Roberts argued that technology "has afforded law enforcement a powerful new tool to carry out its important responsibilities. At the same time, this tool risks Government encroachment of the sort the Framers [of the US Constitution], after consulting the lessons of history, drafted the Fourth Amendment to prevent." As stated in the opinion, "Unlike the nosy neighbor who keeps an eye on comings and goings, they [new technologies] are ever alert, and their memory is nearly infallible. There is a world of difference between the limited types of personal information addressed in Smith [...] and the exhaustive chronicle of location information casually collected by wireless carriers today."
However, Roberts stressed that the Carpenter decision was a very narrow one and did not affect other parts of the third-party doctrine, such as banking records. Similarly, he noted that the decision did not prevent the collection of CSLI without a warrant in cases of emergency or for issues of national security. 
Dissenting opinions
Justice Anthony Kennedy, in a dissenting opinion, cautioned against the limitations on law enforcement inherent in the majority opinion. According to Kennedy, the ruling "places undue restrictions on the lawful and necessary enforcement powers exercised not only by the Federal Government, but also by law enforcement in every State and locality throughout the Nation. Adherence to this Court's longstanding precedents and analytic framework would have been the proper and prudent way to resolve this case." 
In another dissent, Justice Samuel Alito wrote: "I fear that today's decision will do far more harm than good. The Court's reasoning fractures two fundamental pillars of Fourth Amendment law, and in doing so, it guarantees a blizzard of litigation while threatening many legitimate and valuable investigative practices upon which law enforcement has rightfully come to rely." In yet another dissent, Justice Neil Gorsuch agreed with most of the majority opinion but stressed that CSLI data is personal property, and its storage by telephone companies should be immaterial. According to Gorsuch, the Fourth Amendment "grants you the right to invoke its guarantees whenever one of your protected things (your person, your house, your papers, or your effects) is unreasonably searched or seized. Period." Gorsuch further recommended that the third-party doctrine be overturned as inconsistent with the original meaning of the Fourth Amendment.
Impact and subsequent developments
After the Supreme Court ruling, Carpenter's criminal conviction was remanded to the Sixth Circuit to determine if it could stand without the CSLI data that required a warrant per the Supreme Court. Carpenter's lawyers argued that the data should have been subject to the exclusionary rule and thrown out as material collected without a proper warrant under the Supreme Court's ruling. However, the Circuit Court judges concluded that the FBI was acting in good faith with respect to collecting the data based on the law at the time the crimes were committed. This type of good faith exemption is permitted per another Supreme Court precedent, Davis v. United States.Davis v. U.S., 564 US 229 (2011). The evidence was allowed to stand, and the Sixth Circuit again upheld Carpenter's criminal conviction and prison sentence. 
Meanwhile, the Supreme Court's ruling in Carpenter was very narrow and did not otherwise change the third-party doctrine related to other business records that might incidentally reveal location information, nor did it overrule prior decisions concerning conventional surveillance techniques and tools such as security cameras. The Court did not extend its ruling to other matters related to cellphones not presented in Carpenter, including real-time CSLI or "tower dumps" (the downloading of information about all the devices that connected to a particular cell site during a particular interval). The opinion also did not consider other data collection goals involving foreign affairs or national security.
 References 
Further reading
External links
 Case page at SCOTUSblog
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit cases
Category:Search and seizure case law
Category:Telecommunications law
Category:Mobile phone culture
Category:2010s in Detroit
Category:Global Positioning System
"""

From "Carr v. Saul" ==> """
Carr v. Saul, 593 U.S. ___ (2021), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court concerning the Appointments Clause. 
 References 
 External links 
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Carroll v. Town of Princess Anne" ==> """
Carroll v. Town of Princess Anne, 393 U.S. 175 (1968), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a state cannot preemptively prohibit persons from holding a public meeting, without first notifying the persons involved, and providing the persons an opportunity to argue the decision, unless moving party can show (per the equivalent of today's Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 65) (1) that they made efforts to give to notice, and (2) explain to the court the reasons why such notice should not be required. The National States Rights Party won the case unanimously.
 Background 
A white supremacist group, the National States Rights Party, held a rally in Princess Anne, Maryland on August 6, 1966. They intended to hold another public meeting the following day, but local citizens persuaded a Circuit Court judge to issue a 10-day restraining order, prohibiting the group from holding any rally "which will tend to disturb and endanger the citizens of the County".  The Party was not given any advance notice of the restraining order, nor given an opportunity to argue against it.  The Circuit Court then issued a 10-month restraining order.  The Maryland court of appeals overturned the 10 month order, but upheld the 10 day order.  The Party appealed to the Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court held that the 14th Amendment's guarantee of due process required the state to provide the group with notice and a hearing before a restraining order could be issued. Justice Black concurred in the judgment. 
The 10 day restraining order was set aside.
Notes and references
External links
Category:1968 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Carroll v. United States" ==> """
Carroll v. United States, 267 U.S. 132 (1925), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court that upheld the warrantless searches of an automobile, which is known as the automobile exception. The case has also been cited as widening the scope of search.
Background
During prohibition, officers arranged an undercover purchase of liquor from George Carroll, an illicit dealer under investigation, but the transaction was not completed. They later saw Carroll and John Kiro driving on the highway from Detroit to Grand Rapids, Michigan, which they regularly patrolled. They pursued them, pulled them over, and searched the car, finding illegal liquor behind the rear seat.
The National Prohibition Act provided that officers could make warrantless searches of vehicles, boats, or airplanes when they had reason to believe illegal liquor was being transported and that law enforced the Eighteenth Amendment.. The National Prohibition Act required a search warrant for a search of a building. However, this law was revoked in 1933 when Prohibition ended.
Decision
The Court noted that Congress early observed the need for a search warrant in non-border search situations,267 U.S. at 150-53 and Congress always recognized "a necessary difference" between searches of buildings and vehicles "for contraband goods, where it is not practical to secure a warrant, because the vehicle can be quickly moved out of the locality or jurisdiction in which the warrant must be sought."267 U.S. at 153. The warrantless search was thus valid.
The Court held, however,
It would be intolerable and unreasonable if a prohibition agent were authorized to stop every automobile on the chance of finding liquor, and thus subject all persons lawfully using the highways to the inconvenience and indignity of such a search.... [T]hose lawfully within the country, entitled to use the public highways, have a right to free passage without interruption or search unless there is known to a competent official, authorized to search, probable cause for believing that their vehicles are carrying contraband or illegal merchandise.267 U.S. at 153-54.
The Court added that where the securing of a warrant is reasonably practicable, it must be used.267 U.S. at 156. Observation: This comment is no longer valid. See  ("If a car is readily mobile and probable cause exists to believe it contains contraband, the Fourth Amendment thus permits police to search the vehicle without more," citing ; .
That became known as the Carroll doctrine: a vehicle could be searched without a search warrant if there was probable cause to believe that evidence is present in the vehicle, coupled with exigent circumstances to believe that the vehicle could be removed from the area before a warrant could be obtained.In , a vehicle search was sustained under Carroll where the officers had probable cause to believe a vehicle contained liquor, but they waited until the driver showed up to arrest him and search the car. The Court thus rejected Husty's contention that the search was invalid since the police could have obtained a warrant under the circumstances. Husty, 282 U.S. at 701.
Underneath their opinion, the majority included a note that Justice Joseph McKenna concurred with them before his retirement earlier in the year.267 U.S. at 163.
Justices James Clark McReynolds and George Sutherland filed a dissenting opinion. In brief, they believed that the fact that the case involved bootleggers was prejudicial yet not a justification for creating a broad exception to unreasonable search doctrine.267 U.S. at 163-175.
Subsequent events
In 1927, the Florida Legislature enacted the Carroll decision into statute law in Florida, and the statute remains in effect.Fla. Stat. s. 933.19
In United States v. Di Re,. the Court declined to extend Carroll to permit searches of passengers in a vehicle that had apparently been lawfully stopped. In Di Re there was no probable cause to believe that the passenger was holding any evidence.
The Court relied on Carroll in Cooper v. California. to observe that a search of a vehicle may be reasonable where the same search of a dwelling may not be reasonable.
See also
Boyd v. United States, 
Chambers v. Maroney, 
Exclusionary rule
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 267
United States v. Chadwick, 
Weeks v. United States, 
Arizona v. Gant
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1925 in United States case law
Category:United States Eighteenth Amendment case law
Category:1925 in Michigan
Category:Grand Rapids, Michigan
Category:Vehicle law
Category:Legal history of Michigan
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:Prohibition in the United States
"""

From "Carroll v. United States (1957)" ==> """
Carroll v. United States, 354 U.S. 394 (1957), was a case dealing with the appealability of a suppression order issued by the Federal District Court for the District of Columbia for an unlawful warrant under the Fourth Amendment.
In February of 1957, officers arrested Carroll and Stewart on John Doe arrest warrants for violations of local lottery laws. During the detainment, officers conducted a Search Incident to Arrest and seized evidence from their person. They petitioned the District Court for suppression of the evidence on grounds that the warrants were null and void due to the lack of the Constitutionally required probable cause under the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.𝑇ℎ𝑒 𝑅𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 𝑜𝑓 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑃𝑒𝑜𝑝𝑙𝑒 𝑡𝑜 𝑏𝑒 𝑠𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑒 𝑖𝑛 𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑖𝑟 𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑜𝑛𝑠, ℎ𝑜𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑠, 𝑝𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠, 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑠, 𝑎𝑔𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑠𝑡 𝑢𝑛𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒 𝑠𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑠 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑠𝑒𝑖𝑧𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑠, 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑙𝑙 𝑛𝑜𝑡 𝑏𝑒 𝑣𝑖𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑; 𝒂𝒏𝒅 𝒏𝒐 𝒘𝒂𝒓𝒓𝒂𝒏𝒕𝒔 𝒔𝒉𝒂𝒍𝒍 𝒊𝒔𝒔𝒖𝒆, 𝒃𝒖𝒕 𝒖𝒑𝒐𝒏 𝒑𝒓𝒐𝒃𝒂𝒃𝒍𝒆 𝒄𝒂𝒖𝒔𝒆, 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑏𝑦 𝑜𝑎𝑡ℎ 𝑜𝑟 𝑎𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛, 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑙𝑦 𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒 𝑡𝑜 𝑏𝑒 𝑠𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑑, 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑜𝑛𝑠 𝑜𝑟 𝑡ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠 𝑡𝑜 𝑏𝑒 𝑠𝑒𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑑. The Fourth Amendment. The District Court granted the petition. The Government appeals to the Federal Court of Appeals, which reversed the suppression order.
In a unanimous 9-0 opinion written by Justice Warren, the Supreme Court of the United States reversed the Court of Appeals, stating that:
𝐼𝑡 𝑖𝑠 𝑎𝑥𝑖𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑐, 𝑎𝑠 𝑎 𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑦 𝑎𝑠 𝑤𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝑎𝑠 𝑑𝑜𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑒, 𝑡ℎ𝑎𝑡 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒 𝑗𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑖𝑛 𝑎 𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑓𝑖𝑐 𝑓𝑒𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑙 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑡 𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟 𝑎 𝑔𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑛 𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑐𝑎𝑠𝑒 𝑖𝑠 𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑢𝑝𝑜𝑛 𝑎𝑢𝑡ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑙𝑦 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑏𝑦 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑡𝑒. Carroll v. United States, .
The Court held that, although some orders may be appealable under the authority of 18 U.S.C. 1291, this order in this case lacked such authority. The Circuit Court was reversed and remanded.
References
External links
Category:1957 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Carson v. Makin" ==> """
Carson v. Makin, 596 U.S. ___ (2022), was a United States Supreme Court case related to the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and the Free Exercise Clause. It was a follow-up to Espinoza v. Montana Department of Revenue.
The case centered on the limits of school vouchers offered by the state of Maine, which had disallowed the vouchers to be used to pay for religious-based private schools. In a 6–3 decision the Court ruled that Maine's restrictions on vouchers violated the Free Exercise Clause, as they discriminated against religious-backed private schools. The minority opinions argued that the decision worked against the long-standing principle of the  separation of church and state, since state governments would now be required to fund religious institutions.
 Background 
In many states in the United States, the state may offer tuition assistance for private schools in lieu of public schools for primary education, using school vouchers. However, several states have established in their constitution, through way of a Blaine Amendment or similar wording, that the state cannot fund religious schools. In the case of Maine, about half of the students live in rural areas, and many of these towns lack public high schools. Since 1873, the state provided tuition assistance program for residents of those localities to send their children to nearby public or private schools, which until 1980 included religious schools. The tuition covers board and travel, amounting to about  (as of 2021). The program funds around 11 nonsectarian private schools exist across the state, handling approximately 4,800 students, and additional nonsectarian schools in neighboring states. The state changed the program in 1980 to disallow the vouchers to be used for secular schools run by religious organizations on the basis that funding these schools violated the U.S. and state Constitution on the Establishment Clause and separation of church and state.
During the Trump administration, the issue of school choice had become a major issue under President Donald Trump and his Secretary of Education Betsy DeVos. Trump pushed on Congress to pass legislation to support school choice and vouchers, including for religious schools, but failed to gain sufficient support due to conflicts in the Senate and the unlikely chance of its success in the Democrat-controlled House of Representatives.
Earlier, Zelman v. Simmons-Harris () had established that an Ohio voucher program which allowed parents to use the vouchers for private religious schools did not violate the Establishment Clause. Leading into Carson the Supreme Case ruled in two precedent cases. The first was Trinity Lutheran Church of Columbia, Inc. v. Comer (), in which the Court ruled that denying a religious school in Missouri the funds to rebuild a playground while providing funds to non-secular schools violated the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment, and that government programs cannot discriminate on the basis of religion in their operations. The second was Espinoza v. Montana Department of Revenue () that if states do offer such assistance, they cannot prevent such tuition from being used for religious schools simply because the school was religious.
Lower courts
With the Trinity Lutheran decision in 2017, the Institute for Justice took representation of two Maine families to challenge the exclusion of sectarian schools from the program in 2018. The filing argued a test was developed in Trinity Lutheran, that "The government must remain neutral with regard to religion — neither favoring nor disfavoring it — and the participants must exercise a genuine choice between religious and nonreligious options." As the voucher program discriminated against religious schools, the program was not neutral and therefore unconstitutional. The Institute also backed a second case in Washington state over its work-study program that prevented participants from being employed by religious organizations, though this case was ultimately dismissed.
The families' case was first heard in the United States District Court for the District of Maine, which found for the state in 2019. The case was appealed to the First Circuit. While the case was in preparation for hearing, the Supreme Court issued its ruling in Espinoza, and the families filed a new brief asking the First Circuit to weigh this new decision in their deliberations. The majority opinion of the First Circuit upheld the district court's ruling, stating that as Maine's program based its voucher allowance on whether schools taught and proselytized religion with the voucher funds, rather than the school simply run by a religious organization, the program fell within the separation of church and state.
Supreme Court
Certiorari was granted in the case on July 2, 2021. Oral arguments were held on December 8, 2021. The state argued that its program does provide school vouchers for private schools with "substantially the same education provided in the public schools", and do not choose to fund those that have a significant religious teaching component. The state also contended that the program was not a school choice program, but intended to aid students where there is otherwise no local high school in reasonably close distance for them to attend. The families' council argued that as soon as Maine's program allows for parents to decide on an alternative to a public school for their children, "it has to remain neutral as between religious and non-religious private schools". The Cato Institute, Hillsdale College, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and the Americans for Prosperity Foundation filed amicus briefs in support for the petitioner, and The Freedom From Religion Foundation, The American Civil Liberties Union, and the National School Boards Association filed amicus briefs in support for the respondent.
 Ruling 
In a 6-3 decision the Supreme Court ruled on ideological lines that Maine's nonsectarian requirement for tuition assistance violates the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, struck down the Maine law, and reversed the lower court opinion. Chief Justice John Roberts wrote the opinion of the Court for himself and five other Justices. Justice Stephen Breyer wrote a dissenting opinion joined fully by Justice Elena Kagan and joined partially by Justice Sonia Sotomayor. Justice Sotomayor wrote a separate dissenting opinion.
 Opinion of the Court 
In his majority opinion Chief Justice John Roberts wrote that the State violated the Free Exercise Clause of the United States Constitution as it prevents religious observers from receiving public benefits. He cited various cases where the court struck down actions that did so, such as Espinoza and Trinity Lutheran. He stated that the Maine legislature excluded "private religious schools from those eligible to receive such funds" and such a decision by the state reaches a greater separation of church and state than intended in the Establishment Clause of the United States Constitution. He wrote on the basis of Zelman, "a benefit program under which private citizens 'direct government aid to religious schools wholly as a result of their own genuine and independent private choice' does not offend the Establishment Clause." The court ruled that Maine purposefully "identify and exclude otherwise eligible schools on the basis of their religious exercise" and that such is a "discrimination against religion".
 Dissents 
Justice Stephen Breyer wrote a dissenting opinion joined fully by Justice Elena Kagan and joined partially by Justice Sonia Sotomayor. Justice Sotomayor wrote a separate dissenting opinion. Breyer expressed concern that Carson v. Makin could require states to fund religious schools with taxpayer money, writing that the ruling paid "almost no attention" to the First Amendment's prohibitions on the state's establishment of religion while "giving almost exclusive attention" the Amendment's prohibitions on religious free exercise. Breyer also wrote that the ruling broke with historical precedent, that Supreme Court had "never previously held what the Court holds today, namely, that a State must (not may) use state funds to pay for religious education as part of a tuition program designed to ensure the provision of free statewide public school education."
In her dissent, Sotomayor wrote that in 5 years, the Court has "shift[ed] from a rule that permits States to decline to fund religious organizations to one that requires States in many circumstances to subsidize religious indoctrination with taxpayer dollars." She argued that the decision in Carson "continues to dismantle the wall of separation between church and state that the framers fought to build."
 Analysis 
While only one other state, Vermont, had a similar voucher program as Maine's, analysts anticipated that the decision would spur religious groups to seek similar programs in conservative states. Supporters of the ruling, including several religious groups, stated that the ruling would enhance religious liberties and "school-choice."
Many critics believe that the ruling in this case is a "further erosion" of the separation of church and state.
Steve Vladeck from CNN wrote that this ruling would be "putting (state) government(s) in the awkward position of having to choose between directly funding religious activity or not providing funding at all".
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
"""

From "Carter v. Burr" ==> """
Carter v. Burr, 113 U.S. 737 (1885), was a case regarding a promissory note that was held by the appellee which secured by mortgage of premises in the City of Washington, DC to the appellant, to decide whether other transactions regarding the property would pay this note, or if it would instead remain in force, along with the right to participate in the proceeds arising from a sale under the mortgage..
Decision
Chief Justice Waite delivered the opinion of the Court.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States securities case law
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:1885 in Washington, D.C.
Category:Legal history of the District of Columbia
"""

From "Carter v. Carter Coal Co." ==> """
Carter v. Carter Coal Company, 298 U.S. 238 (1936), is a United States Supreme Court decision interpreting the Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution, which permits the United States Congress to "regulate Commerce... among the several States.".  Specifically, it analyzes the extent of Congress' power, according to the Commerce Clause, looking at whether or not they have the right to regulate manufacturing.
Background
The Bituminous Coal Conservation Act was passed in 1935 and replaced the previous codes set forth by the National Industry Recovery Act (NIRA). The new law established a commission, made up of coal miners, coal producers, and the public, to establish fair competition standards, production standards, wages, hours, and labor relations. All mines were required to pay a 15% tax on coal produced. Mines that complied with the Act would be refunded 90% of the 15% tax.
James W. Carter was a bitter foe of the United Mine Workers; he was a shareholder of the Carter Coal Company of McDowell County, West Virginia and did not feel that the company should join the government program. The board of directors for the company thought that the company could not afford to pay the tax if it did not receive anything back.
Carter sued the federal government and his own father who was also named Carter. The plaintiff claimed that coal mining was not interstate commerce and so could not be regulated by Congress.
The question was whether Congress, according to the Commerce Clause, has the power to regulate the coal mining industry.
Decision
Majority opinion
The Supreme Court majority ruled in favor of the plaintiff the younger Carter. The Supreme Court ruled 5-4 the Act was unconstitutional for the following reasons:
Just because a commodity is manufactured or produced within a state and is intended for interstate commerce does not mean that its "production or manufacturing is subject to federal regulation under the commerce clause."
A commodity that is meant to be sold in interstate commerce is not considered to be part of interstate commerce "before the commencement of its movement from the state."
"Mining is not interstate commerce." It is a local business and is subject to local control and taxation.
The word "commerce" is equivalent to the phrase "intercourse for the purposes of trade" and the process of mining coal is not within that definition.
The labor board has powers over production, not commerce. That confirms the idea that production is a purely-local activity.
If the production of coal by a single person did not have a direct effect on interstate commerce, the production of coal by many people also could not have a direct effect on interstate commerce.
The evils that Congress sought to control were "all local evils over which the federal government has no legislative control."
"The federal regulatory power ceases when interstate commerce ends; and, the power does not attach until interstate commercial intercourse begins."
Dissenting opinions
The Three Musketeers dissented.
Justice Cardozo, dissenting, reasoned that the price-fixing provision of the Coal Conservation Act was constitutional because it had a direct effect on interstate trade. Justices Stone and Brandeis joined Cardozo's opinion.
Chief Justice Hughes also wrote a separate opinion, agreeing with the other five justices that the Act's labor provision was unconstitutional because it was poorly drafted and did not fall within the jurisdiction of Congress to regulate interstate commerce. However, he mainly sided with Cardozo's opinion and noted that the Act's labor and marketing provisions were not dependent on each other. On April 12, 1937, however, Hughes, who wrote the majority opinion, later found the pro-labor Wagner Act constitutional in five separate cases and noted that it was skillfully drafted and specified interstate commerce regulations.http://holtz.org/Library/Social%20Science/History/Machine%20Age/Court-Packing%20and%20the%20Commerce%20Clause.htm
See also
 Carter Coal Company Store (Caretta, West Virginia)
 Carter Coal Company Store (Coalwood, West Virginia)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 298
References
Epstein, Lee, and Thomas G. Walker. Constitutional Law for a Changing America: Institutional Powers and Constraints. 6th ed. Washington D.C.: CQ P, 2007. 448–450.
External links
 Summary of Carter v. Carter Coal Company
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:1936 in United States case law
Category:Coal mining in the United States
Category:New Deal in West Virginia
Category:McDowell County, West Virginia
Category:Coal mining law
Category:Constitutional challenges to the New Deal
"""

From "Carter v. Kentucky" ==> """
Carter v. Kentucky was a case in which the U.S. Supreme Court held that trial judges in criminal proceedings must, upon proper request of the defendant, inform the jury of his right against self-incrimination, and that its execution may not be used against him.
 Background 
On Friday morning, December 22, 1978, while it was still dark, Officer Deborah Ellison of the Hopkinsville Police Department in Hopkinsville, Kentucky, noticed something strange in the alley between Young's Hardware Store and Edna's Furniture Store. After shining her spotlight down the alley, she saw two men who immediately fled the scene. After driving down the alley, she found a hole in the side of the hardware store. Knowing he was in the area she radioed for Officer Leroy Davis, reasonably suspecting, based upon the totality of circumstances, that they were involved in criminal activity, because: 1) They were in an alley in the dark; 2) They immediately fled; and 3) there was an opening to the store in the area they were at. Officer Ellison inspected the alleyway. At the same time, Officer Davis saw the two men run off in different directions, and, after a chase, stopped one, whose name was Lonnie Joe Carter. Carter had dropped a gym bag and a radio tuned to a Police band. When caught he was wearing gloves, but no jacket. Officer Ellison found two men's jackets as well as some stolen merchandise in the alley near the hole in the wall. After being brought to her, Officer Ellison noted Officer Davis that Carter "was of similar height and weight to one of the men in the alley, and that he wore similar clothing." She could not give a more positive identification, however, because the alley was dark. Carter was taken to Police headquarters.
Carter's council requested at trial that the jury be given the following instruction: "The [defendant] is not compelled to testify and the fact that he does not cannot be used as an inference of guilt and should not prejudice him in any way." The Judge, however, refused the request, and the Jury found him guilty of third-degree burglary, recommending a sentence of two years in prison. Following was the recidivist phase of the trial, in which the prosecution showed forth evidence of previous felony convictions. The defense presented no evidence, and the Jury found him guilty as a persistent offender, sentencing him to twenty years in prison. Carter appealed.
The Supreme Court of the State of Kentucky argued two things: 1) There is no case law within the jurisdiction supporting the idea that the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendment procedural due process rights included a right to have the Jury be informed of the privilege against self-incrimination; and 2) The Judge would have had to comment upon the defendant's failure to testify, violating Kentucky Revised Statute 421.225. Because the statute as interpreted did not violate the Constitution as interpreted, the Statute must control the proceedings within the courtroom. Thus the Supreme Court affirmed the decision in Green v. Commonweath, affirming the trial court's conviction. Carter appealed.
 Decision 
In an 8–1 decision, the U.S. Supreme Court reversed the Kentucky Supreme Court's decision and remanded the case back for further proceedings. The court had held in Bruno v. United States that federal defendants were granted that right in federal court, but the decision came as a result of a federal statute rather than constitutional law. The court additionally held in Griffin v. California that the right to remain silent may not be used as evidence against one's self and that a Judge may not make that presumption to the Jury. The Court held in Lakeside v. Oregon that a Judge may choose to give the Jury instruction at question in this case even with the objection of the defense council. But no case had established a Constitutional right to have the Jury provided the instruction at the request of the defendant until this point. The Court stated:
"The freedom of a defendant in a criminal proceeding to remain silent 'unless he chooses to speak in the unfettered exercise of his own will is' is guaranteed by the Fifth Amendment and made applicable to state criminal proceedings through the Fourteenth. And the Constitution further guarantees that no adverse inferences are to be drawn from the exercise of that privilege. Just as adverse comment on a defendant's silence 'cuts down on the privilege by making its assertion costly,' the failure to limit the jurors' speculation on the meaning of that silence, when the defendant makes a timely request that a prophylactic instruction be given, exacts an impermissible toll on the full and free exercise of the privilege. Accordingly, we hold that a state trial judge has the constitutional obligation, upon proper request, to minimize the danger that the jury will give evidentiary weight to a defendant's failure to testify."
Thus the Kentucky Supreme Court was reversed, and the judgement remanded to the State Supreme Court for further proceedings. In a short, three-sentence order, the Kentucky Supreme Court then reversed the trial court's conviction and remanded for a new trial, where he was again convicted and appealed.
 References 
 Footnotes 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1981 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Carter v. United States" ==> """
Carter v. United States, 530 U.S. 255,Carter v. United States,  is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held, 5–4, that a defendant charged with robbery under 18 USC § 2113(a) was not entitled to a jury instruction to consider the lesser offense of larceny under 18 USC § 2113(b).
Background
In 1997, Floyd J. Carter entered a bank unarmed, removed nearly $16,000, and fled the scene. In the process, Carter pushed one customer and startled others. Carter was charged with federal bank robbery under 18 USC § 2113(a), which punishes anyone who "by force and violence, or by intimidation, takes... any... thing of value [from a] bank." Carter pleaded not guilty on the grounds that he had not used any force, violence, or intimidation to deprive the bank of its money. Carter’s defense asked the District Court to instruct the jury to consider whether Carter committed the lesser crime of federal bank larceny under 18 U.S.C. § 2113(b), which provides "[w]hoever takes and carries away, with intent to steal or purloin, any... thing of value exceeding $1,000 [from a]... bank." The District Court denied the motion and the jury returned a guilty verdict on the count of robbery. The Third Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the judgment, and the Supreme Court granted certiorari.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Thomas delivered the opinion for the majority. The majority applied Rule 31(c) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure to require a defendant requesting a jury instruction of a lesser offense to prove that the elements of the lesser offense are a subset of the elements of the charged offense. The Court evaluated whether the elements of the crime of larceny under § 2113(b) were a subset of the elements of robbery under § 2113(a). The Court found several elements of larceny (“with intent to steal or purloin,” “tak[e] and carr[y] away” and “value exceeding $1,000”) that were not elements of robbery.  The opinion relied on the legislative history of § 2113(a), which was revised in 1948 to delete the word ‘feloniously’. The majority interpreted that deletion as the removal of the intent requirement, and found similar Congressional intent in the “take” and value elements under § 2133(b). Carter argued that Congress intended for § 2113(b) to be a lesser crime of § 2113(a) because § 2113(c) applied only whenever § 2113(b) was violated and the Court rejected this argument. The Court declined to apply a less rigid test to determine whether § 2113(b) was a lesser offense, citing its prior holding in Schmuck v. United States. The majority also rejected a common law interpretation of the statutes, holding that Congress had not appropriated common law terms in the statute but had instead defined the crimes expressly. 
Justice Ginsburg, with Stevens, Souter, and Breyer, dissented from the opinion. The dissent cited the common law influence on the statute in question as well as the preceding laws in its development as indication that Congress intended § 2133(b) to be a lesser offense.
Impact
The Carter opinion showed that the Court was willing to abandon common law interpretation principles for some federal statutes or statutory provisions by asserting that “a ‘cluster of ideas' from the common law should be imported into statutory text only when Congress employs a common-law term”. This opinion was a further rejection of the idea that federal legislation is written with a "common law background." The decision can also be characterized as a more textualist approach to statutory interpretation.
 See also 
 Schmuck v. United States, 
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Town of Castle Rock v. Gonzales" ==> """
Castle Rock v. Gonzales, 545 U.S. 748 (2005), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled, 7–2, that a town and its police department could not be sued under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 for failing to enforce a  restraining order, which had led to the murders of a woman's three children by her estranged husband.. The decision has since become infamous and condemned by several human rights groups.
 Background synopsis
 Restraining order and police inaction 
During divorce proceedings, Jessica Lenahan-Gonzales, a resident of Castle Rock, Colorado, obtained a permanent restraining order against her husband Simon, who had been stalking her, on June 4, 1999, requiring him to remain at least  from her and her four children (son Jesse, who is not Simon's biological child, and daughters Rebecca, Katheryn, and Leslie) except during specified visitation time.  On June 22, at approximately 5:15 pm, Simon took possession of the three girls in violation of the order. Jessica called the police at approximately 7:30 pm, 8:30 pm, and 10:10 pm on June 22, and 12:15 am on June 23, and visited the police station in person at 12:40 am on June 23. Prior to the second call, Simon had called Jessica and stated that he had the daughters with him at an amusement park in Denver, Colorado. However, since Jessica had allowed Simon, from time to time, to take the children at various hours, the police took no action. At approximately 3:20 am on June 23, Simon appeared at the Castle Rock police station and was killed in a shoot-out with the officers. A search of his vehicle revealed the dead bodies of the three daughters, who were determined to have been killed prior to arrival at the police station. There was no cause of death found, nor was there a time or place of death.
United States District Court for the District of Colorado
Gonzales filed suit in the United States District Court for the District of Colorado against Castle Rock, Colorado, its police department, and the three individual police officers with whom she had spoken under 42 U.S.C. § 1983,. claiming a federally protected property interest in enforcement of the restraining order and alleging "an official policy or custom of failing to respond properly to complaints of restraining order violations."  A motion to dismiss the case was granted, and Gonzales appealed to the Denver, Colorado Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals. A panel of that court rejected Gonzales's substantive due process claim but found a procedural due process claim; an en banc rehearing reached the same conclusion. The court also affirmed the finding that the three individual officers had qualified immunity and as such could not be sued.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court reversed the Tenth Circuit's decision, reinstating the District Court's order of dismissal.  The Court's majority opinion by Justice Antonin Scalia held that enforcement of the restraining order was not mandatory under Colorado law; were a mandate for enforcement to exist, it would not create an individual right to enforcement that could be considered a protected entitlement under the precedent of Board of Regents of State Colleges v. Roth; and even if there were a protected individual entitlement to enforcement of a restraining order, such entitlement would have no monetary value and hence would not count as property for the Due Process Clause.
Justice David Souter wrote a concurring opinion, using the reasoning that enforcement of a restraining order is a process, not the interest protected by the process, and that there is not due process protection for processes.
 Stevens' dissent 
Justice John Paul Stevens wrote a dissenting opinion, in which he wrote that with respect to whether or not an arrest was mandatory under Colorado law, the court should either have deferred to the 10th Circuit court's finding that it was or else certified the question to the Colorado Supreme Court rather than decide the issue itself.  He went on to write that the law created a statutory guarantee of enforcement, which is an individual benefit and constitutes a protected property interest under Roth, rejecting the court's use of O'Bannon v. Town Court Nursing Center to require a monetary value and the concurrence's distinction between enforcement of the restraining order (the violator's arrest) and the benefit of enforcement (safety from the violator).
 Subsequent developments 
 Inter-American Commission on Human Rights 
In 2011, the case came before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, a commission composed of representatives from the members of Organization of American States (the United States is a full member by its ratification of the charter document, which is a treaty itself) which found that "the state failed to act with due diligence to protect Jessica Lenahan and (her daughters) Leslie, Katheryn and Rebecca Gonzales from domestic violence, which violated the state’s obligation not to discriminate and to provide for equal protection before the law." The Commission also said that "the failure of the United States to adequately organize its state structure to protect [the Gonzales girls] from domestic violence was discriminatory and constituted a violation of their right to life."IACHR report No. 80/11 case 12.626 merits Jessica Lenahan (Gonzales) et al. United States
Response
The National Organization for Women has argued the Supreme Court's decision reduced the utility of restraining orders and "effectively gives law enforcement a green light to ignore restraining orders."Gonzales Ruling Endangers Women and Children 
See also
 DeShaney v. Winnebago County
 Warren v. District of Columbia
 Domestic violence
 Protective order
 Restraining order
 Refusing to assist a police officer
References
External links
 Jessica Lenahan (Gonzales) v. United States, a case brought by the petitioner before the Inter-American Commission for Human Rights
 Court Backs Town in Domestic Violence Case
 PBS Documentary on case October 2018 
Category:United States civil due process case law
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Castle Rock, Colorado
Category:Law enforcement in Colorado
Category:Domestic violence in the United States
"""

From "Caterpillar Inc. v. Lewis" ==> """
Caterpillar Inc. v. Lewis, 519 U.S. 61 (1996), held that federal jurisdiction predicated on diversity of citizenship can be sustained even if there did not exist complete diversity at the time of removal to federal court, so long as complete diversity exists at the time the district court enters judgment..
Facts
James David Lewis, a resident of Kentucky, sustained injuries while operating a bulldozer. He filed suit in a Kentucky state court, alleging state-law product liability claims of defective manufacture, negligent manufacture, failure to warn, and breach of warranty. Lewis named as defendants Caterpillar and Whayne Supply Company.  Caterpillar is a Delaware corporation with its principal place of business in Illinois.  Whayne Supply Company, the company that sold the bulldozer, was a Kentucky corporation with its principal place of business in Kentucky.  Later, the insurance company for Lewis's employer, Liberty Mutual Insurance Group, intervened as a plaintiff and made its own claims against Caterpillar and Whayne Supply. Liberty Mutual is a Massachusetts corporation with its principal place of business in Massachusetts.
Lewis settled his claim against Whayne Supply, which led Caterpillar to seek to remove the case to federal court. Lewis opposed this effort, arguing that complete diversity did not exist between all plaintiffs and all defendants because Liberty Mutual had not settled its claims against Whayne Supply. The district court ignored Lewis's argument, and allowed the removal because it believed that the fact that Lewis had settled his claim with Whayne Supply was sufficient to create the diversity necessary for federal jurisdiction.
The case proceeded through the discovery phase, during which Liberty Mutual settled with Whayne Supply. This settlement left Caterpillar as the only defendant in the case, such that all plaintiffs were citizens of different states than all defendants. After a six-day jury trial, the district court entered judgment for Caterpillar.  Lewis appealed, and the Sixth Circuit vacated the judgment.  It believed that diversity did not exist because, at the time of removal, a resident of Kentucky (Lewis) was a plaintiff and another resident of Kentucky (Whayne Supply) was still a defendant, although there was no claim between these two.  For this reason, the Sixth Circuit reasoned, the district court lacked jurisdiction to hear the case.  Caterpillar asked the Supreme Court to review the case, stressing that at the time judgment was entered, the jurisdictional defect that had existed at the beginning had been cured.  The Supreme Court agreed to hear the case.
Decision of the court
Article III allows federal courts to hear disputes between citizens of different states, but the Court has long interpreted the enabling statute whereby Congress exercised the right to confer this power as requiring that there be "complete diversity" of citizenship before federal courts may hear cases predicated on diversity jurisdiction. See 28 U.S.C. § 1332,. Exxon-Mobil v. Allapattah Servs.,. and Strawbridge v. Curtiss.. "Complete diversity" means that all plaintiffs must be citizens of different states than all defendants; in the case of corporate parties, their states of incorporation and places of business are both relevant.  Under federal statute, diversity must exist at the time of removal and thereafter.  In this case, both sides agreed that the district court did not correctly determine that the diversity requirement was satisfied at the time of removal and that the Sixth Circuit correctly identified this defect.  Both sides also agreed that complete diversity did exist at the time of judgment.  "Does the District Court's initial misjudgment still burden and run with the case, or is it overcome by the eventual dismissal of the nondiverse defendant?"
The Court ruled that because subject-matter jurisdiction existed at the time of judgment, the jurisdictional defect had been cured, and the Sixth Circuit erred in ruling otherwise.  But Lewis had preserved his objection to federal jurisdiction by filing a motion to remand the case to state court and then by raising the issue on appeal.  Shouldn't the plaintiff be rewarded for his diligent effort to preserve his choice to try the case in state court?  Lewis argued that to allow Caterpillar to benefit from the district court's mistake would encourage defendants to seek removal more often in the hopes that the district court will make a mistake they might exploit.  "These arguments are hardly meritless but they run up against an overriding consideration.  Once a diversity case has been tried in federal court, with rules of decision supplied by state law under the regime of Erie Railroad Co. v. Tompkins,. considerations of finality, efficiency, and economy become overwhelming."  If the Court were to require that a case that had proceeded through trial to judgment had to be dismissed afterward for lack of jurisdiction, there would be a tremendous waste of judicial resources.  In this case, complete diversity, and hence federal jurisdiction, existed at the time of judgment.  "To wipe out the adjudication postjudgment, and return to state court a case now satisfying all federal jurisdictional requirements, would impose an exorbitant cost on our dual court system, a cost incompatible with the fair and unprotracted administration of justice."  Furthermore, the Court did not foresee that premature removal requests would prove to be the temptation Lewis envisioned.  Instead, the Court trusted district courts to apply the removal rules properly, and observed that the fear of irritating district judges would deter defendants from filing frivolous removal requests.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 519
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
References
External links
  Brief of Caterpillar, Inc.
Lewis, Caterpillar Inc v
Category:Diversity jurisdiction case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1996 in United States case law
"""

From "CBOCS West, Inc. v. Humphries" ==> """
CBOCS West, Inc., v. Hedrick G. Humphries, 553 U.S. 442 (2008), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that the petitioner, Hedrick Humphries, was unfairly retaliated against by CBOCS West Inc. for complaining to managers about the dismissal of another black employee for race reasons. The court found that CBOCS West Inc. had violated the Civil Rights Act of 1871 and the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
 Background 
Hendrick Humpries was a mid-level manager for a Cracker Barrel restaurant, which is owned by CBOCS West Inc. Humphries was fired from his job at Cracker Barrel for speaking out over another Black coworker being fired for his race. He originally filed under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and 42 U.S.C. § 1981. However Title VII claims first must be made to the U.S. Equal Opportunity Employment Commission and that part of the case was dismissed by the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois. Humphries appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, which reversed the earlier decision and ordered a trial. The trial held that CBOCS did indeed violate Title VII and U.S.C. § 1981. CBOCS then a petition for a writ of certiorari with the Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court held that retaliation is covered under 42 U.S.C. § 1981 which provides that "[a]ll persons within the jurisdiction of the United States shall have the same right in every State and Territory to make and enforce contracts . . . as is enjoyed by white citizens".. The court then held that CBOCS did indeed violate Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and U.S.C. § 1981.  The court relied heavily on stare decisis in its decision, citing Sullivan v. Little Hunting Park, Inc. and Jackson v. Birmingham Board of Education.
 References 
External links
  Supreme Court docket for case 06-1431
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2008 in United States case law
"""

From "CBS, Inc. v. Federal Communications Commission" ==> """
CBS, Inc vs. FCC (453 US 367) is a 1981 United States Supreme Court decision finding that the Federal Communications Act of 1934 created a new, individual right to broadcast access for candidates for federal office. Under this decision broadcast media were found to have an obligation to allow any legally qualified federal candidate running for public office to purchase network time under section 312(a)(7) of the 1976 amendment to the Communications Act.
Background
Since the overuse of broadcast frequencies can cause signal interference broadcasting has been regulated since its infancy under the Radio Act of 1927. Regulation was grounded in fears that signal interference could limit the development of radio leading to media concentration. The Communications Act of 1934 tried to balance the regulatory goal of using public airwaves to further the public interest against freedom of the press. Under the Campaign Communications Reform Act of 1971 the 1934 law was amended to allow for the revocation of broadcast licenses in cases candidates for federal office were denied reasonable access to the airwaves.
Case history
After the three major broadcasting networks denied the Carter-Mondale Presidential Committee (CMPC) the purchase of air time for campaign purposes the FCC determined that the networks had failed to meet the requirements imposed by section 312(a)(7) of the Communications Act. The networks filed for judicial review of the FCC's determination. The FCC orders were upheld by the DC Court of Appeals.
Supreme Court decision
The Supreme Court found that the right of access as provided for in section 312(a)(7) of the Communications Act did not violate broadcasters' first amendment rights. They held that the statute created a special right of access to broadcast media for federal candidates.
References
External links
Category:Federal Communications Commission litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Broadcast law
Category:CBS Television Network
Category:Jimmy Carter
Category:Walter Mondale
Category:Election campaign law
"""

From "Cedar Point Nursery v. Hassid" ==> """
Cedar Point Nursery v. Hassid, 594 U.S. ___ (2021), was a United States Supreme Court case involving eminent domain and labor relations. In its decision, the Court held that a regulation made pursuant to the California Agricultural Labor Relations Act that required agricultural employers to allow labor organizers to regularly access their property for the purposes of union recruitment constituted a per se taking under the Fifth Amendment. Consequently, the regulation may not be enforced unless “just compensation” is provided to the employers.
 Background 
In 1975, California's legislature passed the California Agricultural Labor Relations Act to help unions gain access to agriculture workers in the state, which at that time tended to be migratory with the seasons and difficult to contact otherwise. The Act allowed union members, with prior notice to the state's Agricultural Labor Relations Board but without consent of the property owner, to come onto agricultural properties up to three times a day, one hour at a time, up to 120 days during a year, to perform unionization activities. 
The dispute arose out of a 2015 effort by agricultural union organizers to persuade workers at a Dorris, California strawberry nursery and at a Central Valley fruit packing operation to join a collective bargaining organization. The visit to the northern California farm was conducted under the 1975 Act. The nursery owner sued for a declaratory judgment and an injunction barring future visits by labor organizers, arguing that the regulation results in a physical taking of property and an unreasonable seizure under the U.S. Constitution.
Both the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California and the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit rejected the request for an injunction and the nursery's and fruit packer's arguments that state authorization of union organizer visits under the state regulation is a taking of property or an unreasonable seizure. The 2-1 opinion by the appeals court was written by Judge Richard Paez and joined by Judge William A. Fletcher. Judge Edward Leavy dissented. Judge Sandra Segal Ikuta wrote a dissent from the denial of rehearing en banc that was joined by 7 other judges.
The California Supreme Court had previously rejected constitutional attacks on the regulation in 1976.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case on November 13, 2020. Amicus curiae briefs were filed by multiple organizations, including Pelican Institute for Public Policy, Cato Institute, Americans for Prosperity Foundation, New England Legal Foundation, California Farm Bureau Federation, Western Growers Association, California Fresh Fruit Association, Mountain States Legal Foundation, Institute for Justice, Chamber of Commerce of the United States, and Buckeye Institute for the petitioner. A coalition of states led by Oklahoma also filed an amicus brief on the petitioners' side. Amici for the respondent included National Employment Law Project, United Food & Commercial Workers Western States Council, Teamsters Joint Council 7, Constitutional Accountability Center, AFL–CIO, Service Employees International Union, United Farm Workers of America, California Rural Legal Assistance, Inc., and International Lawyers Assisting Workers Network. A coalition of states led by Virginia also filed an amicus brief supporting the respondent. Several U.S. senators and a group of local governments also filed amicus briefs in support of the petitioner.
The United States filed an amicus brief in support of petitioners on January 7, 2021, 13 days before the end of the Trump administration. On February 12, 2021, acting solicitor general Elizabeth Prelogar notified the Supreme Court that the Biden administration had changed the government's position and urged affirmance of the lower court decision.
The basic issue before the justices was whether the union organizer visits to the petitioners' facilities is a physical taking of property and therefore automatically subject to an injunction or mandatory compensation under the 1982 case of Loretto v. Teleprompter Manhattan CATV Corp. or, instead, whether the petitioners' claim should be evaluated under the various factors outlined in the 1978 case of Penn Central Transportation Co. v. New York City. 
The Supreme Court heard oral arguments on March 22, 2021. Cedar Point Nursery and Fowler Packing Co. were represented by the Pacific Legal Foundation.
The Court issued its decision on June 23, 2021. In a 6–3 decision, the Court reversed the Ninth Circuit decision and remanded the case back for further review. The majority opinion was written by Chief Justice John Roberts and joined by Justices Clarence Thomas, Samuel Alito, Neil Gorsuch, Brett Kavanaugh, and Amy Coney Barrett. Kavanaugh also wrote a concurring opinion. Roberts wrote "The access regulation amounts to simple appropriation of private property" and that "access regulation grants labor organizations a right to invade the growers' property. It therefore constitutes a per se physical taking" without compensation. Roberts stated that this would not affect functions like government inspectors as those are beneficial to both employees and the public.
Justice Stephen Breyer wrote the dissenting opinion, joined by Justices Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan. Breyer wrote that the access granted to union organizers was only temporary and not permanent and thus should not be considered a taking, since the agricultural worked are not "forever denied" use of the property, and thus the law was "not functionally equivalent to the classic taking in which government directly appropriates private property or ousts the owner from his domain". Breyer also expressed concern that the majority opinion may be used broadly by landowner to block access from inspectors such as those "to verify proper preservation of wetlands or the habitat enjoyed by an endangered species, or for that matter, the safety of inspected meat".
 References 
 External links 
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:United States labor case law
"""

From "Cedar Rapids Community School Dist. v. Garret F." ==> """
Cedar Rapids Community School District v. Garret F., 526 U.S. 66 (1999), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that the related services provision in the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) required public school districts to fund "continuous, one-on-one nursing care for disabled children" despite arguments from the school district concerning the costs of the services."  The judges relied heavily on Irving Independent School Dist. v. Tatro.. Under the Court's reading of the IDEA's relevant provisions, medical treatments such as suctioning, ventilator checks, catheterization, and others which can be administered by non-physician personnel come within the parameters of the special education law's related services. Disability advocates considered the Court decision to be a "substantial victory for families of children with disabilities." Amendments were made in the Education Flexibility Partnership Act of 1999 to increase IDEA funding as a result of the case.
Background
The Court reasoned in a seven to two decision, that Tatro established the bright-line rule, by which "the services of a physician (other than for diagnostic and evaluation purposes) are subject to the medical services exclusion, but services that can be provided in the school setting by a nurse or qualified layperson are not.".
Justices Clarence Thomas and Anthony M. Kennedy dissented, noting that the ruling "blindsides unwary states."
References
External links
Category:United States education case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1999 in United States case law
Category:1999 in education
Category:United States disability case law
"""

From "Cedric Kushner Promotions, Ltd. v. King" ==> """
Cedric Kushner Promotions, Ltd. v. King, 533 U.S. 158 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case concerning the extent to which the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO) applied to certain types of corporation-individual organizations. In this case, the Court decided unanimously to apply it to respondent Don King.
Background
Cedric Kushner Promotions, Ltd., a corporate promoter of boxing matches, sued Don King, the president and sole shareholder of a rival corporation, alleging that King had conducted his corporation's affairs in violation of RICO. RICO makes it "unlawful for any person employed by or associated with any enterprise... to conduct or participate... in the conduct of such enterprise's affairs through a pattern of racketeering activity." The District Court dismissed the complaint. In affirming the decision, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals held that RICO applies only where a plaintiff shows the existence of two separate entities, a "person" and a distinct "enterprise," the affairs of which that "person" improperly conducts. The court concluded that King was part of the corporation, not a "person," distinct from the "enterprise," who allegedly improperly conducted the "enterprise's affairs."
Opinion of the Court
Justice Stephen Breyer wrote the decision of the Court, which unanimously reversed the appellate court. The Court held that "the need for two distinct entities is satisfied; hence, the RICO provision... applies when a corporate employee unlawfully conducts the affairs of the corporation of which he is the sole owner -- whether he conducts those affairs within the scope, or beyond the scope, of corporate authority." "The corporate owner/employee, a natural person, is distinct from the corporation itself, a legally different entity," Justice Breyer wrote. "A corporate employee who conducts the corporation's affairs through an unlawful RICO 'pattern... of activity,' uses that corporation as a 'vehicle' whether he is, or is not, its sole owner." Under this reading of the statute, the Court of appeals' decision was reached in error; the case was sent back to them for future disposition of the case.
See also
 United States v. Bestfoods
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act
Category:2001 in United States case law
"""

From "Celotex Corp. v. Catrett" ==> """
Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317 (1986), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court. Written by Associate Justice William Rehnquist, the decision of the Court held that a party moving for summary judgment need show only that the opposing party lacks evidence sufficient to support its case. A broader version of that doctrine was later formally added to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.  
Celotex was one of a "trilogy" of U.S. Supreme Court decisions on summary judgment issued in 1986, the other two being Anderson v. Liberty Lobby and Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp.. Within 20 years these three became the most-cited Supreme Court decisions in the U.S. federal court system.
Case history
In September 1980, Catrett (respondent-plaintiff) sued fifteen asbestos manufacturers and distributors—including Celotex (petitioner-defendant)—in United States District Court for the District of Columbia, on the basis of evidence alleging that her husband, Louis H. Catrett, died in 1979 of health effects of exposure to asbestos manufactured or distributed by the defendants. Catrett sought recovery for claims arising from negligence, breach of warranty, and strict liability on the part of the defendant corporations.
Two of the defendants filed motions for dismissal for lack of personal jurisdiction. The district court granted the motions and the remaining thirteen defendant corporations including Celotex filed motions for summary judgment on other grounds. Celotex filed its motion in September 1981 and argued that summary judgment was proper because Catrett had failed to produce evidence that any of Celotex's products were the proximate cause of damages within the jurisdictional limits of the court. Celotex noted that in interrogatories, Catrett had failed to identify any witnesses who could testify to her husband's exposure to Celotex's products. Catrett then sought to enter into evidence three documents: a transcript of a deposition of decedent, a letter from one of decedent's former employers whom petitioner planned to call as a trial witness, and a letter from an official of an insurance company to Catrett's attorney. Catrett alleged that each of the documents tended to establish that the decedent had been exposed to Celotex's asbestos products in Chicago during 1970-1971. Celotex objected to the evidence, arguing that the three documents were hearsay and therefore could not be considered in opposition to Celotex's motion for summary judgment. The district court sustained Celotex's objection to the evidence.
The federal district court found that Catrett lacked evidence to show that she could prevail at trial on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence. Under Rule 56 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, summary judgment, the case was dismissed. On appeal, the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit reversed the district court's decision. Finally, the Supreme Court reversed the appeals court's decision and remanded the case.
Issues
The issue of this case was whether petitioner-defendant Celotex Corp.'s attempted showing that the respondent-plaintiff had put forth inadequate evidence showing that her husband had been exposed to Celotex asbestos was a sufficient basis on which to grant summary judgment. Some have interpreted the decision as shifting the burden of proof for summary judgment from the moving party ("movant") to the respondent (facially challenging Adickes v. S.H. Kress Co. (1970), though the Court did not technically overrule Kress, and in fact attempted to reconcile the Celotex decision with the former case).Rowe, Thomas et al. Civil Procedure. Foundation Press. 2004. Celotex affirmed that the movant still must "show" the respondent does not have enough evidence to make out a prima facie case  (for example, by pointing out specific discovery responses where the respondent admits a lack of evidence). 
Respondent-plaintiff had argued that Celotex Corp.'s motion for summary judgment was insufficiently "supported," and that the moving party must provide affidavits. On this basis, the court of appeals reversed the decision to grant summary judgment for Celotex Corp., but the Supreme Court stated in its decision that affidavits were not necessary, as long as it demonstrated the lack of a genuine issue for trial.
Thus, according to the Celotex standard, the movant in a motion for summary judgment must show the absence of genuine factual issues in the nonmovant's case, although the movant is not required specifically to negate any aspects of his opponent's claims.Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323 (1986)
References
Footnotes
Works cited
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 477
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
External links
  Full text opinion from Findlaw.com
 Full text opinion on Lawlio.com
 Case Brief for Celotex Corp. v. Catrett
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States summary judgment case law
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:Asbestos disasters 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Central Bank of Denver, N.A. v. First Interstate Bank of Denver, N.A." ==> """
Central Bank of Denver v. First Interstate Bank of Denver, 511 U.S. 164 (1994), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court, which held private plaintiffs may not maintain aiding and abetting suit under Securities Exchange Act § 10(b).
The majority opinion in the case established that liability did not extend to "aiders or abettors" that participate in misstatements or omissions in connection with the sale of securities. The Supreme Court held that "private civil liability under Rule 10b-5 does not extend to those who do not engage in a manipulative or deceptive practice but who aid and abet such a violation of 10(b)." This distinguished between the primary liability of violators of Rule 10b-5 and non-primary defendants, who had not directly deceived investors. This was a more literal reading than hitherto of Section 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and the Securities and Exchange Commission's Rule 10b-5, which prohibit fraud or deceit in connection with the purchase or sale of securities.
The Supreme Court's ruling reversed a long history of court decisions and SEC enforcement actions where aiders and abettors, often banks, accountants, trustees, and attorneys, were found liable under Rule 10b-5. The case makes the distinction between primary violators, who directly misstate or omit material facts that are relied upon by investors, and aiders and abettors. According to the court:  "A plaintiff must show reliance on the defendant's misstatement or omission to recover under 10b-5. Basic Inc. v. Levinson, supra, at 243. Were we to allow the aiding and abetting action proposed in this case, the defendant could be liable without any showing that the plaintiff relied upon the aider and abettor's statement or actions. . . .".  When investors relied on such statements or actions, the court extends Rule 10b-5 liability to these secondary participants. The Court stated that "any person or entity, including a lawyer, accountant, or bank, who employs a manipulative device or makes a material misstatement (or omission) on which a purchaser or seller of securities relies may be liable as a primary violator under 10b-5. . .."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 511
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
Stoneridge Investment Partners v. Scientific-Atlanta (2008)
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States securities case law
Category:1994 in United States case law
Category:Implied statutory cause of action case law
"""

From "Central Green Co. v. United States" ==> """
Central Green Co. v. United States, 531 U.S. 425 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case decided in 2001. The case concerned the meaning of the words "flood or flood waters" within the Flood Control Act of 1928. The Court concluded that the law did not always apply to federal flood control facilities.
Background
Central Green Co. owned 1,000 acres of pistachio orchards in California's San Joaquin Valley. The Madera Canal flowed through their property. In 1996, they brought a suit against the United States alleging negligence in the operation and design of the canal. They alleged that it causes subsurface flooding which destroyed some of their crop.. In court, the United States argued that the Flood Control Act of 1928 grants them immunity, as it states "[n]o liability of any kind shall attach to or rest upon the United States for any damage from or by floods or flood waters at any place".531 U.S. 425 at 426. The District Court dismissed the complaint, agreeing with the United States that this incident would fall in the confines of "flood or flood waters". Central Green Co. appealed and the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed. It agreed with Central Green that the Madera Canal "serves no flood control purpose", but nevertheless held that immunity attached "solely because it is a branch of the Central Valley Project".531 U.S. 425 at 429. Central Green appealed again, this time to the United States Supreme Court, which granted review.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Stevens wrote the decision of the Court, which was unanimous. Stevens began by stating a prior case bound the Court to a different interpretation of the phrase "floods or flood waters" than the Ninth Circuit. In James v. United States (1986), the Court found the phrase "floods or flood waters" encompassed waters released for flood control purposes when reservoired waters are at flood stage.531 U.S. 425 at 431. He went on to write that it was a difficult 'fact-led' question about whether this singular incident would fall within the James decision. For that reason, the Court would allow the suit to proceed in the District Court, only concluding that it was in error for the Government to receive absolute immunity in this case. Therefore, the Ninth Circuit was reversed.
See also
 Flood Control Act of 1928
 Legislative intent
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2001 in the environment
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States environmental case law
"""

From "Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission" ==> """
Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission, 447 U.S. 557 (1980), was an important case decided by the United States Supreme Court that laid out a four-part test for determining when restrictions on commercial speech violated the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. Justice Powell wrote the opinion of the court. Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. had challenged a Public Service Commission regulation that prohibited promotional advertising by electric utilities. Justice Brennan, Justice Blackmun, and Justice Stevens wrote separate concurring opinions, and the latter two were both joined by Justice Brennan. Justice Rehnquist dissented.
The case presented the question whether a regulation of the New York Public Service Commission violates the First and Fourteenth Amendments because it completely bans promotional advertising by an electrical utility.
Background
In the midst of the 1973 oil crisis, the Public Service Commission of New York, a public utilities commission, required electric companies to ban any language from their current marketing that promoted the use of electricity, trying to encourage conservation to extend their fuel resources during the crisis. By 1976, the oil crisis had been averted, but the Public Service Commission took in public comments about keeping the electricity promotion ban in the interest of continuing promotion of conservation, in line with the national focus. One of the electric companies, Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. (now Central Hudson Energy Group), objected to the ban, stating it was a violation of their First Amendment rights. The commission, taking in all comments, decided to continue the ban, creating a policy statement for it in early 1977. The policy divided marketing material into promotional that was aimed to encourage sales for the electric company, and informational. The policy banned any type of language in promotional materials that was against the current national energy conservation goals, which included blocking language that would encourage users to shift to off-peak power, though such language could be included in informational material; the Commission recognized that this was undesirable but believed that it was necessary to achieve "some dampening of unnecessary growth" of electricity use.
Central Hudson filed suit against the commission, stating the new policy violated both their First and Fourteenth Amendment rights. The case, heard in trial court, at the New York Supreme Court, and at the New York Court of Appeals, found for the commission, agreeing that the commission's interest in conservation goals outweighed the commercial speech rights of Central Hudson.Matter of Consol. Edison Co. of New York, Inc. v. Pub. Serv. Commn., 47 N.Y.2d 94, 417 N.Y.S.2d 30, 390 N.E.2d 749 (1979). The case was petitioned to the Supreme Court.
Holding
The Court ruled in an 8–1 decision that the commission's policy violated the First and Fourteenth Amendments, and reversed the judgement of the lower courts.
To make their argument, the Court established a four-step analysis for commercial speech to the commission's arguments in support of its ban on promotional advertising:
 Is the expression protected by the First Amendment? For speech to come within that provision, it must concern lawful activity and not be misleading.
 Is the asserted governmental interest substantial?
 Does the regulation directly advance the governmental interest asserted?
 Is the regulation more extensive than is necessary to serve that interest?
 There must be a "reasonable fit" between the government's ends and the means for achieving those ends.
Related cases
In contrast with Central Hudson, Posadas de Puerto Rico Associates v. Tourism Company of Puerto Rico (1986) held that it was constitutional for Puerto Rico to restrict commercial advertisement of legal casino gambling to residents.  Posadas remains a controversial case that illustrated the elasticity of the Central Hudson standards. 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Rhode Island (1996), however, held that a law prohibiting publication of liquor prices in Rhode Island was unconstitutional.  Four of the justices deciding that case advocated to replace the Central Hudson test with a more rigorous, less permissive standard.
While Central Hudson is used to determine when governments can restrict commercial speech, Zauderer v. Office of Disciplinary Counsel of Supreme Court of Ohio, , established a constitutional standard where the government can mandate commercial speech, in the form of disclaimers, as long as the information is "purely factual and uncontroversial", serves a related government interest, and is meant to prevent consumer deception.
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States commercial speech case law
Category:United States energy case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1980 in United States case law
"""

From "Central Laborers' Pension Fund v. Heinz" ==> """
Central Laborers' Pension Fund v. Heinz, 541 U.S. 739 (2004), is a case that was argued in the Supreme Court of the United States on 19 April 2004. The question it presented was whether Section 204(g) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act contradicts Section 203(a)(3)(B).
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 541
List of United States Supreme Court cases
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:Laborers' International Union of North America
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States labor case law
"""

From "Central Railroad & Banking Co. of Georgia v. Pettus" ==> """
Central Railroad & Banking Co. of Ga. v. Pettus, 113 U.S. 116 (1885), was an appeal from a decree of the Circuit Court of the United States for the Middle district of Alabama in favor of the appellees, Pettus & Dawson and Watts & Sons, adjudging them entitled to the sum of, 161.21, and interest thereon at eight percent per annum from March 7, 1881, with lien, to secure its payment, upon the roadbed, depots, side tracks, turnouts, trestles, and bridges owned and used by the appellants, corporations of the State of Georgia, in operating the railroad formerly belonging to the Montgomery and West Point Railroad Company, an Alabama corporation, and which extends from Montgomery to West Point with a branch from Opelika to Columbus. This property was directed to be exposed to sale unless within a given time the said amount was paid. This suit is the outgrowth of certain litigation in the courts of Alabama relating to the before-mentioned and other railroad property in which the appellants are interested.. 
Summary
On September 1, 1870, the Western Railroad Company, an Alabama corporation, purchased and took possession of the railroad (main line and branch) and all other property of the Montgomery and West Point Railroad Company, one of the terms and conditions of such purchase being, as was claimed, that the former company assumed the payment of all outstanding debts and obligations of the latter and agreed to issue its capital stock, dollar for dollar, in exchange for stock of the Montgomery and West Point Railroad Company outstanding. 
It was a part of that arrangement that the last-named company should, as it subsequently did, surrender its charter to the state. When this purchase was made, there were, upon the franchises and property of the latter company, two mortgages to secure bonds proposed to be issued—one, June 1866, for 0,000, bonds for the whole of which were issued; the other, May 1, 1868, for 0,000, bonds for, 000 of which were issued. It had also outstanding bonds issued in 1866 and 1867, not secured by mortgage or otherwise. The Western Railroad Company had at the time of its purchase a mortgage of date September 15, 1868, upon its own property and franchises to secure 0,000 of bonds then, or at some subsequent period, guaranteed by the present appellants.
On September 15, 1870, that company executed to Morris and Lowery, trustees, a mortgage upon its property and franchises (including the property transferred to it by the Montgomery and West Point Railroad Company), to secure the payment of, 200,000 of bonds, thereafter to be issued, and of which a large amount was issued, and their payment was also guaranteed by the appellants.
Subsequently, on March 31, 1874, those trustees commenced a suit in the Chancery Court of Montgomery County, Alabama, against the Western Railroad Company, the present appellants, the surviving trustees in the mortgages executed by the Montgomery and West Point Railroad Company, and others. Its object was to procure a sale of the property of the former company, including that purchased from the latter company. A final decree was passed December 18, 1874, ordering a sale, subject, however, to a lien, in respect of the property formerly owned by the last-named company, in favor of the holders of its mortgage bonds, according to their respective priorities, and, in respect of the property of the Western Railroad Company, to a lien in favor of the holders of bonds secured by its mortgage of September 15, 1868. The sale was had, the present appellants becoming the purchasers.
On May 8, 1875, Branch, Sons & Co., H. P. Hoadely, and C. S. Plank—holding bonds of the (old) Montgomery and West Point Railroad Company not secured by mortgage—through Pettus & Dawson and Watts & Sons, their solicitors, exhibited a bill in equity in the same court against the present appellants, the Western Railroad Company, the Montgomery and West Point Railroad Company, and others. They sued for themselves as well as for all other creditors of the last-named company who should come in and make themselves complainants and contribute to the expenses of the suit. Such proceedings were had—the Georgia corporations appearing and making defense—that on May 1, 1877, a final decree was entered by which it was, among other things, adjudged that "the unsecured creditors of the Montgomery and West Point Railroad Company, to which class complainants belong, have a lien" upon the property transferred by it to the Western Railroad Company; that such lien was subordinate to those for the bonds issued under the several mortgages executed by the Montgomery and West Point Railroad Company that were outstanding and unpaid, but superior to that of the mortgage executed by the Western Railroad Company after its said purchase, so far as the property of the Montgomery and West Point Railroad Company was covered by that mortgage, and that the property of all kinds, belonging to the latter company, be sold to satisfy its debts according to priority.
The cause was referred to a register to ascertain and report the amounts due to the complainants and to such other unsecured creditors of the Montgomery and West Point Railroad Company as should prove their claims pursuant to the decree; also the amounts due to holders of bonds issued under its several mortgages. Upon appeal by the two Georgia corporations to the Supreme Court of Alabama, that decree was affirmed. The register thereafter proceeded with its execution. Numerous parties, including the complainants, appeared before him and had their claims registered, the creditors in each instance retaining in their own custody the evidence of their respective demands. The aggregate amount of such claims was very large.
On April 15, 1879, the register not having made his report upon these claims, Pettus & Dawson and Watts & Sons, by leave of the court, filed in the cause their joint petition, alleging in substance that as solicitors specially employed by the complainants, Branch, Sons & Co., Hoadley, and Plank, they prepared and filed the original bill, as well in behalf of themselves as of all other unsecured creditors of the Montgomery and West Point Railroad Company who should come in and contribute to the expenses of the suit; conducted the proceedings to a final decree; represented the same interests in the Supreme Court of Alabama; that their relations to the suit were well known to the Georgia corporations during the whole period of the litigation; that pending the reference before the register, after the rights of complainants and all creditors of the same class had been established by the final decree, those corporations made a secret arrangement with their immediate clients, whereby the claims of the latter were paid in full, principal and interest, and whereby also Branch, Sons & Co. and their co-complainants agreed to withhold from their solicitors the fact of such settlement until the Georgia corporations could buy or settle all other claims of the unsecured creditors of the Montgomery and West Point Railroad Company; that "afterwards said two Georgia companies, defendants to this suit, did buy up or settle the other claims, which had been filed in the cause, under said decree," and, "either jointly or separately, thereby acquired possession and control of said claims so filed;" that they also purchased and settled a large amount of claims, which might have been, but were not, filed with the register; that at the time of such purchase, said Georgia corporations had actual notice that petitioners, as solicitors in that suit, claimed reasonable compensation for such services as they rendered in behalf of the unsecured creditors of the Montgomery and West Point Railroad Company (other than complainants) who should come in and take the benefit of the final decree, and also the benefit of any lien upon said property that should be declared in favor of those creditors, and that in equity they
"were the assignees of a part of each claim as filed to the amount of the reasonable value of the services rendered in said cause by petitioners for the benefit of each holder and owner of such claims respectively."
The prayer of the petition was that an account be taken of the sums thus due to them as solicitors representing the unsecured creditors of the Montgomery and West Point Railroad Company (except the complainants and other named creditors with whom they had special contracts for fees) who received the benefit of their services; that they be declared to have a lien for the value of such services on all the property of that company which had come into the possession of the Georgia corporations, and that so much of it as may be necessary for that purpose be sold to meet the amounts due them.
The register reported, on April 22, 1879, that there were then no bonds or claims in the registry, except one claim, filed in court, as to which he did not report because no one had appeared and requested that it be audited.
Subsequently, April 24, 1879, the Georgia corporations presented their joint petition for the removal of the suit commenced against them by Pettus & Dawson and Watts & Sons (they being the only defendants to the petition filed by the latter) to the circuit court of the United States, in which court it was docketed, and, after answer by the defendants and proof taken, proceeded to final decree. When the cause was removed from the state court, nothing practically remained for determination between the parties to the record except the claim of appellees, citizens of Alabama, to a lien upon the property in question owned by the two Georgia corporations.
Findings
The court below did not err in declaring a lien upon the property in question to secure such compensation as appellees were entitled to receive, for according to the law of Alabama, by one of whose courts the original decree was rendered and by which law this question must be determined, an attorney at law or solicitor in chancery has a lien upon a judgment or decree obtained for a client to the extent the latter has agreed to pay him, or, if there has been no specific agreement for compensation, to the extent to which he is entitled to recover, viz., reasonable compensation for the services rendered. Ex Parte Lehman, 59 Ala. 632; Warfield v. Campbell, 38 Ala. 527. That lien could not be defeated by the corporations which owned the property purchasing the claims that were filed by creditors under the decree. The lien of the solicitor rests by the law of that state upon the basis that he is to be regarded as an assignee of the judgment or decree, to the extent of his fees, from the date of its rendition. This right of the solicitors is superior to any which the defendant corporations acquired subsequent to the decree by the purchase of the claims of unsecured creditors.
It remained only to consider whether the sum allowed appellees was too great. The decree gave them an amount equal to ten percent upon the aggregate principal and interest of the bonds and coupons filed in the cause, excluding those in respect of which there was, between appellees and complainants and others, special contracts for compensation. It is shown that appellees had with the complainants contracts for small retainers and five percent upon the sums realized by the suit. We perceive no reason for this discrimination against creditors who were not parties except by filing their claims after decree. One-half the sum allowed was, under all the circumstances, sufficient.
Decree reversal
The decree was reversed and the cause remanded with directions to modify the decree so as to award to appellees only the sum of, 580, with interest from March 7, 1881, with the benefit of the lien upon the property as established by the decree. Each party will pay his costs in this Court and one-half the cost of printing the record.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Railway litigation in 1885
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Central of Georgia Railway
"""

From "Central Railroad Co. of New Jersey v. Mills" ==> """
Central R. Co. of N. J. v. Mills, 113 U.S. 249 (1885), involved a case where the Court of Claims had dismissed a petition of the claimants, regarding the rejection of two items sued for: (1) labor done and materials furnished by the claimants in constructing the coffer dams, and in performing the work necessarily connected therewith and preliminary to the masonry work for the piers and abutments, (2) loss and damages resulting to the claimants in consequence of the reduction of the dimensions of the piers and abutments made subsequently to the making of the contract..
Background
The decision of the Court of Claims in regard to item (1) was that the claimants had not shown that the written contract did not express the intent of both parties as to the coffer dams, and that even if that court were satisfied that the claimants executed the contract in mistake of their rights, there was no evidence that the defendants shared the mistake. Its decision in regard to item (2) was that it would be disposed to regard the case, on the facts, as one for equitable interposition for the purpose of further inquiry and the ascertainment of the rights of the parties in equity if it had jurisdiction, but that the statute did not authorize it to entertain those considerations, because, in the proceedings before it, it could hear and determine only claims for labor done and materials furnished by the claimants under their contract with the defendants.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court held that the ruling of the Court of Claims in regard to item (1)—the coffer dams—was erroneous, and that by the actual contract between the parties the claimants were not to do any of the work covered by the claim made by them under item (1), and that the written contract must be reformed accordingly. As to item (2), this Court held, that the Court of Claims placed too limited a construction upon the special act of Congress, and that its power, under that act, extended to reforming the contract in respect to permitting the officers of the United States to materially vary the plans for the piers so as to essentially change the obligations of the parties.
The decree of the Court of Claims was reversed, and the cause was remanded, with directions to proceed in it according to law and in conformity with the opinion of this Court. This cause was remanded to the Court of Claims, with a direction to enter judgment accordingly.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Central Railroad of New Jersey
Category:Railway litigation in 1885
"""

From "Central Virginia Community College v. Katz" ==> """
Central Virginia Community College v. Katz, 546 U.S. 356 (2006), is a United States Supreme Court case holding that the Bankruptcy Clause of the Constitution abrogates state sovereign immunity. It is significant as one of only three cases allowing Congress to use an Article I power to authorize individuals to sue states, the others being PennEast Pipeline Co. v. New Jersey and Torres v. Texas Department of Public Safety.
 Background 
In England, sovereign immunity referred to the concept that the king could not be sued without his consent. Beginning with Hans v. Louisiana (1890), a line of controversial Supreme Court cases had applied the concept of sovereign immunity to suits brought by private individuals against state governments. See The Eleventh Amendment. By the time Central Virginia Community College v. Katz came up for review, a majority of the justices on the Supreme Court had suggested Congress could never authorize individuals to sue a state pursuant to its Article I powers, including the Bankruptcy power. Seminole Tribe v. Florida.
Wallace's Bookstores did business with Central Virginia Community College, an arm of the state. While it was insolvent, Wallace's Bookstores made certain preferential transfers of property to the state to satisfy debts. After Wallace's Bookstores filed for bankruptcy, Katz, the bankruptcy trustee, sued the state under  to recover those transfers. The state raised sovereign immunity as a defense.
 Oral arguments 
Oral argument was held on October 31, 2005, with William E. Thro arguing for the petitioners and Kim Martin Lewis for the respondents. During oral arguments, a light bulb exploded  above the bench, showering the front of the court with small shards of glass. Chief Justice John Roberts, who had been on the court for less than a month, quipped that "it's a trick they play on new chief justices all the time," prompting laughter, "we're even more in the dark now than before."
 Opinion of the Court 
In an opinion by Justice Stevens, the Court rejected the state's claim of sovereign immunity.The Supreme Court, 2005 Term — Leading Cases, 120 Harv. L. Rev. 125 (2006). The Court first noted that during the time the Articles of Confederation were in effect, states often did not recognize another state's discharge of a person's debt. This patchwork of bankruptcy laws made it difficult for people in debt to get out of debtors' prison. In light of this history, the Court interpreted Congress' power under the Bankruptcy Clause to make "uniform laws on the subject of bankruptcies" to include the power to abrogate state sovereign immunity.
The Court stated early bankruptcy legislation also supported its interpretation of the Bankruptcy Clause. It noted that in 1800, when concerns for state sovereign immunity ran fervent, Congress, with no recorded objection, gave federal courts power to release debtors from state prison through the writ of habeas corpus.
In coming to its conclusion, the Court declined to follow dicta in Seminole Tribe v. Florida suggesting a contrary result.
 Dissent 
Justice Thomas, writing for himself and three other justices, argued the historical record indicated states did not give up their sovereign immunity under the Bankruptcy Clause. The dissenters would have followed the view that nothing in Article I abrogates state sovereign immunity.
References	
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:United States bankruptcy case law
Category:Legal history of Virginia
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:2006 in Virginia
Category:Virginia Community College System
"""

From "Chae Chan Ping v. United States" ==> """
Chae Chan Ping v. United States, 130 U.S. 581 (1889), better known as the Chinese Exclusion Case, was a case decided by the US Supreme Court on May 13, 1889, that challenged the Scott Act of 1888, an addendum to the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882.. 
One of the grounds of the challenge was the Act ran afoul of the Burlingame Treaty of 1868. The Supreme Court rejected the challenge and upheld the authority of the US federal government to set immigration policy and to pass new legislation even if it overrode the terms of previous international treaties.
The decision was an important precedent for the Supreme Court's deference to the plenary power of the legislative branch in immigration law and the government's authority to overturn the terms of international treaties. Although the term consular nonreviewability would not be used until the 20th century, the case was cited as a key precedent in the defining cases that established that doctrine. As such, it played an important role in limiting the role of the judiciary in shaping immigration to the United States.
 Background 
In 1868, the United States and China agreed to into the Burlingame Treaty, which established formal friendly relations between the two countries and granted China most favored nation status. The treaty encouraged immigration from China and granted some privileges to citizens of either country residing in the other but withheld the privilege of naturalization for immigrants from China.
On November 17, 1880, the treaty was amended to suspend immigration from China. The amendment was called the Treaty Regulating Immigration from China, and historians refer to it as the Angell Treaty of 1880. Its prefix stated: "The United States, because of the constantly increasing immigration of Chinese labourers to the territory of the United States and the embarrassments consequent upon such immigration now desires to negotiate a modification of the existing Treaties which shall not be in direct contravention to their spirit."
In 1882, the Chinese Exclusion Act was passed, forbidding the immigration of skilled and unskilled laborers from China to the United States. The rights of prior immigrants were not significantly amended. An 1884 Amendment to the Chinese Exclusion Act required Chinese citizens to obtain re-entry permits if they wished to return after temporarily leaving the United States. On October 1, 1888, the US government passed the Scott Act. Authored by William Lawrence Scott of Pennsylvania, the act was signed into law by President Grover Cleveland on October 1, 1888. The act forbade re-entry of Chinese immigrants to the United States who would not otherwise be eligible to enter the United States if immigrating for the first time. This went against the privileges that the Burlingame Treaty gave Chinese immigrants to the United States.
 Facts 
Chae Chan Ping () was a Chinese citizen who had moved to San Francisco, California, in 1875. He worked in the United States from 1875 to June 2, 1887, and left to visit his homeland in China after he had obtained a certificate that would entitle him to return to the United States and had been issued in accordance with provisions of the Chinese Exclusion Act.
On October 1, 1888, while he was outside the United States, the Scott Act became law and forbade his re-entry.
Chae Chan Ping departed on his return journey to the United States on September 7, 1888, from Hong Kong, on the steamship Belgic. On October 8, 1888, the ship landed within the port of San Francisco. He requested entry to the United States and presented his certificate. He was denied entry based on the Scott Act and was detained on board by Captain Walker, the captain of the Belgic.
A writ of habeas corpus was filed on behalf of Ping, who requested for the captain to release him and to allow him to be presented in court. The captain complied, and Ping appeared before the court, which determined that he was being deprived of liberty, and it returned him to the control of the captain. Ping appealed the order, and the case reached the US Supreme Court.
The arguments for the case were heard by on March 28 and 29, 1889. Ping was represented by Thos. D. Riordan, Harvey S. Brown, George Hoadly, and Jas. C. Carter. Geo. A. Johnson, John F. Swift, and Stephen M. White represented the State of California, and Sol. Gen. Jenks represented the US federal government.
 Issues 
Several different arguments were made by the lawyers representing Ping, and the Supreme Court's opinion on them would serve an important precedent for future decisions:
 The appeal challenged the authority of the federal legislative and executive branches to overturn international treaties and implicitly claimed that any such overturning was subject to judicial oversight.
 The appeal argued that the right of visitation in a treaty was a form of property protected by the Fifth Amendment.
 The appeal referenced previous criticisms by legal scholars of the constitutionality of the Alien and Sedition Acts, passed in 1798.
 Decision 
In its decision published on May 13, 1889, the Supreme Court unanimously upheld the decision of the lower court in an opinion penned by Justice Stephen Johnson Field, who had risen to the position of Supreme Court justice after he had served on the California Supreme Court. Field had pushed back against legislation such as the Pigtail Ordinance, which was de facto discriminatory against the Chinese and so courted unpopularity in California.McCloskey, American Conservatism, pp. 109-111. However, his opinion in this case had rhetoric that was more in line with public sentiment regarding the Chinese at the time and was consistent with his dissent in Chew Heong v. United States, a related challenge to the Chinese Exclusion Act that was decided against the US government.
Field offered a number of reasons for the Supreme Court's decision:
 He clarified that the US government could pass new legislation overriding the terms of past treaties. In that case, the treaty would be treated as valid law only until the new legislation became effective. Although there were no direct precedents in the domain of immigration law, Field cited past precedents involving trade treaties in which the government had changed trade laws, negating the terms of previous treaties, and the courts had rejected appeals challenging the change in law. Examples cited included:
 Taylor v. Morton, 67 U.S. 481 (1862):. In this case, the Supreme Court upheld a change in the US tariff structure on hemp that overrode terms of a treaty with Russia.
 Whitney v. Robertson, 124 U.S. 190 (1888):. This case upheld the US government's authority to interpret ambiguous treaty terms as it saw fit.
 He noted that when the Burlingame Treaty was amended in 1880, the Chinese government had conceded US authority to regulate immigration from China.
 He noted past precedent in treaties and international diplomatic communication between the United States and other countries, including Switzerland, France, and Mexico and asserted that governments had the authority to regulate immigration in the national interest that existed even when the wisdom of particular decisions was in question.
 He noted that the judiciary was not the right place to appeal any violation of the terms of international treaties but that it was a diplomatic matter for the governments of the respective countries to sort out among themselves.
 Relation with other cases 
 Other Chinese Exclusion Cases 
The case is sometimes called the "Chinese Exclusion Case" on account of being the most important case directly pertaining to the Chinese Exclusion Act. Some commentators use the term "Chinese Exclusion Cases" for a collection of this and four other cases that were decided in the aftermath of the Chinese Exclusion Act:
 Chew Heong v. United States (1884): Heong had lived in the United States and left to visit China before the passage of the Chinese Exclusion Act. An Amendment to the Act in 1884 would require all Chinese in the United States to obtain a re-entry permit prior to departure. Heong, who returned to the United States without a permit, was denied re-entry and appealed the decision. The appeal was granted, and Heong was allowed to re-enter the country. This is the only case of the five that was decided against the US government.
 Chae Chan Ping v. United States (1889) (current page)
 Fong Yue Ting v. United States (1893): The Supreme Court upheld the decision of the United States government to deport Fong Yue Ting and two other Chinese residents who were deemed by the US government to hold no valid residency permits. The decision reaffirmed that the US government's power to deport foreigners is an absolute and unqualified right, just like its power to regulate entry.
 Lem Moon Sing v. United States (1895): The decision by the US Congress in the Geary Act of 1892 was upheld to exclude foreigners from entry without any habeas corpus relief.
 United States v. Ju Toy (1905): The Supreme Court allowed Congress to deny the writ of habeas corpus even to persons claiming to be US citizens.
Another related case that was decided somewhat differently by the Supreme Court is that of United States v. Wong Kim Ark, which held that a person born in the United States of Chinese citizens legally residing there automatically becomes a US citizen. The decision established an important precedent in the Supreme Courts interpretation of the Citizenship Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
 Value as precedent for later doctrines in immigration law 
In this case and the subsequent Chinese Exclusion Cases, the Supreme Court repeatedly sided with the US government against aliens by offering the rationale that immigration policy and enforcement are matters for the legislative and the executive branches. Some commentators argue that the case was an important precedent in establishing the plenary power doctrine, which immunizes from judicial review the substantive immigration decisions of Congress and the executive branch of the federal government. Others have disagreed about the significance of these cases for plenary power. The defining case for the plenary power doctrine, Knauff v. Shaughnessy (1950), did not explicitly cite the case.
Some commentators have also cited the decisions made in this case as having precedential value for the doctrine of consular nonreviewability, which would emerge in the latter half of the 20th century although it was not a direct precedent, and that term was not yet in use. Although the case did not touch on the authority of US consulates, it arguably addressed similar questions since the task of determining whether an individual would be allowed to enter the United States was then solely undertaken by the officer at the port of entry. By the mid-20th century, the main decision was made by consular officers evaluating visa applications.
The purported significance attached to the case, which was decided at a time of large anti-Chinese sentiment, may have played a role in influencing the court decisions, which have been criticized by commentators and compared to the precedents Dred Scott v. Sandford or Plessy v. Fergusson. Both decisions used reasoning that has been since rejected and are believed to have been influenced by the greater levels of racism existing at the time.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 130
 References 
 Sources 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:1889 in United States case law
Category:Deportation from the United States
Category:China–United States relations
Category:Anti-Chinese sentiment in the United States
Category:Chinese-American culture in San Francisco
"""

From "Chafin v. Chafin" ==> """
Chafin v. Chafin, 568 U.S. 165 (2013), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held the appeal of a district court's decision to return a child to his country of residence is not precluded by the child's departure from the United States.. It arose from the divorce proceedings of Mr. and Ms. Chafin; she wanted their daughter to live with her in Scotland, while he wanted her to remain in the United States with him.
Background
Sergeant First Class Jeffrey Lee Chafin, an American soldier, married Lynne Hales Chafin in Scotland in March 2006. They had a daughter together, who went to live with her mother in Scotland while her father was serving in Afghanistan. After Chafin's deployment was over, the family reunited in Alabama. There, in 2010, Jeffrey Chafin filed for divorce, as well as seeking temporary custody of his daughter after Ms. Chafin was arrested for domestic assault.
After her arrest, the United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement learned that Ms. Chafin had overstayed her visa, and she was deported. She then sued in American court, demanding that her daughter be returned to Scotland, so that a Scottish court could decide the custody issue under the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction.
Lower courts
Ms. Chafin's lawsuit was heard in the District Court for the Northern District of Alabama. There, following a bench trial, the district court granted her request, ordering that the daughter be returned to Scotland. Mr. Chafin announced his intention to appeal the decision, and asked that the court's order be stayed until the appeal was heard. However, the court declined to stay the ruling pending an appeal. The daughter left for Scotland the same day.
The district court separately ordered Mr. Chafin to pay Ms. Chafin $100,000 to cover legal fees and travel expenses.
Mr. Chafin appealed the district court's order to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit. But the appeals court declined to hear his challenge, refusing to consider the merits of the appeal. Instead, the appeals court declared that the case was moot, given that his daughter had already returned to Scotland. As a result, it denied his appeal, instead ordering the district court to vacate the return order and dismiss the entire case.
Mr. Chafin then appealed to the United States Supreme Court, which accepted the case. One of the factors in the Court's decision to accept the case was that the Eleventh Circuit's decision that the case was moot did not match the views of the Fourth Circuit, which in 2003 ruled that appeals courts did retain jurisdiction in such situations. This disagreement created a circuit split, which increases the likelihood that the Supreme Court will accept a case.
Supreme Court decision
Issue
The case hinged on the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction. Specifically, the Convention seeks "to establish procedures to ensure [the] prompt return [of children] to the State of their habitual residence." The United States is a signatory to the convention. The District Court, in keeping with the United States' obligation under the convention, decided that the Chafins' daughter should be returned to Scotland, which was her habitual residence. The issue on appeal, however, was whether the case was moot as a result of her departure from the United States, rather than the underlying decision on the merits of the case.
However, the Convention does not address the situation that arose in this case, where one party seeks to contest a finding of the child's "habitual residency".
Ruling
The Court concluded that despite leaving the country, U.S. courts still maintained jurisdiction over Ms. Chafin. Thus, in a decision authored by John Roberts, it held that the American judicial system could still order her to return the child. Accordingly, the Supreme Court unanimously held that "such return does not render this case moot." The Court vacated the Eleventh Circuit's decision and remanded the case back to the Eleventh Circuit to evaluate the merits of the appeal. It further noted that, even if Ms. Chafin were to ignore an adverse result, that alone did not preclude the case from being appealed, and that the Scottish courts that were simultaneously deciding the custody dispute could be influenced by the result of the case.
Roberts further argued that, if such appeals were moot, parents might be inclined to immediately leave the United States after securing custody of a child, to prevent the possible loss of an appeal. Such attempts to evade American jurisdiction could prompt judges to stay their rulings as a preventative measure to retain jurisdiction, in which case "a child would lose precious months when she could have been readjusting to life in her country of habitual residence, even though the appeal has little chance of success." The Court also concluded that the legal fees Mr. Chafin had been ordered to pay meant that the case was not mooted by the daughter's departure to Scotland, since Mr. Chafin had not yet paid the $100,000 to his ex-wife.
Subsequent developments
The Eleventh Circuit, hearing the case for a second time, then considered the underlying merits of the appeal. The court ruled against Mr. Chafin. In a per curiam decision, the appeals court affirmed the original judgment, deferring to the district court's decision that the child's "habitual residence" was Scotland. PDF
 See also 
 Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction
 International Child Abduction Remedies Act
 References 
Further reading
External links
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Divorce law in the United States
Category:Child custody
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Chaidez v. United States" ==> """
Chaidez v. United States, 568 U.S. 342 (2013), was a United States Supreme Court case that determined that the ruling in Padilla v. Commonwealth of Kentucky could not be applied retroactively, because the Padilla case applied a new rule to the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution., 133 S. Ct. 1103 (2013).  Padilla v. Kentucky held that the Sixth Amendment made it mandatory for criminal defense attorneys to advise non-citizen clients about the deportation risks of a guilty plea., 130 S. Ct. 1473, 1478 (2010). While Padilla v. Kentucky was a case related to immigration and deportation, Justice Scalia worried that there was "no logical stopping point" to how Padilla v. Commonwealth of Kentucky can be applied.Padilla, 130 S. Ct. at 1496. Justice Scalia wondered if the same logic could be extended and applied  to numerous other cases, and felt it would be impossible for attorneys to make sure any client was informed of all the potential legal consequences post trial.
Chaidez v. United States placed a limitation on the ruling in Padilla holding that it does not apply to any case before March 31, 2010, when the Padilla decision was issued. Some legal scholars speculate that this decision was made in part to prevent a "flood" of new cases from any time in the past."The Supreme Court Ruling in Chaidez v. United States: Averting a Flood of Padilla Litigation by Former Prisoners"Criminal Law Reporter. May 31, 2010 Non-citizens challenging a deportation case who do not have protection under Padilla v. Commonwealth of Kentucky are still able to appeal a trial if they have been otherwise misadvised regarding the actual trial. Chaidez v. United States did not clarify whether or not individuals who filed a claim before March 31, 2010, but whose final conviction took place after March 31, 2010 were able to receive protection from Padilla v. Kentucky."Seeking Post-Conviction Under Padilla v. Kentucky after Chaidez v. United States " National Immigration Project. February 28, 2013
Background
Roselva Chaidez, the petitioner, was born in Mexico but moved to the United States in the 1970s. She became a lawful permanent resident of the United States in 1977. She was originally brought to court over an insurance defraud case in the early 2000s.Chaidez, 133 S. Ct. at 1106. Chaidez pretended to be a passenger in a car collision to be able to receive part of the insurance claim. From this claim, she received about $1,200 until the insurance company later picked up on the defraud. This insurance defraud was of a larger insurance scheme led by other individuals, which earned approximately $26,000."In Supreme Court Case Chaidez v. United States, NIJC Argues that Immigrants’ Right to Effective Assistance of Counsel Existed Pre-Padilla" National Immigrant Justice Center. February 20, 2014. In the original case, she pleaded guilty and sentenced to four years of probation. She was unaware of the potential deportation consequences this would have.
Chaidez disclosed the information about her guilty plea when she was applying to become a United States citizen in 2007. While she only played a minor role in a larger fraud scheme, the total fraud of the larger scheme was above $10,000 and therefore considered an aggravated felony under United States law. Her application was being reviewed in 2009, when it was discovered that her crime meant that according to the law she should be deported from the United States. Chaidez challenged her original defraud case on the grounds that she was not warned about deportation at the same time Padilla v. Commonwealth was being decided in the courts.
Decisions
The Supreme Court decided that Padilla V. Commonwealth of Kentucky could not be held retroactively, due to the Supreme Court's decision in Teague v. Lane..  Teague v. Lane said that Supreme Court cases could not be applied retroactively if they apply a "new rule" or obligation on the part of the government. A court case is considered a new rule when "the result is not dictated by precedent existing at the time the defendant's conviction became final” but does not create a new rule  when it is merely extending a previously ruling.Teague, 489 U.S. at 306. The crucial question in Chaidez v. United States was whether it was established outside of the courts that criminal defense attorneys had a known obligation to disclose information. This court's final decision established that Padilla v. Commonwealth of Kentucky established a new rule, and therefore could not be applied retroactively.  Seven of the supreme court justices were in favor of the decision in Chaidez v. United States, while two voted against it.Chaidez, 133 S. Ct. at 1114.
Majority opinion
The majority opinion was given by Justice Elena Kagan. She stated that the decision in Padilla v. Commonwealth of Kentucky was a new rule relating to whether the Sixth Amendment could relate to deportation.  As Chaidez's insurance defraud trial was decided before this new rule, she was not offered any additional protections as a part of this ruling.Chaidez, 133 S. Ct. at 1107. In her argument, she mentioned previous court cases where it was ruled that attorney do not have to warn their clients about  risks that will result from a guilty plea such as deportation such as Santos-Sanchez v. United States and United States v. George.Chaidez, 133 S. Ct. at 1109.
When the Supreme Court justices decided Padilla v.  Commonwealth of Kentucky, Justice Kagan stated "we answered a question about the Sixth Amendment's reach that we had left open" in the past and therefore it must be viewed as a new rule.Chaidez, 133 S. Ct. at 1110.
Concurring opinion
Justice Clarence Thomas delivered the concurring opinion.  He said that the decision held in Padilla v. Commonwealth of Kentucky was different than previous interpretations of the Sixth Amendment.  Justice Thomas had dissented when voting in Padilla v. Kentucky, so he extended his argument further than whether or not Padilla v. Commonwealth of Kentucky imposed a new rule.Chaidez, 133 S. Ct. at 1114 (Thomas, J., concurring). Justice Thomas had a different interpretation of the Sixth Amendment than most of the other Supreme Court Justices who had voted for Padilla v. Commonwealth of Kentucky.  In his view, the Sixth Amendment “provides for adequate assistance of counsel in the charged offense and does not extend to advice regarding possible consequences, such as deportation”. In the testimony, he stated that he does not only believe Padilla v. Kentucky should not held retroactively, but believes it should be overturned as a whole.
Dissenting opinion
Justices Sonia Sotomayor and Ruth Bader Ginsburg voted against the majority opinion. Sotomayor delivered the dissenting opinion. She says that the new ruling did not create a new rule, but that it extended an existing rule and therefore should be applied retroactively.Chaidez, 133 S. Ct. at 1114 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting). The previous precedent, she argued came on behalf of Strickland v. Washington, which stated that attorneys should give a level of "reasonably effective assistance", which she believed Chaidez's attorney had failed to do..
Challenges by state supreme courts
The ruling in Chaidez v. United States has been challenged at the state level. The Supreme Court of Massachusetts ruled that Padilla v. Commonwealth of Kentucky can be applied retroactively in Commonwealth v. Clarke, 460 Mass. 30 (2011). The  Supreme Court of Massachusetts examined the case of Teague v. Lane and applied a different conclusion than the Supreme Court of the  United States. The Supreme Court argued that "because relief under Padilla may only be sought by defendants pursuant to Rule 30 motions, such claims for relief should be directed as a direct view, thus even a new rule can be applied retroactively.Immigration Impact Unit, (March 8, 2013) "Practice Advisory on the impact in Massachusetts of Chaidez v. United States"  Committee of Public Counsel Services. State law, in this instance Rule 30, allowed for Massachusetts to apply its own interpretation of previous Supreme Court precedents. Rule 30 is a Criminal Procedure Rule in Massachusetts law that dictates who the appeal process works in the legal system, and allows for protections for those appealing court decisions including allowing individuals to start a new trial under certain circumstances.Massachusetts Criminal Procedure Rule 30: Postconviction Relief , Massachusetts Tribal Court Law Libraries. June 30, 2012.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2013 in United States case law
"""

From "Chamber of Commerce v. Brown" ==> """
thumb|180px|Jerry Brown
Chamber of Commerce v. Brown, 554 U.S. 60 (2008), is a United States labor law case, concerning the scope of federal preemption against state law for labor rights.
Facts
The US Chamber of Commerce claimed that a California law, Assembly Bill 1889 (AB 1889), was preempted by the National Labor Relations Act of 1935. This prohibited employers that receive state funds “to assist, promote, or deter union organizing.”See Cal. Govt. Code Ann. §§16645–16649 (West Supp. 2008) Attorney General of California Jerry Brown defended the case.
Judgment
Seven judges on the Supreme Court held that California was preempted from passing a law prohibiting any recipient of state funds either from using money to promote or deter union organizing efforts.
Although the NLRA itself contains no express pre-emption provision, we have held that Congress implicitly mandated two types of pre-emption as necessary to implement federal labor policy. The first, known as Garmon pre-emption, see San Diego Building Trades Council v. Garmon, 359 U. S. 236 (1959), “is intended to preclude state interference with the National Labor Relations Board’s interpretation and active enforcement of the ‘integrated scheme of regulation’ established by the NLRA.” Golden State Transit Corp. v. Los Angeles, 475 U. S. 608, 613 (1986) (Golden State I). To this end, Garmon pre-emption forbids States to “regulate activity that the NLRA protects, prohibits, or arguably protects or prohibits.” Wisconsin Dept. of Industry v. Gould Inc., 475 U. S. 282, 286 (1986). The second, known as Machinists pre-emption, forbids both the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) and States to regulate conduct that Congress intended “be unregulated because left ‘to be controlled by the free play of economic forces.’” Machinists v. Wisconsin Employment Relations Comm’n, 427 U. S. 132, 140 (1976) (quoting NLRB v. Nash-Finch Co., 404 U. S. 138, 144 (1971)). Machinists pre-emption is based on the premise that “ ‘Congress struck a balance of protection, prohibition, and laissez-faire in respect to union organization, collective bargaining, and labor disputes.’ ” 427 U. S., at 140, n. 4 (quoting Cox, Labor Law Preemption Revisited, 85 Harv. L. Rev. 1337, 1352 (1972)).
Today we hold that §§16645.2 and 16645.7 are pre-empted under Machinists because they regulate within “a zone protected and reserved for market freedom.” Building & Constr. Trades Council v. Associated Builders & Contractors of Mass./R. I., Inc., 507 U. S. 218, 227 (1993) (Boston Harbor). We do not reach the question whether the provisions would also be pre-empted under Garmon.
[...]
It is beyond dispute that California enacted AB 1889 in its capacity as a regulator rather than a market participant. AB 1889 is neither “specifically tailored to one particular job” nor a “legitimate response to state procurement constraints or to local economic needs.” Gould, 475 U. S., at 291. As the statute’s preamble candidly acknowledges, the legislative purpose is not the efficient procurement of goods and services, but the furtherance of a labor policy. See 2000 Cal. Stats. ch. 872, §1. Although a State has a legitimate proprietary interest in ensuring that state funds are spent in accordance with the purposes for which they are appropriated, this is not the objective of AB 1889. In contrast to a neutral affirmative requirement that funds be spent solely for the purposes of the relevant grant or program, AB 1889 imposes a targeted negative restriction on employer speech about unionization. Furthermore, the statute does not even apply this constraint uniformly. Instead of forbidding the use of state funds for all employer advocacy regarding unionization, AB 1889 permits use of state funds for select employer advocacy activities that promote unions. Specifically, the statute exempts expenses incurred in connection with, inter alia, giving unions access to the workplace, and voluntarily recognizing unions without a secret ballot election. §§16647(b), (d).
The Court of Appeals held that although California did not act as a market participant in enacting AB 1889, the NLRA did not pre-empt the statute. It purported to distinguish Gould on the theory that AB 1889 does not make employer neutrality a condition for receiving funds, but instead restricts only the use of funds. According to the Court of Appeals, this distinction matters because when a State imposes a “use” restriction instead of a “receipt” restriction, “an employer has and retains the freedom to spend its own funds however it wishes.” 463 F. 3d, at 1088.
California’s reliance on a “use” restriction rather than a “receipt” restriction is, at least in this case, no more consequential than Wisconsin’s reliance on its spending power rather than its police power in Gould. As explained below, AB 1889 couples its “use” restriction with compliance costs and litigation risks that are calculated to make union-related advocacy prohibitively expensive for employers that receive state funds. By making it exceedingly difficult for employers to demonstrate that they have not used state funds and by imposing punitive sanctions for noncompliance, AB 1889 effectively reaches beyond “the use of funds over which California maintains a sovereign interest.” Brief for State Respondents 19....
Justices Stephen Breyer and Ruth Bader Ginsburg dissented because the law was simply neutral to the bargaining process.
The operative sections of the California statute provide that employers who wish to “assist, promote or deter union organizing,” cannot use state money when they do so. The majority finds these provisions pre-empted because in its view the sections regulate employer speech in a manner that weakens, or undercuts, a congressional policy, embodied in NLRA §8(c), “ ‘to encourage free debate on issues dividing labor and management.’ ” Ante, at 6–7 (citing Linn v. Plant Guard Workers, 383 U. S. 53, 62 (1966)).
Although I agree the congressional policy favors “free debate,” I do not believe the operative provisions of the California statute amount to impermissible regulation that interferes with that policy as Congress intended it. First, the only relevant Supreme Court case that found a State’s labor-related spending limitations to be pre-empted differs radically from the case before us. In that case, Wisconsin Dept. of Industry v. Gould Inc., 475 U. S. 282, the Court considered a Wisconsin statute that prohibited the State from doing business with firms that repeatedly violated the NLRA. The Court said that the statute’s “manifest purpose and inevitable effect” was “to enforce” the NLRA’s requirements, which “role Congress reserved exclusively for the [National Labor Relations Board].” Id., at 291. In a word, the Wisconsin statute sought “to compel conformity with the NLRA.” Building & Constr. Trades Council v. Associated Builders & Contractors of Mass./R. I., Inc., 507 U. S. 218, 228 (1993) (emphasis added).
California’s statute differs from the Wisconsin statute because it does not seek to compel labor-related activity. Nor does it seek to forbid labor-related activity. It permits all employers who receive state funds to “assist, promote, or deter union organizing.” It simply says to those employers, do not do so on our dime. I concede that a federal law that forces States to pay for labor-related speech from public funds would encourage more of that speech. But no one can claim that the NLRA is such a law. And without such a law, a State’s refusal to pay for labor-related speech does not impermissibly discourage that activity. To refuse to pay for an activity (as here) is not the same as to compel others to engage in that activity (as in Gould).
Second, California’s operative language does not weaken or undercut Congress’ policy of “encourag[ing] free debate on issues dividing labor and management.” Linn, supra, at 62. For one thing, employers remain free to spend their own money to “assist, promote, or deter” unionization. More importantly, I cannot conclude that California’s statute would weaken or undercut any such congressional policy because Congress itself has enacted three statutes that, using identical language, do precisely the same thing. Congress has forbidden recipients of Head Start funds from using the funds to “assist, promote, or deter union organizing.” 42 U. S. C. §9839(e). It has forbidden recipients of Workforce Investment Act of 1998 funds from using the funds to “assist, promote, or deter union organizing.” 29 U. S. C. §2931(b)(7). And it has forbidden recipients of National Community Service Act of 1990 funds from using the funds to “assist, promote, or deter union organizing.” 42 U. S. C. §12634(b)(1). Could Congress have thought that the NLRA would prevent the States from enacting the very same kinds of laws that Congress itself has enacted? Far more likely, Congress thought that directing government funds away from labor-related activity was consistent, not inconsistent, with, the policy of “encourag[ing] free debate” embedded in its labor statutes.
Finally, the law normally gives legislatures broad authority to decide how to spend the People’s money. A legislature, after all, generally has the right not to fund activities that it would prefer not to fund—even where the activities are otherwise protected....
 See also 
 United States labor law
 References 
External links
Category:United States labor case law
Category:2008 in California
Category:2008 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Chamber of Commerce v. Whiting" ==> """
Chamber of Commerce v. Whiting, 563 U.S. 582 (2011), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States that upheld an Arizona state law suspending or revoking business licenses of businesses that hire illegal aliens.
The case dealt with the question of whether the Legal Arizona Workers Act was invalid under federal statutes, in particular the Immigration Reform and Control Act. On May 26, 2011, the Supreme Court ruled, in a 5-3 decision, that the Legal Arizona Workers Act was not preempted by federal legislation.1. LawMemo, Chamber of Commerce of the United States v. Whiting, http://www.lawmemo.com/supreme/case/Chamber2/ Justices Roberts, Scalia, Kennedy, Alito and Thomas formed the majority opinion, and Justices Breyer, Ginsburg and Sotomayor formed the minority opinion, with Sotomayor filling her own dissenting opinion. Justice Kagan was recused in the case because she had a prior role in the case from her former role as Solicitor General of the United States.
Background
"The Legal Arizona Workers Act allows superior courts in Arizona to suspend or revoke business licenses of employers who knowingly or intentionally hire unauthorized aliens" and also "makes participation in E-Verify (a system that determines eligibility for employment based on information from I-9 forms and U.S. Department of Homeland Security and Social Security Administration records) mandatory for all employers." The main questions presented in this case were the following:
Does the Arizona law, which "imposes sanctions on employers who hire unauthorized aliens is invalid under a federal statute", the Immigration Reform and Control Act, which has a provision to "preempt any State or local law imposing civil or criminal sanctions... upon those who employ, or recruit or refer for a fee for employment, unauthorized alien?"
Is the Arizona statute requiring the use of the federal electronic employment verification system by all employers preempted by the federal law?
Is the Arizona statute implicitly preempted because it undermines the federal "comprehensive scheme" to regulate the employment of aliens?4. LawMemo, Chamber of Commerce of the United States v. Whiting, http://www.lawmemo.com/supreme/case/Chamber2/
The Supreme Court had to determine whether the federal law that states companies cannot be punished for hiring undocumented workers unknowingly, except in cases of licensing, would prevent a state, such as Arizona, from having a law imposing sanctions on employers that hired undocumented workers.
Majority opinion
The majority ruled that federal law "does not prevent Arizona from revoking the business licenses of state companies that knowingly hire undocumented workers, or from requiring employers in the state to use a federal electronic system to check that their workers are authorized to work in the United States."5.	Supreme Court of the United States blog, Chamber of Commerce of the United States v. Whiting, http://www.scotusblog.com/case-files/cases/chamber-of-commerce-of-the-united-states-v-candelaria/ During the oral arguments, Justice Scalia, in particular, defended the states' authority in questions of enforcement of immigration laws, given what "he perceived as a failure of the federal government" to enforce laws to keep undocumented workers out of the country.6. Lyle Denniston, On aliens, Arizona may win — for now, SCOTUSblog (December 8, 2010, 1:56 PM), http://www.scotusblog.com/2010/12/on-aliens-arizona-may-win-for-now/ In addition, since the federal statute indicated that the state government were allowed to take action "through licensing and similar laws," Chief Justice Roberts and Justices Alito indicated that Arizona's law was valid under the federal law because that part of the federal statute was very broad.
In the majority opinion, Chief Justice Roberts accepted the arguments that the state of Arizona had made about how the initiative was narrow and closely tracked and was modeled after the objectives of the 1986 federal law.8. Lyle Denniston, Opinion recap: Shared role on aliens’ jobs, SCOTUSblog (May. 26, 2011, 12:51 PM), http://www.scotusblog.com/2011/05/opinion-recap-shared-role-on-aliens-jobs/ He also indicated that the Arizona law was the "route least likely to cause tension with federal law" and that the saving clause provided "a licensing exemption to general preemption of state worker laws."
Even though Justice Kennedy joined the majority opinion, during the oral arguments he appeared to agree with some of the arguments that were made in the dissenting opinion. On an argument Justice Ginsburg made about "an anomaly" that Arizona is forbidden by federal law to impose a fine for hiring an undocumented worker, but Arizona has the ability to revoke a license to do business, as well as on the question of the Arizona E-Verify provisions, Justice Kennedy indicated that the E-Verify provisions "is almost a classic example of doing something inconsistent with the federal requirement," given that the federal law indicates that the federal E-Verify is a voluntary system, but the Arizona E-Verify provisions make the program mandatory to a greater extent.11.	Lyle Denniston, On aliens, Arizona may win — for now, SCOTUSblog (December 8, 2010, 1:56 PM), http://www.scotusblog.com/2010/12/on-aliens-arizona-may-win-for-now/
Dissenting opinions
Justice Breyer, dissenting, had indicated during oral arguments that he believed that "Congress… had taken 'an absolutely balanced' approach" in an attempt to ensure undocumented workers were not able to get jobs but make sure as well that businesses did not discriminate in hiring to avoid the risk of losing its license.
Also dissenting, Justice Sotomayor indicated that the majority's reading of the exception "cannot be reconciled" with the rest of what Congress enacted in 1986: "Congress could not plausibly have intended… for the saving clause to operate in the way the majority reads it to do."
Along that line, Justices Sotomayor and Breyer argued that the Arizona law went far beyond the "scope of federal control" and that it would "actively frustrate federal efforts and compromise the need for uniformity in dealing with unlawful aliens." Given the Arizona law created new enforcement mechanisms in handling of undocumented workers, it prevented uniform policies, which went against the spirit of the federal law: to have uniform legislation.
Reactions
Some argue that Supreme Court sent a "strong signal" that the states will be afforded the ability to control and experiment with laws involving undocumented workers who live and work with each given state, given the Court's majority indicated that the licensing exception to the federal law was a very broad exception. In her dissent, Justice Sotomayor indicated that the majority had "turned states loose to determine for themselves whether someone has employed an unauthorized alien so long as they do so in conjunction with licensing sanctions."16.	Lyle Denniston, Opinion recap: Shared role on aliens' jobs, SCOTUSblog (May. 26, 2011, 12:51 PM), http://www.scotusblog.com/2011/05/opinion-recap-shared-role-on-aliens-jobs/
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:United States Chamber of Commerce
Category:United States labor case law
Category:Legal history of Arizona
"""

From "Chambers v. Florida" ==> """
Chambers v. Florida, 309 U.S. 227 (1940), was a landmark United States Supreme Court case that dealt with the extent to which police pressure resulting in a criminal defendant's confession violates the Due Process Clause..
Case 
The case was argued on January 6, 1940, in front of the court by Thurgood Marshall (who was 31 years old at the time), representing four black men convicted for the murder of a white man in Florida. 
The defendant Chambers, along with three other co-defendants, were four of up to forty transient black men arrested for the murder of Robert Darcy, an elderly local man, in Pompano Beach, Florida. The community was outraged by the murder, and the Broward County Sheriff's department was apparently under pressure to close the case. Chambers and the other defendants were taken to Miami for questioning, ostensibly to protect them from the mob that had formed, and then to Fort Lauderdale.
The state did not contest that the defendants were held without access to legal counsel, and were not arraigned for a week. They were subjected to questioning on a random basis, often alone in a room with up to ten police officers and other members of the community. In the legal climate before Miranda, they were not informed of their right to remain silent. After a week of questioning, and despite previous denials, the four co-defendants eventually confessed to the crime and were convicted of capital murder and sentenced to death. Their convictions were affirmed by the Supreme Court of Florida.Chambers v. State, 136 Fla. 568, 187 So. 156 (1939).
Decision
On February 13, 1940, the court delivered its ruling. The opinion of the court was delivered by Justice Hugo Black of Alabama.
This was Marshall's first of many triumphs in front of the nation's highest tribunal; the Court ruled in favor of the defendants, and overturned their convictions. The court found that on the facts admitted by the police and sheriff's officers, the confessions had clearly been compelled and were therefore inadmissible. It marked one of the first times that the court had accepted the contention that treatment short of physical violence should result in the suppression of evidence.
Several of the features of this case, such as not allowing defendants to contact anyone, holding them without formal charges or arraignment, and denying them counsel during questioning were common tactics in law enforcement at the time and were eventually rejected by the court in Miranda v. Arizona (1966), a case in which Marshall argued on behalf of the United States government as Solicitor General of the United States.See appearances of counsel listing in Miranda decision.
Aftermath
In subsequent proceedings before the Florida courts, the indictment against the defendants was quashed on the ground that blacks had been arbitrarily and intentionally excluded from the grand jury. Williamson v. Baker, 148 Fla. 387, 388-389, 4 So. 2d 471, 471-472 (1941) (discussing the Chambers case).
See also
 Brown v. Mississippi (1936)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:1940 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:Pompano Beach, Florida
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Chambers v. Maroney" ==> """
Chambers v. Maroney, 399 U.S. 42 (1970), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court applied the Carroll doctrineSee . in a case with a significant factual difference—the search took place after the vehicle was moved to the stationhouse.  The search was thus delayed and did not take place on the highway (or street) as in Carroll.Compare , and , where the Court held that a search incident could not be conducted later at the stationhouse. After a gas station robbery, a vehicle fitting the description of the robbers' car was stopped. Inside were people wearing clothing matching the description of that worn by the robbers. They were arrested, and the car was taken to the police station where it was later searched.
Opinion of the Court
The Court first held that the search could not be sustained as a search incident to arrest (SITA). It quoted at length from Carroll that a search of a movable vehicle is treated differently under the Fourth Amendment because the mobility of the vehicle alone can easily defeat the warrant requirement.Chambers v. Maroney, 399 U.S. at 48-49, quoting Carroll, 267 U.S. at 153-54. If there is probable cause to believe the vehicle contains criminal evidence and there exist exigent circumstances where the vehicle can be removed from the jurisdiction, a warrantless search would be reasonable.Chambers, 399 U.S. at 50-51: But the circumstances that furnish probable cause to search a particular auto for particular articles are most often unforeseeable; moreover, the opportunity to search is fleeting since a car is readily movable. Where this is true, as in Carroll and the case before us now, if an effective search is to be made at any time, either the search must be made immediately without a warrant or the car itself must be seized and held without a warrant for whatever period is necessary to obtain a warrant for the search. See also id. at 51 n. 9. It made no constitutional difference here that the search followed the seizure because the probable cause which developed on the street still existed at the station house (where the vehicle was impounded).Chambers, 399 U.S. at 52.  Compare  (overruled on other grounds by  and diverged from by  (a delayed seizure of clothing from an arrestee was not an unreasonable search), and  (delay of mail in transit to allow probable cause to develop). For this purpose, it is significant to note that the automobile exception and the SITA doctrine are quite different.
Aftermath
Companion cases, including Perini v. Colosimo,399 U.S. 519 (1970). Crouse v. Wood,399 U.S. 520 (1970). Hocker v. Heffley,399 U.S. 521 (1970). and Kelley v. Arizona,399 U.S. 525 (1970). were vacated in per curiam opinions and respectively remanded to the Sixth Circuit, Tenth Circuit, Ninth Circuit, and Arizona Supreme Court, "for further consideration in light of Chambers v. Maroney". In each case the per curiam opinion noted that Justice Harlan would have remanded "for the reasons stated in his separate opinion in Chambers".
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 399
References
Further reading
Chambers is discussed in:
Note, 75 Dick L Rev 511 (1971);
Note, 46 Ind L J 257 (1971);
Comment, 47 Notre Dame Law 668 (1972);
Note, 7 Tulsa L J 197 (1971);
Note, 23 Vand L Rev 1370 (1970).
Heisse, Warrantless Automobile Searches and Telephonic Search Warrants: Should the Automobile Exception be Redrawn?, 7 Hast Const L Q 1031 (1980).
External links
Category:1970 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Chambers v. Mississippi" ==> """
Chambers v. Mississippi, 410 U.S. 284 (1973), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a state may not enforce its rules of evidence, such as rules excluding hearsay, in a fashion that disallows a criminal defendant from presenting reliable exculpatory evidence and thus denies the defendant a fair trial.
Background
Leon Chambers, of Woodville, Mississippi, was charged by the State of Mississippi with murdering Police Officer Aaron Liberty by shooting him. Chambers pleaded not guilty and insisted throughout the proceedings that he was not the shooter. Prior to the trial, another Woodville man, Gable McDonald, told at least three people that he, not Chambers, had shot Liberty and gave a sworn confession. However, at a preliminary hearing in the case, McDonald disavowed his confession.
At Chambers' jury trial, the defense called McDonald as a witness and put his confession into evidence. On cross-examination, the prosecution presented evidence that McDonald had withdrawn and disavowed the confession. The defense then asked for permission to examine McDonald as an adverse witness. The court denied permission, basing its ruling upon Mississippi's common-law "voucher" rule, which prohibits the party that called a witness to the stand from impeaching his own witness.
The defense then sought to present testimony from three other witnesses, all of whom would have testified that McDonald told them soon after the shooting that he and not Chambers had shot Officer Liberty. The trial judge found that this testimony would constitute inadmissible hearsay and excluded it.
The jury found Chambers guilty of murder and sentenced him to life imprisonment. The Supreme Court of Mississippi affirmed the conviction with one Justice dissenting.Chambers v. State, 252 So. 2d 217 (Miss. 1971) (per curiam).
Chambers then asked the United States Supreme Court to review his claim that the trial court's evidentiary rulings deprived him of a fair trial, in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. While Chambers' petition for certiorari was pending, Circuit Justice Lewis F. Powell, Jr. released Chambers on bail.Chambers v. Mississippi,  (Powell, J., Circuit Justice, in chambers) (in-chambers opinion denying State's application to revoke prior unpublished order admitting Chambers to bail). The Court granted certiorari..
Opinion of the Court
In an opinion written by Justice Powell for an eight-Justice majority, the Court agreed that Chambers had been unconstitutionally deprived of a fair trial. The Court began its analysis by observing that "[t]he right of an accused in a criminal trial to due process is, in essence, the right to a fair opportunity to defend against the State's accusations. The rights to confront and cross-examine witnesses and to call witnesses on one's own behalf have long been recognized as essential to due process.".
Here, because of the trial court's ruling on the defense's adverse-witness motion, "Chambers was denied an opportunity to subject McDonald's damning repudiation and alibi to cross-examination."Chambers, 410 U.S. at 295. The court observed that "[t]he right of cross examination ... is implicit in the constitutional right of confrontation, and helps assure the 'accuracy of the truth-determining process.'" Chambers had a constitutional right to conduct a full examination of McDonald without being bound by McDonald's testimony or barred from seeking to impeach it.
Chambers' rights were further violated by the trial judge's refusal to permit testimony from the three other witnesses, who would have testified that McDonald made statements shortly after the crime identifying himself as the shooter. Mississippi sought to defend this exclusion as a straightforward application of the hearsay rule, under which "[o]ut-of-court statements are traditionally excluded because they lack the conventional indicia of reliability," such as being made under oath and subject to cross-examination.Chambers, 410 U.S. at 298. However, the Court observed, the hearsay rule has developed many exceptions that allow the admission of hearsay statements "made under circumstances that tend to assure reliability." Here, "[t]he hearsay statements involved in this case were originally made and subsequently offered at trial under circumstances that provided considerable assurance of their reliability."Chambers, 410 U.S. at 300.
The Court "conclude[d] that the exclusion of this critical evidence, coupled with the State's refusal to permit Chambers to cross-examine McDonald, denied him a trial in accord with traditional and fundamental standards of due process."Chambers, 410 U.S. at 302. Accordingly, Chambers' conviction was reversed.
Concurring opinion
Justice Byron R. White authored a concurring opinion discussing whether Chambers had sufficiently raised his constitutional objections to the trial court's rulings during the trial, so as to preserve them for appellate review. White expressed some skepticism on this point. However, White acknowledged that Chambers had raised his objections at trial, albeit on non-constitutional grounds, and that he had raised his due-process claim in the Mississippi Supreme Court. Moreover, the State did not argue non-preservation in opposing Chambers' petition. Therefore, White acquiesced dubitante in the majority's conclusion that the Court had jurisdiction to reach the merits. On the merits, he agreed with the majority opinion.
Dissenting opinion
Justice William H. Rehnquist dissented. In his view, the Supreme Court lacked jurisdiction over Chambers' constitutional claims because he had not raised them at trial. Rehnquist also expressed his skepticism about what he characterized as "the Court's further constitutionalization of the intricacies of the common law of evidence."
Social background to the case
The shooting of Officer Liberty took place during a period of racial unrest in Woodville, during which African-American residents were boycotting white-owned establishments to press demands for desegregation and increased services to black neighborhoods. During the boycotts, there had been a series of confrontations between members of the Deacons for Defense and the Woodville police force. The boycotters' demands had included the hiring of African-American police officers, and these demands had been granted to the extent of hiring a small number of black officers, whose superiors restricted them to acting against other blacks; Officer Liberty was himself African-American, and defendant Chambers had been the first black police officer in Woodville before being fired when he would not accept the limitations on his duties. None of this racial background and social history is mentioned anywhere in the Supreme Court opinions in the case.
Notes
References
Stephan Landsman, "Chambers v. Mississippi: A New Justice Meets an Old Style Southern Verdict", in Richard Lempert, ed., Evidence Stories (Foundation Press 2006).
Emily A. Prifogle, "Law and Local Activism: Uncovering the Civil Rights History of Chambers v. Mississippi", 101 California L. Rev. 445 (2013), available via SSRN at https://ssrn.com/abstract=2247503.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fourteenth Amendment case law
Category:1973 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
"""

From "Chambers v. United States" ==> """
Chambers v. United States, 555 U.S. 122 (2009),. was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that failing to report for incarceration does not qualify as a "violent felony" for the purposes of the Armed Career Criminal Act..
 Background 
The Armed Career Criminal Act, enacted in 1984 and since amended, provides for enhanced sentences for felons who commit crimes with firearms. A felon convicted of a "violent felony" or a "serious drug offense" at least three times faces a minimum sentence of fifteen years in prison.
The petitioner, Deondery Chambers, pleaded guilty in District Court to the charge of being a felon in unlawful possession of a firearm. The prosecution sought to invoke the ACCA's mandatory 15-year prison term on the grounds that Chambers had three prior convictions which qualified: robbery and aggravated battery (1998), a drug conviction (1999), a failure to report for incarceration charge stemming from the robbery and battery conviction. The court had required Chambers to report to a local prison for 11 weekends of incarceration; Chambers missed four of the weekends and was convicted under Illinois law for "fail[ing] to report to a penal institution."Quoted in Chambers v. United States, 555 U.S. at 690.
Chambers challenged the failure to report, arguing that it was not a "violent felony." The District Court disagreed, treating the failure to report as similar to an escape and therefore a violent felony under the ACCA. The United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit upheld the District Court. Other Courts of Appeal had come to differing conclusions: the First Circuit agreed that failure to report qualified as a violent felony in United States v. Winn (2001), while the Ninth Circuit held that it did not in United States v. Piccolo (2006). The Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve the split.
 Opinion of the Court 
Robert Hochman argued the case for the petitioner.  Assistant to the Solicitor General Matthew D. Roberts argued for the respondent.https://www.oyez.org/cases/2000-2009/2008/2008_06_11206   Roberts argued that "failure-to-report escape is similar in kind to burglary because it's purposeful, violent, and aggressive in the same way as burglary."  Roberts argued that failure to report is an invitation for a violent confrontation between the police and the felon.https://www.oyez.org/cases/2000-2009/2008/2008_06_11206/argument 
The Supreme Court held unanimously that a failure to report did not qualify as a violent felony for the purposes of the Armed Career Criminal Act. Justice Breyer wrote the majority opinion which six other justices joined, while Justice Alito wrote a concurrence which Justice Thomas joined.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:Armed Career Criminal Act case law
"""

From "Champion v. Ames" ==> """
Champion v. Ames, 188 U.S. 321 (1903), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court which held that trafficking lottery tickets constituted interstate commerce that could be regulated by the U.S. Congress under the Commerce Clause.
Background
Congress enacted the Federal Lottery Act in 1895, which prohibited the sending of lottery tickets across state lines. The appellant, Charles Champion, was indicted for shipping Paraguayan lottery tickets from Texas to California. The indictment was challenged on the grounds that the power to regulate commerce does not include the power to prohibit commerce of any item.
Decision of the Supreme Court
Most important in this case was that the Supreme Court recognized that Congress' power to regulate interstate traffic is plenary.  That is, the power is complete in and of itself.  This wide discretion allowed Congress to regulate traffic as it sees fit, within Constitutional limits, even to the extent of prohibiting goods, as here.  This plenary power is distinct from the aggregate-impact theories later espoused in the Shreveport line of cases.
The 5–4 decision upholding the statute was authored by Justice John Marshall Harlan. The dissent by Chief Justice Fuller was joined by Justice Brewer, Justice Shiras, and Justice Peckham. They argued that the Tenth Amendment limited Congress' ability to regulate interstate commerce.Ellis Katz. 2006. "Champion v. Ames", Encyclopedia of American Federalism.
 See also 
 Louisiana State Lottery Company
 Gibbons v. Ogden (1824), the first recognition by the U.S. Supreme Court that Congress' power to regulate interstate commerce is plenary (see Chief Justice Marshall's majority opinion)
 Hammer v. Dagenhart (1918), in which the Court struck down a similar law on the grounds that the federal government could not use its power to regulate interstate commerce to accomplish certain ends
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:1903 in United States case law
Category:Lotteries in the United States
"""

From "Chandler v. Florida" ==> """
Chandler v. Florida, 449 U.S. 560 (1981), was a legal case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a state could allow the broadcast and still photography coverage of criminal trials. While refraining from formally overruling Estes v. Texas, which in 1965 held that media coverage was "infringing the fundamental right to a fair trial guaranteed by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment," it effectively did so.
Background
After the media was allowed to televise a portion of their case, two Miami Beach police officers filed suit objecting to the coverage case. The two police officers were charged with burglarizing a Miami Beach restaurant.
Question Before the Court
Does media coverage of a criminal's trial violate the accused right to a fair trial protected by the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments?
Decision of the Court
In an 8-0 decision in favor of the State of Florida, Chief Justice Burger wrote the opinion for the Supreme Court. Citing Estes v. Texas (1964), the Court denied Chandler's claim that a media presence in the courtroom is offensive to due process. So long as the "evolving technology" does not infringe on "fundamental guarantees" of the accused, the media does not violate a person's constitutional right to due process. Further, the Court noted that the previous statute upheld by the Florida State Supreme Court implemented strict guidelines "intended to protect the right of a defendant to a fair trial" in regards to the medias coverage of a criminal trial..
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 449
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:1981 in United States case law
"""

From "Chandler v. Miller" ==> """
Chandler v. Miller, 520 U.S. 305 (1997), was a case before the United States Supreme Court concerning the Constitutionality under the Fourth Amendment of a state statute requiring drug tests of all candidates for certain state offices. The case is notable as being the only one in recent years where the Supreme Court has upheld a challenge to a ballot access restriction from members of a third party, in this case the Libertarian Party of Georgia.
Background
Statute
In 1990, Georgia enacted a statuteGa. Code Ann. § 21-2-140 which required candidates for designated state office to certify that they had taken a drug test and obtained negative results.  The candidate could provide test specimen at a laboratory approved by the state or at the office of the candidate's personal physician. Once a urine sample was obtained, a state-approved laboratory determined whether any of the specified illegal drugs were present and prepared a certificate reporting the test results to the candidate.
Facts
In 1994, three Libertarian Party candidates for such state offices statute filed an action in District Court against the governor of Georgia and two other state officials involved in the administration of the statute, requesting declaratory and injunctive relief barring enforcement of the statute.  They alleged that the drug tests required by the statute violated their rights under provisions including the Federal Constitution's Fourth Amendment.
District court
The District Court denied the candidates' motion for a preliminary injunction.  After the candidates submitted to the drug tests, obtained the required certificates, and appeared on the ballot in the 1994 election, the District Court entered final judgment for the state officials.
Eleventh Circuit
On appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit, in affirming, expressed the view that with respect to the Fourth Amendment, the state's interests outweighed the privacy intrusion caused by the statute's required certification (73 F.3d 1543).
Opinion of the Court
On certiorari, Ginsburg, joined by Stevens, O'Connor, Scalia, Kennedy, Souter, Thomas, and Breyer reversed. The Court noted that while the Fourth Amendment generally prohibits officials from conducting search and seizures without individualized suspicion, there does exist a "closely guarded" category of permissible suspicionless searches and seizures. However, the Court held that the statute's drug-testing requirement did not fit within this category. The Court emphasized that the proffered special need for drug testing must be substantial—important enough to override the individual's acknowledged privacy interest, sufficiently vital to suppress the Fourth Amendment's normal requirement of individualized suspicion.
Additionally, the Court found that Georgia failed to show, in justification of Ga. Code Ann. § 21-2-140, a special need of that kind. Notably lacking in respondent officials' presentation was any indication of a concrete danger that demanded departure from the Fourth Amendment's main rule. The statute was not needed and could not work to ferret out lawbreakers, and officials barely attempted to support the statute on that ground. However well meant, the candidate drug test Georgia devised diminished personal privacy for a symbol's sake; state action that is prohibited by the Fourth Amendment. In addition to Georgia's failure to provide evidence of a drug problem among its state officials, the Court concluded that even if such a problem did exist, the affected officials would likely not perform the kind of high-risk, safety-sensitive tasks which might justify the statute's proposed incursion on their individual privacy rights.  Where, as in this case, public safety was not genuinely jeopardized, the Fourth Amendment precluded a suspicionless search, no matter how conveniently arranged.
Dissent
Chief Justice Rehnquist expressed the view that the statute's urinalysis test was a reasonable search under the Fourth Amendment.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 520
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1997 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Drug testing
Category:Libertarian Party (United States)
Category:United States elections case law
Category:Legal history of Georgia (U.S. state)
"""

From "Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire" ==> """
Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 315 U.S. 568 (1942), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court in which the Court articulated the fighting words doctrine, a limitation of the First Amendment's guarantee of freedom of speech.. 
 Background 
On April 6, 1940, Walter Chaplinsky, a Jehovah's Witness, was using the public sidewalk as a pulpit in downtown Rochester, passing out pamphlets and calling organized religion a "racket". After a large crowd had begun blocking the roads and generally causing a scene, a police officer removed Chaplinsky to take him to police headquarters. Upon seeing the town marshal (who had returned to the scene after warning Chaplinsky earlier to keep it down and avoid causing a commotion), Chaplinsky attacked the marshal verbally. He was then arrested. The complaint against Chaplinsky stated that he shouted: "You are a God-damned racketeer" and "a damned Fascist". Chaplinsky admitted that he said the words charged in the complaint, with the exception of "God".
For this, he was charged and convicted under a New Hampshire statute forbidding intentionally offensive speech directed at others in a public place. Under New Hampshire's Offensive Conduct law (chap. 378, para. 2 of the NH. Public Laws) it is illegal for anyone to address "any offensive, derisive or annoying word to anyone who is lawfully in any street or public place ... or to call him by an offensive or derisive name."
Chaplinsky appealed the fine he was assessed, claiming that the law was "vague" and that it infringed upon his First Amendment and Fourteenth Amendment rights to free speech.
 Alternate views 
Some modern legal historians have disputed the generally accepted version of events that led to Chaplinsky's arrest.
Columbia Law School professor Vincent Blasi's article on the topic describes the events thus: while preaching, Chaplinsky was surrounded by men who mocked Jehovah's Witnesses' objections to saluting the flag. One man attempted to hit Chaplinsky in full view of the town marshal, who warned Chaplinsky that he was in danger but did not arrest his assailant. After the marshal left, another man produced a flagpole and attempted to impale Chaplinsky; while Chaplinsky was pinned against a car by the pole, other members of the crowd struck him. A police officer arrived and, rather than dispersing the crowd, took Chaplinsky into custody.
En route to the station, the officer, as well as members of the crowd, insulted Chaplinsky and his religion.  Chaplinsky responded by calling the town marshal, who had returned to assist the officer, a "damn fascist and a racketeer" and was arrested for the use of offensive language in public.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court, in a unanimous decision, upheld the arrest. Writing the decision for the Court, Justice Frank Murphy advanced a "two-tier theory" of the First Amendment. Certain "well-defined and narrowly limited" categories of speech fall outside the bounds of constitutional protection. Thus, "the lewd and obscene, the profane, the slanderous", and (in this case) insulting or "fighting" words neither contributed to the expression of ideas nor possessed any "social value" in the search for truth.See Sullivan, Harold J. (2005). Civil Rights and Liberties: Provocative Questions and Evolving Answers. 2nd ed. New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 2005 at 24.
Murphy wrote:
There are certain well-defined and narrowly limited classes of speech,  the prevention and punishment of which have never been thought to raise any constitutional problem. These include the lewd and obscene, the profane, the libelous, and the insulting or "fighting" words those which by their very utterance inflict injury or tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace. It has been well observed that such utterances are no essential part of any exposition of ideas, and are of such slight social value as a step to truth that any benefit that may be derived from them is clearly outweighed by the social interest in order and morality.
 Subsequent case law 
Subsequent cases, in the Supreme Court, lower federal courts, and state courts have reached diverse conclusions on what constitute fighting words that are outside the protection of the First Amendment. The cases have also varied on what contexts – such as the reaction of hearers (public officials, police officers, ordinary citizens) – make a difference for the limits on protected speech. A particularly provocative example occurred in Cohen v. California (1971) in which an individual was criminally charged for wearing, in a courthouse, a jacket on which was written "Fuck the Draft". The Supreme Court held that the Chaplinsky doctrine did not control this case, and overturned the conviction. The Court's opinion, by Justice John Marshall Harlan II, declared, "For while the particular four-letter word being litigated here is perhaps more distasteful than most others of its genre, it is nevertheless often true that one man's vulgarity is another's lyric."
A legal scholar, writing in 2003 over 60 years after the Chaplinsky decision, has noted that lower courts "have reached maddeningly inconsistent results" on what is and is not protected by the First Amendment in the area of fighting words.
 See also 
Clear and present danger
Imminent lawless action
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 315
Shouting fire in a crowded theater
Threatening the president of the United States
Abrams v. United States, 
Brandenburg v. Ohio, 
Dennis v. United States, 
Feiner v. New York, 
Hess v. Indiana, 
Korematsu v. United States, 
Kunz v. New York, 
Masses Publishing Co. v. Patten, (1917)
Sacher v. United States,  
Schenck v. United States, 
Terminiello v. City of Chicago, 
Whitney v. California, 
 References 
 Further reading 
 External links 
Category:1942 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:Legal history of New Hampshire
Category:Rochester, New Hampshire
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
"""

From "Chapman v. California" ==> """
Chapman v. California, 386 U.S. 18 (1967),Chapman v. California, 386 U.S. 18 (1967) was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States that a federal "harmless error" rule must apply, instead of equivalent state rules, for reviewing trials where federally-protected rights had been violated.
 Background 
 Legal background 
"Harmless error" rules were a well-established aspect of American law, having originated in English common law. The basic idea was that a legal error during trial (such as a violation of the rules of evidence, or a violation of a constitutional trial right) could be grounds for overturning the result of the trial—unless the error was "harmless." There were differing opinions, though, on what "harmless" should mean; in the words of legal scholar William Howard, ". . .the crux of the harmless error controversy has been whether rules of evidence are a mere means to the ascertainment of truth or are themselves an end, to be followed sometimes at the expense of the truth . . . courts in the majority of American jurisdictions ultimately chose the latter." All 50 states had harmless-error laws by the time Chapman v. California was decided.
 Factual background 
On October 17, 1962, Ruth Elizabeth Chapman and Thomas Leroy Teale arrived together at a motel in Fresno, California, renting a room with a bad check.People v. Teale, 63 Cal. 2d 178 (Cal. 1965) Around 10 pm, they were seen at a tavern in nearby Lodi, and they stayed there drinking beer for about three hours. They were then seen around 2 am at another bar, the Spot Club, where the only people inside were Chapman, Teale, and the bartender, a man named Billy Dean Adcock. Shortly after, witnesses saw three people outside of the bar: Adcock, who was locking the door, and two people who matched the descriptions of Chapman and Teale.
The next morning, the Spot Club was found in disarray, with $260 missing, papers from the register scattered around, and Adcock's routine tasks left undone. Adcock's body was found later that morning in a ditch north of Lodi with three bullet wounds in his head and about $50 missing from his wallet. Chapman was arrested in St. Louis on October 26, and Teale was arrested in New Orleans on November 2.
 Procedural history in lower courts 
 Trial 
Chapman and Teale were charged with murder, robbery, and kidnapping, and a joint trial was held April 16, 1963. The prosecution's evidence included traces of Adcock's blood found on both defendants' clothes, paint inside their car that likely came from Adcock's shoes, and witnesses who said they'd seen them that night (e.g. at the Spot Club). There was also a prisoner who testified about conversations he'd had with Teale after Teale was arrested, where Teale had said incriminating things like, "they were arguing over money all afternoon, and he said it was his idea to rob him."
Neither of the defendants testified. The California Constitution at the time said (in Article I § 13), "in any criminal case, whether the defendant testifies or not, his failure to explain or to deny by his testimony any evidence or facts in the case against him may be commented upon by the court and by counsel, and may be considered by the court or the jury." As such, the prosecution spoke extensively and repeatedly about their failure to testify, arguing that their silence meant they couldn't refute the evidence. The trial judge also included in the jury instructions an instruction that they could draw adverse inferences from the defendants' failure to testify. They were both convicted, with Teale being given a death sentence, and Chapman sentenced to life imprisonment.
 Appeal 
On an appeal to the California Supreme Court, Chapman and Teale argued a range of issues, which were generally flimsy legal arguments (including their right to a speedy trial, particular instructions issued to the jury, and whether various items should have been allowed as evidence), and the Court ruled against them on almost all of them. However, after the trial in 1963, the U.S. Supreme Court had issued its opinion in Griffin v. California, striking down the part of the California Constitution that allowed prosecutors to comment on defendants' failure to testify (as a violation of the Fifth Amendment's right to silence). There was no question that the prosecution's extensive comments violated the Fifth Amendment in this case, but the California Supreme Court still had to consider whether the violation was a harmless error. Under the California harmless error rule, Chapman and Teale had to prove that the error "resulted in a miscarriage of justice," and the Court ruled to the contrary:
 Decision of the Supreme Court 
 Majority opinion 
Chapman and Teale appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which reversed in an 8–1 vote. Writing for the majority, Justice Black first said that California's harmless error rule could not apply to violations of the Fifth Amendment. Rather, federal rights had to be protected by federal law:
Still, the majority did not buy Chapman and Teale's argument that their convictions should overturned just because their right to silence had been violated. The majority noted that all 50 states had harmless error rules, and that Congress had instructed federal courts in 28 U. S. C. § 2111 that "judgments shall not be reversed for 'errors or defects which do not affect the substantial rights of the parties.'" Thus the argument that "all trial errors which violate the Constitution automatically call for reversal" had little support in contemporary legal practice or Supreme Court precedent, and a new federal harmless error rule would be formulated.
The majority decided to borrow the reasoning the Court had used in Fahy v. Connecticut in 1963, when it had said, "The question is whether there is a reasonable possibility that the evidence complained of might have contributed to the conviction."Fahy v. Connecticut, 375 U.S. 85 (1963) Also, the majority disliked the fact that California's rule put the burden of proof on defendants to show a miscarriage of justice. The new rule would instead "requir[e] the beneficiary of a constitutional error to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the error complained of did not contribute to the verdict obtained."
Applying the new rule to Chapman and Teale's trial, the majority found that the prosecution's extensive comments on their silence was easily enough to create a reasonable doubt. Even if the case against them was strong, they had tried to make arguments in defense, and these arguments had been undermined by encouraging the jury to draw adverse inferences from their failure to testify—especially given how often the prosecution had referred to it. Their convictions were therefore reversed, and remanded for a new trial.
 Stewart's concurrence 
Justice Stewart concurred, but he wrote, separately, to argue that some constitutional violations could never be harmless. He listed examples of recent Supreme Court cases where the Court had reversed convictions without requiring any proof of harm; for example, the Court had said in Lynumn v. Illinois that it was "impermissible" to apply a harmless error rule to the use of an involuntary confession as evidence.Lynumn v. Illinois, 372 U.S. 528 (1963) Stewart worried that the majority opinion could be interpreted as requiring harmless error analysis in all situations and for all violations of the Constitution.
 Harlan's dissent 
Justice Harlan argued in dissent that the majority's new rule exceeded the Court's authority:
Harlan argued that there was an important distinction between the Supreme Court's power to enforce the Constitution (which applied to every unit of state government in the country through the Fourteenth Amendment), and the supervisory power that the Court held over federal courts. As a supervisory authority, the Supreme Court not only heard appeals from lower federal courts, but could almost make administrative decisions, such as issuing rules of procedure (civil procedure, appellate procedure, etc.) or rules of evidence. In Harlan's view, a harmless-error rule was just another procedural rule, and that meant that federal courts had to respect state versions of the rule when they were applied in state court.
 References 
 Notes 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Legal history of California
Category:1967 in United States case law
"""

From "Charlton v. Kelly" ==> """
Charlton v. Kelly, 229 U.S. 447 (1913), is a case pertaining to extradition of a U.S. citizen to Italy.. In 1910, Porter Charlton confessed in New York to having murdered his wife in Italy.Charlton, 229 U.S. at 470. The Italian vice consul requested Charlton's extradition.Charlton, 229 U.S. at 448, 470-71. Hon. John A. Blair, one of the judges of the Circuit Court of the United States for the district of New Jersey, suspended Charlton's petition for a writ of habeas corpus and a warrant was issued for his arrest.Charlton, 229 U.S. at 448-49. This order for extradition was approved by Secretary of State Philander C. Knox.Charlton, 229 U.S. at 465.
Opinion of the Court
In an opinion written by Justice Horace Harmon Lurton, the Court held that the United States had the right to waive a breach of its extradition treaty with Italy, and by waiving the breach, the countries would remain bound by the treaty.Charlton, 229 U.S. at 475-76.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 229
References
External links
 Lawyers' Reports Annotated entry on Charlton v. Kelly on Google Books
Category:1913 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Extradition case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "Chase v. Curtis" ==> """
Chase v. Curtis, 113 U.S. 452 (1885), was a suit brought under the provisions of §12 of the Act of the Legislature of New York of February 17, 1848, as amended June 7, 1875, where trustees of corporations formed for manufacturing, mining, mechanical, or chemical purposes are made liable for debts of the company on failure to file the reports of capital and of debts required by that section, is penal in its character, and must be construed with strictness as against those sought to be subjected to its liabilities.  Suit was brought to recover from the trustees of such a corporation the amount of a judgment against the corporation, the judgment roll is not competent evidence to establish a debt due from the corporation to the plaintiff..
A claim in tort against a corporation formed under that act, as amended, is not a debt of the company for which the trustees may become liable jointly and severally under the provisions of the Act.  In a proceeding to enforce a liability created by a state statute, the courts of the United States give to a judgment of a state court the same effect, either as evidence or as cause of action, which is given to it in like proceedings in the courts of the state whose laws are invoked in the enforcement.
The complaint in this action, after alleging that the plaintiff in error was a citizen of Pennsylvania, and the defendants citizens of New York, proceeded as follows:
"Second. That at the times hereinafter mentioned, the defendants were trustees of the Union Petroleum Company of New York."
"Third. That the said company is, and at the times hereinafter mentioned was, a corporation organized pursuant to an Act of the legislature of the State of New York entitled 'An act to authorize the formation of corporations for manufacturing, mining, mechanical, or chemical purposes,' passed on the 17th day of February, 1848, and the amendments thereto, its principal place of business being in the City of New York."
"Fourth. That the said plaintiffs brought their plea of trespass on the case against the said Union Petroleum Company of New York in the Court of Common Pleas for the County of Venango, in the State of Pennsylvania, in which the said Union Petroleum Company duly appeared, and that the said action was thereafter, and on or about the 9th day of September, 1873, on the petition of the said Union Petroleum Company, verified by the affidavit of Abijah Curtis, one of the defendants above named, removed to the United States Circuit Court for the Western District of Pennsylvania. And that on the 30th day of July, 1874, and before the time for filing the annual report hereinafter mentioned, the above-named plaintiffs duly recovered a judgment in the said action against the said Union Petroleum Company of New York in the Circuit Court of the United States in and for the Western District of Pennsylvania, by the judgment and consideration of said court having jurisdiction therein, and of the said Union Petroleum Company of New York, for forty thousand five hundred dollars ($40,500.00) damages, and three hundred and twenty-eight dollars and ninety-seven cents ($328.97) costs, which judgment was duly given, and still remains in full force and effect, not satisfied or annulled, and no part thereof has been paid."
"Fifth. That the said Union Petroleum Company of New York did not within twenty (20) days from the first day of January, 1875, make and publish a report as required by law in such case made and provided, signed by its president and a majority of its trustees, and verified by the oaths of the president or secretary thereof, and did not file the same in the office of the clerk of the county where the business of the company was carried on, to-wit, the County of New York, nor have they made, published, signed, verified, or filed any such report whatsoever as by law required, but have wholly failed so to do."
"Wherefore the plaintiffs demand judgment against the above-named defendants in the sum of $40,828.97, with interest on $40,500.00 from the 30th day of July, 1874, and on $328.97 from the 3d day of October, 1874, besides the costs and disbursements of this action."
To this complaint the defendants severally demurred on the ground that it did not state facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action. The demurrer was sustained and judgment rendered in favor of the defendants dismissing the complaint, to reverse which this writ of error is prosecuted.
The statute on which the action is founded is as follows:
"SECTION 1. The twelfth section of the 'Act to authorize the formation of corporations for manufacturing, mining, mechanical, or chemical purposes,' passed February 17, 1848, as said section was amended by chapter 657 of the Laws of 1871, is hereby further amended, so that section 12 shall read as follows:"
It is finally insisted that a judgment against the corporation, although founded upon a tort, becomes ipso facto a debt by contract, being a contract of record or a specialty in the nature of a contract. But we have already seen that the settled course of decision in the New York Court of Appeals rejects the judgment against the corporation as either evidence or ground of liability against the trustees, and founds the latter upon the obligation of the corporation on which the judgment itself rests. And it was decided by this Court in the case of Louisiana v. New Orleans, 109 U. S. 285, that a liability for a tort, created by statute, although reduced to judgment by a recovery for the damages suffered, did not thereby become a debt by contract in the sense of the Constitution of the United States forbidding state legislation impairing its obligation, for the reason that the term 'contract' is used in the Constitution in its ordinary sense as signifying the agreement of two or more minds, for considerations proceeding from one to the other, to do or not to do certain acts. Mutual assent to its terms is of its very essence."
The same definition applies in the present instance, and excludes the liability of the defendants, as trustees of the corporation, for its torts, although reduced to judgment.
The court found no error in the judgment of the circuit court, and it was accordingly affirmed.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
"""

From "Chauffeurs, Teamsters, & Helpers Local No. 391 v. Terry" ==> """
Chauffeurs, Teamsters, and Helpers Local No. 391 v. Terry, 494 U.S. 558 (1990), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that an action by an employee for a breach of a labor union's duty of fair representation entitled him to a jury trial under the Seventh Amendment..
Facts
McLean Trucking Corporation and the defendant/petitioner union, Chauffeurs, Teamsters, and Helpers Local No. 391, were parties to a collective bargaining agreement which governed employment at McLean.  The plaintiffs/respondents in this matter were union members employed as truck drivers by McLean.  In 1982, McLean began to shut down some of its terminals and reorganizing others.  The company transferred plaintiffs to its terminal in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, and granted them special seniority rights over inactive employees at that terminal who had been temporarily laid off.
After working at Winston-Salem for six weeks, the plaintiffs were alternately laid off and recalled several times.  Some of the laid off truckers were stripped of their special seniority rights.  The plaintiffs filed a grievance with the union, alleging that McLean had breached the collective bargaining agreement by giving inactive employees preference over them.  The grievance committee ordered McLean to recall the plaintiffs and lay off the inactive drivers who had been recalled, and to recognize plaintiffs' special seniority rights until the inactive employees were recalled properly.  McLean obeyed the order of the grievance committee at first, but then recalled the inactive employees, causing them to gain seniority status over the plaintiffs.  In the next round of layoffs, this meant that the plaintiffs were laid off first.  Plaintiffs then filed another grievance with the union, alleging that McLean's actions were intended to circumvent the grievance committee's initial order.  But the grievance committee held that McLean had acted legitimately.  This pattern of temporary layoffs and recalls continued, prompting plaintiffs to file another grievance, but the union did not refer the third grievance to a grievance committee, instead ruling that the relevant issues had already been decided.
In July 1983, plaintiffs brought suit against both the union and McLean in the United States District Court for the Middle District of North Carolina, alleging that McLean had violated the collective bargaining agreement in violation of the Labor Management Relations Act, , and alleging that the union had breached its duty of fair representation.  Plaintiffs requested a permanent injunction requiring the defendants to restore their seniority and cease their illegal activity.  They further requested compensatory damages for lost wages and health benefits.  McLean filed for bankruptcy in 1986, and all the claims against it were voluntarily dismissed.
Plaintiffs had requested a jury trial in their pleadings, but the union moved to strike the demand for a jury trial, on the grounds that the no right to a jury trial exists in a duty of fair representation suit.  The District Court denied the defendant's motion to strike, and the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit affirmed, holding that the Seventh Amendment entitled the plaintiffs to a jury trial on their claims for monetary damages.
Decision
 Majority opinion 
Justice Marshall wrote for the majority.  He began his opinion by explaining that the right to a jury trial provided by the Seventh Amendment encompasses more than the common law forms of action recognized in 1791  (when the Bill of Rights was ratified), but rather any lawsuit in which parties' legal rights were to be determined, as opposed to suits which only involve equitable rights and remedies.  Using the two-part test established in Tull, the court must first compare the statutory action created by Congress  to the 18th century actions brought in the courts of England prior to the merger of the courts of law and equity; then, examine the remedy sought by the plaintiff to determine whether it was legal or equitable in nature.
Since actions to enforce collective bargaining agreements were unknown in 18th-century England (such agreements were unlawful at the time), the union argued that the action brought by the plaintiffs was, in essence, an attempt to vacate an arbitration award, which historically was considered an action in equity.  Marshall rejected this argument because there had been no arbitration with regards to the union's duty of fair representation.  The union further argued that the suit was comparable to an action for breach of fiduciary duty (e.g. a suit concerning a trust), which was also considered an equitable action.  The plaintiffs countered by comparing their suit to an action against an attorney for malpractice, which was an action at law.
Marshall conceded that the analogy to a trust action was more convincing, but reasoned that the right to a jury trial depended more on the nature of the issues to be tried.  Although there was a fiduciary duty issue between the plaintiffs and the union, there was also an underlying breach of contract—that of the collective bargaining agreement between McLean and the plaintiffs.
Since the first part of the analysis failed to produce a dispositive result, Marshall then turned to the type of relief the plaintiffs sought.  The only remaining remedy the plaintiffs sought against the union was compensatory damages, which are the traditional legal remedy.  While restitutionary remedies such as back pay and benefits may be characterized as equitable when sought from an employer, the damages here were sought from the union.  Thus, Marshall held that the plaintiffs were requesting a legal remedy, and therefore, on the balance of the issues, were entitled to have their case heard by a jury.
 Brennan's concurrence 
Justice Brennan concurred, but desired to simplify the test for determining a plaintiff's Seventh Amendment rights.  Specifically, he felt that it was unnecessary to examine the nature of the action itself, but rather to simply examine the type of relief requested by the plaintiff.  If the plaintiff requested a legal remedy (such as monetary damages), Brennan would simply assume that the right to a jury trial existed, unless Congress had assigned the particular action to a non-Article III tribunal, and a jury trial would frustrate the intent of Congress.
Brennan went on to criticize the Court's historical analysis of traditional equitable and legal causes of action.  Many of the statutory rights created by Congress are not analogous to anything which existed in the courts of 18th-century England, and judges lack the historical training to analyze such matters consistently.  Different justices and historians have come to different conclusions as to what is analogous to a "legal" or "equitable" action.  He concluded that the right to a jury trial was too important for the Court to allow for such an uncertainty.
 Stevens' concurrence 
Justice Stevens concurred separately, on similar grounds as Justice Brennan did.  He felt that the Court's attempt to find an 18th-century common law analogue to the collective-bargaining and fair representation actions in this case was a misguided historical judgment, and that the type of relief sought by the plaintiff was the relevant inquiry.  He explained that it was perfectly rational to have members of the community—i.e. a jury of one's peers—hear such a case.
 Dissent 
Justice Kennedy, with whom Justices O'Connor and Scalia joined, dissented, arguing that the majority's analogy to an equitable trust action should have been dispositive in this case.  He further argued that the relationship between the union and its workers was more similar to the relationship between a trustee and a beneficiary than an attorney and his client, because a union had a duty of fair representation to all of its workers and did not normally be compelled to act as an agent by one beneficiary.  He also stated that the relief sought by the plaintiffs was equitable in nature, because it sought to make the plaintiffs whole, and that the majority unnecessarily separated out the legal and equitable issues in this case.
Justice Kennedy defended the historical comparison of the cause of action to the "suits at common law" available in 1791.  He felt that to expand the right beyond what was available to plaintiffs at the time of the ratification of the Bill of Rights was nothing more than rewriting the Constitution, stating "[w]e cannot preserve a right existing in 1791 unless we look to history to identify it."Terry, 494 U.S. at 593 (Kennedy, J., dissenting).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 494
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Analysis of Tull Analysis of Tull v. United States Two-Part Test.
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Seventh Amendment case law
Category:International Brotherhood of Teamsters
Category:1990 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Chavez v. Martinez" ==> """
Chavez v. Martinez, 538 U.S. 760 (2003), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court, which held that a police officer does not deprive a suspect of constitutional rights by failing to issue a Miranda warning.  However, the court held open the possibility that the right to substantive due process could be violated in certain egregious circumstances and remanded the case to the lower court to decide this issue on the case's facts.
A complex series of concurrences and dissents were filed, many partially joined by various justices.  Justice Thomas announced the judgment of the court, finding that no constitutional rights were violated.  However, the only opinion to gain the votes of a majority of the court was Part II of Souter's concurrence, which consisted of a direction to the lower court to consider the substantive due process claims on remand.
 Background 
In 1997, during an altercation with the police in Oxnard, California, the respondent Martinez was shot five times.  He was very seriously injured.  The police officer's supervisor—the petitioner, Chavez—arrived at the scene around the same time as the paramedics.  He rode in the ambulance with Martinez and accompanied him into the hospital.  Throughout this time, Martinez was often conscious but in great distress, repeatedly stating that he was dying and requesting treatment.  Without informing Martinez of his Miranda rights, Chavez sporadically interviewed Martinez about the incident over a period of 45 minutes.  Martinez survived the incident, but was partially paralyzed and left blind."permanently blinded and paralyzed from the waist down" Chavez v. Martinez, 538 U.S. 760, 764 (2003)  He was never charged with a crime and his answers were never used against him in any criminal prosecution.Chavez v. Martinez, 538 U.S. 760, 764 (2003)
Martinez sued Chavez in a §1983 action alleging that his constitutional rights had been violated.  The district court found that Chavez had violated at least two of Martinez's clearly established rights: the 5th Amendment right not to be compelled to be a witness against himself and his 14th Amendment right not to be subjected to coercive questioning.  Because of this violation, the district court held that Chavez was not entitled to qualified immunity.  The 9th Circuit affirmed this ruling.  The Supreme Court then granted certiorari.
 Opinion 
Justice Thomas announced the judgment of the Court and delivered an opinion.
 Fifth Amendment 
 Thomas opinion 
The Fifth Amendment requires that “[n]o person ... shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself.” We fail to see how, based on the text of the Fifth Amendment, Martinez can allege a violation of this right, since Martinez was never prosecuted for a crime, let alone compelled to be a witness against himself in a criminal case.Chavez v. Martinez, 538 U.S. 766, 767 (2003)
Although Martinez contends that the meaning of “criminal case” should encompass the entire criminal investigatory process, including police interrogations, we disagree. In our view, a “criminal case” at the very least requires the initiation of legal proceedings. We need not decide today the precise moment when a “criminal case” commences; it is enough to say that police questioning does not constitute a “case” any more than a private investigator’s precomplaint activities constitute a “civil case.” Statements compelled by police interrogations of course may not be used against a defendant at trial, but it is not until their use in a criminal case that a violation of the Self-Incrimination Clause occurs.
Here, Martinez was never made to be a “witness” against himself in violation of the Fifth Amendment’s Self-Incrimination Clause because his statements were never admitted as testimony against him in a criminal case. Nor was he ever placed under oath and exposed to “`the cruel trilemma of self-accusation, perjury or contempt.'” The text of the Self-Incrimination Clause simply cannot support the Ninth Circuit’s view that the mere use of compulsive questioning, without more, violates the Constitution.
Although our cases have permitted the Fifth Amendment’s self-incrimination privilege to be asserted in noncriminal cases, that does not alter our conclusion that a violation of the constitutional right against self-incrimination occurs only if one has been compelled to be a witness against himself in a criminal case.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Miranda warning case law
Category:2003 in United States case law
"""

From "Cheek v. United States" ==> """
Cheek v. United States, 498 U.S. 192 (1991), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court reversed the conviction of John L. Cheek, a tax protester, for willful failure to file tax returns and tax evasion. The Court held that an actual good-faith belief that one is not violating the tax law, based on a misunderstanding caused by the complexity of the tax law, negates willfulness, even if that belief is irrational or unreasonable. The Court also ruled that an actual belief that the tax law is invalid or unconstitutional is not a good faith belief based on a misunderstanding caused by the complexity of the tax law, and is not a defense.
 Background 
The defendant, John L. Cheek, became a pilot for American Airlines in 1973. Through the tax year 1979, Cheek filed Federal income tax returns. Beginning with the 1980 tax year, Cheek stopped filing Federal income tax returns.Dan M. Kahan, "Ignorance of Law Is An Excuse -- But Only for the Virtuous," 96 Michigan Law Review 127, 145 (Oct. 1997). He began claiming up to sixty allowances on his Form W-4 withholding statement submitted to his employer.Mark C. Winings, "Ignorance Is Bliss Especially for the Tax Evader," 84 Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology 575, 582 (Northwestern Univ. School of Law, Fall 1993), at .
From 1982 to 1987, Cheek was also involved in at least four civil cases challenging the Federal income tax.See, e.g., Schaut v. United States, 585 F. Supp. 137, 84-1 U.S. Tax Cas. (CCH) paragr. 9308 (N.D. Ill. 1984); Cheek v. Doe, 110 F.R.D. 420, 421 (N.D. Ill. 1984); Cheek v. Commissioner, 53 T.C.M. (CCH) 111, T.C. Memo. 1987-84 (1987). After 1987, see Pleasant v. Lovell, 974 F.2d 1222 (10th Cir. 1992). Among the arguments raised in those cases were: (1) the argument that he was not a taxpayer within the meaning of the law; (2) the argument that wages are not income; (3) the argument that the Sixteenth Amendment does not authorize an income tax on individuals; and (4) the argument that the Sixteenth Amendment is unenforceable. In all four cases, the courts stated that these arguments were erroneous. Cheek also attended two criminal trials of individuals charged with tax crimes.Cheek, 498 U.S. 192 at 194-95 (1991) (hereinafter Cheek).
John Cheek himself was eventually charged with six counts of willfully failing to file Federal income tax returns under  for 1980, 1981, 1983, 1984, 1985 and 1986. He was also charged with tax evasion under  for years 1980, 1981, and 1983.Cheek, 498 U.S. at 194.
Trial court
At his own criminal trial, Cheek represented himself.Nicholas A. Mirkay III, "The Supreme Court's Decision in Cheek: Does It Encourage Willful Tax Evasion," 56 Missouri Law Review 1119, 1121 (Fall 1991), at .Cheek, 498 U.S. at 195. He also testified that around 1978 he had begun attending seminars conducted by a group that believed that the Federal income tax system was unconstitutional.Dwight W. Stone II, "Cheek v. United States: Finally, a Precise Definition of the Willfulness Requirement in Federal Tax Crimes," 51 Maryland Law Review 224, 225 (1992), at . Cheek stated that based on the seminars and his own study, he sincerely believed that the tax laws were being unconstitutionally enforced, and that his actions were lawful. Cheek specifically testified about his own interpretations of the U.S. Constitution, court opinions, common law and other materials. He testified that he had relied on those materials in concluding that he was not required to file tax returns, that he was not required to pay income taxes, and that he could claim refunds of the money withheld from his pay. Cheek also contended that his wages from a private employer (American Airlines) did not constitute income under the internal revenue laws. Cheek argued that he therefore had acted without the "willfulness" that was required for a criminal tax conviction.Cheek, 498 U.S. at 195-96.
Ignorance of law
Under U.S. criminal law, the general rule is that ignorance of the law or a mistake of law is not a valid defense to criminal prosecutionJon Strauss, "Nonpayment of Taxes: When Ignorance of the Law Is an Excuse," 25 Akron Law Review 611 (Winter/Spring 1992), at .Cheek, 498 U.S. at 199. (see also Ignorantia juris non excusat). However, there are exceptions to that rule. Some U.S. criminal statutes provide for what are known as "specific intent" crimes, where ignorance of the law may be a valid defense. The federal criminal tax statutes are examples of statutes for specific intent crimes, where actual ignorance of the law is a valid defense.Cheek, 498 U.S. at 200.
Erroneous jury instructions
Cheek was convicted, but during the jury deliberations, the jury asked the trial judge for a clarification on the law. The judge instructed the jury that an "honest but unreasonable belief is not a defense, and does not negate willfulness." The trial court also instructed the jury that "[a]dvice or research resulting in the conclusion that wages of a privately employed person are not income or that the tax laws are unconstitutional is not objectively reasonable, and cannot serve as the basis for a good faith misunderstanding of the law defense."Cheek, 498 U.S. at 197.
Appeals
Cheek appealed his conviction to the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, which upheld the conviction. The United States Supreme Court issued a writ of certiorari to review the case. At the Court, Cheek contended that the trial court had erred by instructing the jury that a misunderstanding of the law had to be objectively reasonable to negate willfulness.
Opinion of the Court
In its judgment, the Court produced two essential holdings:
 A genuine, good faith belief that one is not violating the Federal tax law based on a misunderstanding caused by the complexity of the tax law (e.g., the complexity of the statute itself) is a defense to a charge of "willfulness", even though that belief is irrational or unreasonable.Cheek, 498 U.S. at 203.Steven R. Toscher, Dennis L. Perez, Charles P. Rettig &  Edward M. Robbins, Jr., Tax Crimes, Tax Management Portfolio, Volume 636, Bloomberg BNA (3d ed. 2012).
 A belief that the Federal income tax is invalid or unconstitutional is not a misunderstanding caused by the complexity of the tax law,See generally Dan M. Kahan, "Ignorance of Law Is An Excuse -- But Only for the Virtuous," 96 Michigan Law Review 127, 146 (Oct. 1997). and is not a defense to a charge of "willfulness", even if that belief is genuine and is held in good faith.Lyle Denniston, "Court widens use of ignorance plea in tax cases," Baltimore Sun, Jan. 9, 1991, at .Cheek, 498 U.S. at 206.
John Cheek's arguments about the constitutionality of the tax law in various prior court cases were expressly labeled "frivolous" by the Supreme Court. See Cheek, 498 U.S. at 204-205. For example, Cheek had specifically contended prior to his conviction that the Sixteenth Amendment did not authorize a tax on wages and salaries, but only on gain or profit. See Cheek, 498 U.S. at 196.
The Supreme Court reiterated that a finding of willfulness in a federal criminal tax case requires proof (1) that the law imposed a duty on the defendant, (2) that the defendant knew of this duty, and (3) that the defendant voluntarily and intentionally violated that duty.Cheek, 498 U.S. at 201. In explaining how the willfulness element must be proven, the Court distinguished arguments about constitutionality of the tax law from statutory arguments about the tax law.
In an opinion by Justice Byron White, the Court ruled that the defendant's belief that the tax laws were unconstitutional was not a defense, no matter how honestly that belief might have been held. To the contrary, Cheek's acknowledgement that his failure to file tax returns was based on a belief about constitutionality was viewed by the Supreme Court as possible evidence (1) of Cheek's awareness of the tax law itself (the Court stating that constitutional arguments reveal the taxpayer's "full knowledge of the provisions at issue and a studied conclusion, however wrong, that those provisions are invalid and unenforceable"),Cheek, 498 U.S. at 205. and (2) of the voluntary, intentional violation of a known legal duty imposed by the tax law.
However, Cheek's statutory argument—his asserted belief that his wages were not income under the statute (the Internal Revenue Code itself)—was ruled by the Supreme Court to be a possible ground for a valid defense even though that belief was not objectively reasonable, provided that the belief was actually held in good faith. The Supreme Court ruled that by instructing the jury that the defendant's statutory argument had to be based on a belief that was "objectively reasonable," the trial judge had erroneously transformed what should have been treated as a factual issue (for the jury to decide) into a legal issue. The Supreme Court stated that whether the defendant acted willfully is a factual issue to be determined by the jury, and that a valid defense of lack of willfulness could be found even though the defendant's belief is not "objectively reasonable." The Supreme Court remanded the case to the trial court for a retrial. The Court also provided guidelines that could be used by the jury at the retrial:
Dissent
Justice Harry Blackmun, joined by Justice Thurgood Marshall, agreed with the Court's ruling that a belief that the federal income tax is unconstitutional is not a defense to a charge of willfulness. These two justices complained, however, about the Court's ruling that a genuine, good faith belief based on a misunderstanding of the Internal Revenue Code is a valid defense. In dissent, Blackmun wrote:
Cheek defense
Some tax protesters have cited this case for the argument that it is possible to avoid paying taxes without punishment by using the kind of defense raised by Cheek about a good faith misunderstanding of the tax law itself. The Cheek defense is available, however, only in a criminal trial, and not as a method to avoid the payment of tax."The ruling does not shield people from being required to pay taxes and any civil penalties that might be imposed for nonpayment." William Grady, "High Court Overturns Conviction Of Chicago-area Tax Protester," Jan. 9, 1991, Chicago Tribune, at .  In addition, attorney Daniel B. Evans points out that the Cheek defense is logically self-defeating: 
...[I]f you plan ahead to use it, then it is almost certain to fail, because your efforts to establish your "good faith belief" are going to be used by the government as evidence that you knew that what you were doing was wrong when you did it, which is why you worked to set up a defense in advance.  
Later developments
In the case of John Cheek:
Immediately after the ruling, Cheek's lawyer, William R. Coulson, stated that Cheek had "learned his lesson". Coulson described Cheek as a "gullible victim of the tax protest movement".William Grady, "High Court Overturns Conviction Of Chicago-area Tax Protester," Jan. 9, 1991, Chicago Tribune, at .
Further, the case was remanded for a re-trial. In the re-trial, the jury rejected Cheek's argument that he actually "believed" that wages were not taxable. He was again convicted. On March 13, 1992, Cheek was sentenced to one year and one day imprisonment, and he was placed on five years of probation. The conditions of probation were that he would cooperate with the Internal Revenue Service and pay his back taxes, and pay a fine of $62,000. The second conviction was upheld by the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, and the United States Supreme Court let that decision stand by denying review.United States v. Cheek, 3 F.3d 1057, 93-2 U.S. Tax Cas. (CCH) paragr. 50,473 (7th Cir. 1993), at  cert. denied, 510 U.S. 1112, 114 S. Ct. 1055 (1994). Cheek was released from prison in December 1992.John L. Cheek, prisoner number 96657-024, Federal Bureau of Prisons, United States Department of Justice, at .
At least one federal district court has indicated that, in the absence of either testimony by the defendant about his own belief or some other evidence that provides a link to the "taxpayer's mindset", the defendant's lawyer cannot require a court to give a "Cheek defense instruction" to a jury.See generally United States v. Kokenis, 743 F. Supp. 2d 988 (N.D. Ill. 2010). That decision has been affirmed by the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit.United States v. Kokenis, case # 11-1426, 2011 U.S. App. 23370 (7th Cir. November 23, 2011), at .
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 498
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1991 in United States case law
Category:Tax evasion in the United States
"""

From "Cheff v. Schnackenberg" ==> """
Cheff v. Schnackenberg, 384 U.S. 373 (1966), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that crimes carrying possible penalties up to six months imprisonment do not require a jury trial if they otherwise qualify as petty offenses..Varat, J.D. et al.  Constitutional Law Cases and Materials, Concise Thirteenth Edition.  Foundation Press, New York, NY: 2009, p. 351
 References 
External links
Category:United States Sixth Amendment jury case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1966 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Chemical Waste Management, Inc. v. Hunt" ==> """
Chemical Waste Management, Inc. v. Hunt, 504 U.S. 334 (1992), was a United States Supreme Court case that held that an Alabama law imposing a fee (of $72 per ton) on out-of-state hazardous waste being disposed of in-state violated the Dormant Commerce Clause.
Opinion of the Court
The state law was found to discriminate against out-of-state commerce. Justice White explained that "No state may attempt to isolate itself from a problem common to the several States by raising barriers to the free flow of interstate trade," relying on Philadelphia v. New Jersey (1978) as precedent.
The Court suggested two less-discriminatory alternatives to the fee on out-of-state hazardous waste:
 A generally-applicable, additional fee per ton of all hazardous waste disposed of within Alabama, regardless of its source.
 A per-mile tax on all vehicles transporting hazardous waste across Alabama roads.
Dissent
Chief Justice Rehnquist dissented arguing that States may wish to avoid the risks to public health and environment by regulating the disposal of hazardous waste. He continued to say that since taxes are a recognized and effective means for discouraging the consumption of scarce commodities, which he in this case had deemed the environment. Then there was nothing unconstitutional or discriminatory about the state of Alabama's taxes.
Related cases
 White v. Massachusetts Council of Constr. Employers, Inc., 460 U.S. 204, 206 -208 (1983).
 Reeves, Inc. v. Stake, 447 U.S. 429, 436-437 (1980).
 Hughes v. Alexandria Scrap Corp., 426 U.S. 794, 810 (1976).
See also
 Emelle, Alabama
 Environmental dumping
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 504
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1992 in the environment
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:United States environmental case law
"""

From "Cheney v. United States District Court" ==> """
Cheney v. United States District Court, 542 U.S. 367 (2004), was a 2004 United States Supreme Court case between Vice President Dick Cheney and the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia.. The case came as an appeal after the lower District Court for the District of Columbia ordered Cheney to disclose some of his records that would show how his National Energy Policy Development Group developed its recommendations. Cheney appealed the decision to the Court of Appeals for the DC Circuit, but the Appeals Court rejected the appeal. In a 7–2 decision, the Court sent the case back to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit.
Prior history
The case began when the conservative Judicial Watch filed Freedom of Information Act requests about the National Energy Policy Development Group, which Cheney headed, in 2001–2002. These requests were denied.
Judicial Watch and the Sierra Club then sued, arguing the refusal a violation of the Federal Advisory Committee Act of 1972 (FACA), which requires committees set up by the president or by federal agencies to provide advice must conduct their business in public. The exception to this law is committees composed entirely of federal officials and employees, which de jure Cheney's committee was.
However, Judicial Watch and the Sierra Club argued that because so many energy industry lobbyists were so deeply involved in the committee's work, they were effectively members. Under this, the committee would have to obey FACA. In 1993, the D.C. Circuit ruled in Association of American Physicians and Surgeons v. Clinton, that in such a situation, FACA does apply.
In July 2002, D.C. district judge Emmet G. Sullivan ruled that Sierra Club and Judicial Watch deserved to know whether private citizens had taken part in the work of the task force to a large enough degree sufficient to bring the task force under the umbrella of the law.
Rather than accepting the ruling, the vice president appealed it to the Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit, arguing that complying would force him reveal information that, under law, he does not have to reveal. Cheney also argued that the order violated separation of powers principles.
The Court of Appeals ruled that Cheney did have to turn over information. Cheney appealed this decision to the Supreme Court.
Case
The question the Court was debating was whether or not the D.C. District Court should have rejected the request from the Vice President to block disclosure of records from his energy policy task force.
The Court ruled 7–2 that the lower appeals court had acted "prematurely" and sent the case back to the court.
The Court did not rule on whether or not FACA should or should not apply to the task force, and left to the Court of Appeals.
Anthony Kennedy wrote the majority opinion, agreed to by four other justices. Two justices, Clarence Thomas and Scalia would have had the case end there with Cheney not having to disclose any information. Ruth Bader Ginsburg was joined by David H. Souter in dissenting, arguing the Supreme Court should let the case proceed in the District Court.
Scalia conflict of interest controversy
The case received press attention when Antonin Scalia refused to recuse himself from the case, despite having hunted ducks with Cheney and others while the case was pending in the lower courts.  Scalia filed a lengthy statement explaining why he was not recusing himself. In the end, Scalia supported Cheney.
Subsequent history
On May 9, 2005, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia ruled that the Vice President's Energy Task Force did not have to comply with the Federal Advisory Committee Act.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 542
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2004 in United States case law
"""

From "Cheong Ah Moy v. United States" ==> """
Cheong Ah Moy v. United States, 113 U.S. 216 (1885), was a case regarding a Chinese woman who—upon her arrival at a San Francisco port from China—was not permitted to stay in that city by reason of the Acts of Congress of May 6, 1882 (amended 1884). She was forcibly kept on board another vessel scheduled to sail back to China and had to have someone sue out a writ of habeas corpus to obtain her release..
Background
Upon her arrest, the circuit court of the United States ordered that she be returned to the vessel in order to be carried back to China. She was placed in the custody of the marshal, who was directed to execute the order. But the marshal found that the original vessel had sailed, and so he placed his prisoner in jail for safekeeping until another vessel was at hand to remove her.
Her counsel, upon this state of facts, applied at the circuit court for permission to give bail on her behalf to have her released from custody. The judges of the circuit court were divided in their opinion on the question of granting the motion, and, after finally overruling the motion, certified their division to this Court.
In the meantime, on the second day of October, three days after an order was made overruling the motion, and ten days before a writ of error herein was filed in the clerk's office at the circuit court, the marshal already executed the original order of the court, placing the prisoner on board the steamship New York, one of the Pacific Mail steamships, then about to start for China; she departed on said vessel on the seventh day of October. It thus appears that the order of deportation had been fully executed, with the petitioner for the writ of habeas corpus still placed outside the jurisdiction of the court and of the United States, the execution of the order having transpired six days before the writ of error was filed in the circuit court and it being several days before a decision was issued. The question, therefore, was deemed a moot question regarding a plaintiff in error, for even if she was permitted to give bail it could be of no value to her as the order by which she was remanded had already been executed and she was no longer in the custody of the marshal or in prison.
Decision
The Court declined to decide on a question arising from a case which no longer exists in regard to rights that it cannot enforce.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:History of immigration to the United States
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:Deportation from the United States
Category:Chinese-American culture in San Francisco
Category:China–United States relations
"""

From "Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma v. Leavitt" ==> """
Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma v. Leavitt, 543 U.S. 631 (2005), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a contract with the Federal Government to reimburse the tribe for health care costs was binding, despite the failure of Congress to appropriate funds for those costs.Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma, et al. v. Leavitt, 
 Background 
In 1975, Congress enacted the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance ActIndian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act of 1975,  (ISDEAA) which authorized several Federal agencies to enter into contracts with federally recognized Indian tribes.  Pursuant to the ISDEAA, both the Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma and the Shoshone and Paiute tribes of the Duck Valley Indian Reservation (in Idaho and Nevada) entered into contracts with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) to provide health care for tribal members.  Under the ISDEAA and the contracts, HHS was to pay the tribes' costs for providing that care.  In contracts for fiscal years 1994 through 1997, HHS agreed to pay contract support costs to the tribes, but later refused to do so on the grounds that Congress had not appropriated sufficient funds.
 Original proceedings 
In one of the cases, the Cherokee tribe first sought relief in administrative proceedings before the Interior Board of Contract Appeals (Board).  The Board found for the tribe, ordering the government to pay the Cherokees $8.5 million in damages.
In the second case, the tribes then brought suit in the Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Oklahoma, seeking approximately $6.9 million for breach of contract. The District Court found against the tribe, stating that HHS could not pay (through the Department of the Interior, which managed the funds) if Congress had not appropriated enough money.
 Appellate proceedings 
Both cases were appealed – the first by the government to the Federal Circuit Court of Appeals and the second by the tribes to Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals.  Both appellate courts affirmed the decision of the lower courts, which had the result of opposite rulings on almost identical facts.  The Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve the conflict.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Stephen Breyer delivered the opinion of the court, in which six of the other justices joined.  Breyer affirmed the Federal Circuit's decision in favor of the Cherokee tribe and reversed the Tenth Circuit decision that was in favor of the government.  The government argued that if these were "ordinary procurement contracts, its promises to pay would be legally binding" but that these were "unique, government-to-government" contracts.  The government felt that the tribes should only get the pro-ratia portion of the funds that had been appropriated.
Breyer noted that Congress was concerned "with [the] Government's past failure adequately to reimburse tribes' indirect administrative costs and a congressional decision to require payment of those costs in the future."  Breyer was unpersuaded by the arguments of the government and found in favor of the tribes.
 Concurring opinion 
Justice Antonin Scalia concurred in the opinion with the exception of the majority's reliance on a Senate committee report to determine the intent of Congress.
 Subsequent developments 
This case has played a major role in promoting tribal self-determination, while holding the Federal government accountable for paying contracts that it made with the various tribes.Jensen, Mary, Recent Decision: Contracts Formed Under the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act are as Binding as Any Other Government Agreements with a Contractor: Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma v. Leavitt, 44 Duq.L.Rev. 399 (2006)  It is one of the few bright spots for Indian litigation in a period where most of the Supreme Court decisions are going against the tribes.Washburn, Kevin K., Indian Law at a Crossroads: Tribal Self-Determination at the Crossroads, 38 Conn.L.Rev. 777 (2006)
Skibine, Alex Tallchief, The Pedagogy of Indian Law: Teaching Indian Law in an Anti-Tribal Era, 82 N.D.L.Rev. 777 (2008)
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States court cases involving the Cherokee Nation
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:Shoshone
Category:Paiute
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:Native American history of Oklahoma
"""

From "Cherokee Nation v. Georgia" ==> """
Cherokee Nation v. Georgia, 30 U.S. (5 Pet.) 1 (1831), was a United States Supreme Court case. The Cherokee Nation sought a federal injunction against laws passed by the U.S. state of Georgia depriving them of rights within its boundaries, but the Supreme Court did not hear the case on its merits. It ruled that it had no original jurisdiction in the matter, as the Cherokees were a dependent nation, with a relationship to the United States like that of a "ward to its guardian," as said by Chief Justice Marshall..
 Background 
 History 
thumb|left|200px|alt=Map of northeastern Georgia, showing Cherokee lands|Cherokee lands in 1830The Cherokee people had lived in Georgia in what is now the southeastern United States for thousands of years.  In 1542, Hernando de Soto conducted an expedition through the southeastern United States and came into contact with at least three Cherokee villages.,  18-19 (2005),  10-11 (1992).  The English immigrants to the Carolinas began to trade with the tribe beginning in 1673., supra at 21-22; , supra at 19. By 1711, the English were providing guns to the Cherokees in exchange for their help in fighting the Tuscarora tribe in the Tuscarora War.,  34 (1963); , supra at 26.  Cherokee trade with the English colonists of South Carolina and Georgia increased, and in the 1740s the Cherokee began to transition to a commercial hunting and farming lifestyle., supra at 40-41.  In 1775, one Cherokee village was described as having 100 houses, each with a garden, orchard, hothouse, and hog pens., supra at 48.  After a war with the colonists, the Cherokee signed a peace treaty in 1785.Treaty with the Cherokee 1785, Nov. 28, 1785,   In 1791 the Treaty of Holston was signed by Cherokee leaders and William Blount for the United States.Treaty with the Cherokee of 1791, July 2, 1791, .
 Cherokee Nation 
At the turn of the century, the Cherokee still possessed about  of land in Tennessee, North Carolina, Georgia, and Alabama.,  7 (1914).  In the meantime, white settlers eager for new lands urged the removal of the Cherokee and the opening of their remaining lands to settlement, pursuant to the promise made by the United States in 1802 to the State of Georgia that Georgia did have a treaty with the Cherokee.   xi (William L. Anderson, ed. 1992).  President Thomas Jefferson also began to look at removing the tribe from their lands at this time., supra at 21.
Congress voted very small appropriations to support the removal, but policy changed under President James Monroe, who did not favor large-scale removal., supra at 22.  At the same time, the Cherokee were adopting some elements from European-American culture.  During this period until 1816, numerous other treaties were signed by the Cherokee. In each they ceded land to the United States and allowed for roads to be constructed through Cherokee territory, but also kept the terms of the Holston treaty., supra at 20.
In 1817, the Treaty of the Cherokee AgencyTreaty with the Cherokee of 1817, July 8, 1817,  began the start of the Indian removal era for the Cherokee.2 , supra at 140. The treaty promised an "acre for acre" land trade, if the Cherokee would leave their homeland and move to areas west of the Mississippi River., supra at 39.  In 1819, the tribal government passed a law prohibiting any additional land cessions, providing for the death penalty for violation of the statute., supra at 35-36.  By the 1820s, most of the Cherokee had adopted a farming lifestyle similar to that of neighboring European Americans.,  36 (2003).
 State of Georgia 
By 1823, the state government and citizens of Georgia began to agitate for the removal of the Cherokee Nation, in accordance with the agreements of 1802 with the federal government.  Congress responded by appropriating $30,000 to extinguish Cherokee title to land in Georgia.  In the fall of 1823, negotiators for the United States met with the Cherokee National Council at the tribe's capital city of New Echota, located in northwest Georgia.  Joseph McMinn, noted for being in favor of removal, led the U.S. delegation., supra at 40-41.  When the negotiations to remove the tribe did not go well, the U.S. delegation resorted to trying to bribe the tribe's leaders.
On December 20, 1828, the state legislature of Georgia, fearful that the United States would not enforce (as a matter of federal policy) the removal of the Cherokee people from their historic lands in the state, enacted a series of laws which stripped the Cherokee of their rights under the laws of the state.  They intended to force the Cherokee to leave the state. Andrew Jackson, who had long favored removal, was elected US president in 1828, taking office in 1829.  In this climate, John Ross, Principal Chief of the Cherokee Nation, led a delegation to Washington in January 1829 to resolve disputes over the failure of the US government to pay annuities to the Cherokee, and to seek federal enforcement of the boundary between the territory of the state of Georgia and the Cherokee Nation's historic tribal lands within that state. Rather than lead the delegation into futile negotiations with President Jackson, Ross wrote an immediate memorial to Congress, completely forgoing the customary correspondence and petitions to the President.
Ross found support in Congress from individuals in the National Republican Party, such as senators Henry Clay, Theodore Frelinghuysen, and Daniel Webster, as well as representatives Ambrose Spencer and David (Davy) Crockett. Despite this support, in April 1829, John H. Eaton, the secretary of war (1829–1831), informed Ross that President Jackson would support the right of Georgia to extend its laws over the Cherokee Nation.  In May 1830, Congress endorsed Jackson's policy of removal by passing the Indian Removal Act, which authorized the president to set aside lands west of the Mississippi River to exchange for the lands of Indian nations in the east.
When Ross and the Cherokee delegation failed to protect Cherokee lands through negotiation with the executive branch and through petitions to Congress, Ross challenged the actions of the federal government through the U.S. courts.
 The case 
In June 1830, a delegation of Cherokee led by Chief John Ross (selected at the urging of Senators Daniel Webster and Theodore Frelinghuysen) and William Wirt, attorney general in the Monroe and Adams administrations, were selected to defend Cherokee rights before the U.S. Supreme Court.  The Cherokee Nation asked for an injunction, claiming that Georgia's state legislation had created laws that "go directly to annihilate the Cherokees as a political society." Georgia pushed hard to bring evidence that the Cherokee Nation couldn't sue as a "foreign" nation due to the fact that they did not have a constitution or a strong central government. Wirt argued that "the Cherokee Nation  [was] a foreign nation in the sense of our constitution and law" and was not subject to Georgia's jurisdiction.  Wirt asked the Supreme Court to void all Georgia laws extended over Cherokee lands on the grounds that they violated the U.S. Constitution, United States-Cherokee treaties, and United States intercourse laws.
The Court did hear the case but declined to rule on the merits. The Court determined that the framers of the Constitution did not really consider the Indian Tribes as foreign nations but more as "domestic dependent nation[s]" and consequently the Cherokee Nation lacked the standing to sue as a "foreign" nation. Chief Justice Marshall said; "The court has bestowed its best attention on this question, and, after mature deliberation, the majority is of the opinion that an Indian tribe or nation within the United States is not a foreign state in the sense of the constitution, and cannot maintain an action in the courts of the United States." The Court held open the possibility that it yet might rule in favor of the Cherokee "in a proper case with proper parties".
Chief Justice John Marshall wrote that "the relationship of the tribes to the United States resembles that of a 'ward to its guardian'."Wilkinson, C. (1988). American Indians, Time, and the Law: Native Societies in a Modern Constitutional Democracy, Yale University Press Justice William Johnson added that the "rules of nations" would regard "Indian tribes" as "nothing more than wandering hordes, held together only by ties of blood and habit, and having neither rules nor government beyond what is required in a savage state."Cherokee Nation v Georgia 30 U.S. (5 Pet.) at 190.
Justice Smith Thompson, in a dissenting judgment joined by Justice Joseph Story, held that the Cherokee nation was a "foreign state" in the sense that the Cherokee retained their "usages and customs and self-government" and the United States government had treated them as "competent to make a treaty or contract".Cherokee Nation v Georgia 30 U.S. (5 Pet.) at 216-217. The Court therefore had jurisdiction; Acts passed by the State of Georgia were "repugnant to the treaties with the Cherokees" and directly in violation of a congressional Act of 1802;Cherokee Nation v Georgia 30 U.S. (5 Pet.) at 232. and the injury to the Cherokee was severe enough to justify an injunction against the further execution of the state laws.Cherokee Nation v Georgia 30 U.S. (5 Pet.) at 233-234.
 Aftermath 
One year later, however, in Worcester v. Georgia, 31 U.S. 515 (1832), the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the Cherokee Nation was sovereign. According to the decision rendered by Chief Justice John Marshall, this meant that Georgia had no rights to enforce state laws in its territory."Worcester v. Georgia." Oyez. Accessed 03 Aug. 2014. https://www.oyez.org/cases/1792-1850/1832/1832_2
President Andrew Jackson decided not to uphold the ruling of this case, and directed the expulsion of the Cherokee Nation. U.S. Army forces were used in some cases to round them up. Their expulsion and subsequent route is called "The Trail of Tears." Of the 15,000 who left, 4,000 died on the journey to "Indian Territory" in the present-day U.S. state of Oklahoma."The Trail of Tears." pbs.org. Accessed 15 Oct. 2012. https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/aia/part4/4h1567.html
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 30
 Worcester v. Georgia
Tribal Sovereignty in the United States
 Notes 
 References 
 Bibliography
 Further reading 
Anton-Herman Chroust, "Did President Andrew Jackson Actually Threaten the Supreme Court of the United States with Non-enforcement of Its Injunction Against the State of Georgia?," 4 Am. J. Legal Hist. 77 (1960).
Kenneth W. Treacy, "Another View on Wirt in Cherokee Nation", 5 Am. J. Legal Hist. 385 (1961).
Cherokee Nation Vs. The State Of Georgia 	(2009): 1. MasterFILE Premier. Web. 20 February  2012.
Cherokee Nation v. Georgia. Great American Court Cases. Ed. Mark Mikula and L. 	Mpho Mabunda. Vol. 4: Business and Government. Detroit: Gale, 1999. Gale 	Opposing Viewpoints In Context. Web. 20 February  2012.
External links
 Cherokee Nation v. Georgia case brief summary
Cherokee Nation historical marker
Category:United States court cases involving the Cherokee Nation
Category:1831 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:Aboriginal title case law in the United States
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court original jurisdiction cases
Category:Legal history of Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:History of Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:1831 in Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:Trail of Tears
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:March 1831 events
Category:Native American history of Georgia (U.S. state)
"""

From "Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc." ==> """
Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984), was a landmark case in which the United States Supreme Court set forth the legal test for determining whether to grant deference to a government agency's interpretation of a statute which it administers. The decision articulated a doctrine now known as "Chevron deference".United States v. Mead Corp., 533 U.S. 218, 226 (2001). The doctrine consists of a two-part test applied by the court, when appropriate, that is highly deferential to government agencies: "whether the agency's answer is based on a permissible construction [emphasis added] of the statute", so long as Congress has not spoken directly to the precise issue at question.
The decision involved a lawsuit challenging the U.S. government's interpretation of the word "source" in an environmental statute. In 1977, the U.S. Congress passed a bill that amended the Clean Air Act of 1963the United States's comprehensive law regulating air pollution. The bill changed the law so that  all companies in the United States that planned to build or install any major source of air pollutants were required to go through an elaborate "new-source review" process before they could proceed. The bill did not precisely define what constituted a "source" of air pollutants, and so the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) formulated a definition as part of implementing the changes to the law. The EPA's initial definition of a "source" of air pollutants covered essentially any significant change or addition to a plant or factory, but in 1981 it changed its definition to be simply a plant or factory in its entirety. This allowed companies to avoid the "new-source review" process entirely if, when increasing their plant's emissions through building or modifying, they simultaneously modified other parts of their plant to reduce emissions so that the overall change in the plant's emissions was zero. The Natural Resources Defense Council, an American non-profit environmental advocacy organization, then filed and ultimately lost a lawsuit challenging the legality of the EPA's new definition.
Chevron is one of the most important decisions in U.S. administrative law, and has been cited in thousands of cases since being issued in 1984.
Background
Under the Supreme Court's ruling in Marbury v. Madison, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137 (1803), United States federal courts have the authority to judicially review the statutes enacted by Congress, and declare a statute invalid if it violates the Constitution. But the Constitution sets no express limits on how much federal authority can be delegated to a government agency. Rather, limits on the authority granted to a federal agency occur within the statutes enacted by Congress. It is also worth noting that federal courts are constitutionally of "limited jurisdiction". Congress bestowed on them the authority to adjudicate administrative matters in 1948. [28 USC sec. 1331 (1948)]
In 1974 the Supreme Court stated that deference depends on an administrative interpretation being consistent with the agency's other statements and being consistent with the congressional purpose:
Facts
Congress amended the Clean Air Act in 1977 to address states that had failed to attain the air quality standards established by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) (Defendant). "The amended Clean Air Act required these 'non-attainment' States to establish a permit program regulating 'new or modified major stationary sources' of air pollution."467 U.S. at 840. During the Carter administration, the EPA defined a source as any device in a manufacturing plant that produced pollution. In 1981, after Ronald Reagan's election, the EPA, which was headed by Anne M. Gorsuch, adopted a new definition that allowed an existing plant to get permits for new equipment that did not meet standards as long as the total emissions from the plant itself did not increase. The Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC), an environmental protection group, challenged the EPA regulation in federal court, which ruled in the NRDC's favor.NRDC v. Gorsuch, 685 F.2d 718.
Chevron, an affected party, appealed the lower court's decision.
Issue
The issue facing the Court was what standard of review should be applied by a court to a government agency's own reading of a statute that it is charged with administering.
Holding
The Court, in an opinion by Justice John Paul Stevens, upheld the EPA's interpretation. A two-part analysis was born from the Chevron decision (called the "Chevron two-step test"), where a reviewing court determines:
Importance
Chevron is probably the most frequently cited case in American administrative law, but some scholars suggest that the decision has had little impact on the Supreme Court's jurisprudence and merely clarified the Court's existing approach.Thomas W. Merrill, "Judicial Deference to Executive Precedent", 101 Yale L.J. 969, 982–985 (1992) The ruling that the judiciary should defer to a federal agency's interpretation of ambiguous language from Congressional legislation relevant to the agency is often referred to as the Chevron deference. Several of the EPA's rulings for emissions regulations, as well as the Federal Communications Commission's stance on net neutrality have been based on cases decided on the Chevron deference.
Chevron, 18 years later, was able to invoke Chevron deference to win another case, Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Echazabal, , before the Supreme Court. In a unanimous decision, the Court applied Chevron deference and upheld as reasonable an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission regulation, which allowed an employer to refuse to hire an applicant when the applicant's disability on the job would pose a "direct threat" to the applicant's own health.
Three 21st-century decisions of the Supreme Court may limit the scope of administrative agency actions that receive Chevron deference to agency decisions that have the "force of law".See Barnhart v. Walton, 535 U.S. 212 (2002); United States v. Mead Corp., 533 U.S. 218 (2001); Christensen v. Harris County, 529 U.S. 576 (2000). This new doctrine is sometimes referred to as "Chevron step zero".See, for example, Cass R. Sunstein, "Chevron Step Zero", 92 Va. L. Rev. 187 (2006). Thus, for example, a regulation promulgated under the "notice and comment" provisions of § 553 of the Administrative Procedure Act would be likely to receive Chevron deference, but a letter sent by an agency, such as a US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) "no-action" letter, would not.See Christensen v. Harris County, 529 U.S. 576 (1999) (no Chevron deference to opinion letter sent by NLRB about interpretation of overtime laws) However, an agency action that does not receive Chevron deference may still receive some degree of deference under the old standard of Skidmore v. Swift & Co., 323 U.S. 134 (1944).See Barnhart v. Walton, 535 U.S. 212 (2002) (stating explicitly that Skidmore still applies to agency actions that do not receive Chevron deference) The majority in Christensen v. Harris County (2000) suggested that Chevron deference should apply to formal agency documents which have the force of law while Skidmore should apply to less formal agency documents in an attempt to draw a bright line for the question of "force of law" under Chevron step zero. In King v. Burwell (2015), the Supreme Court has suggested that Chevron deference may be inappropriate in regulatory actions of "deep economic and political significance",King v. Burwell, 576 U.S. ___, ___ (2015) (slip op., at 8) (internal quotation marks deleted) hinting at the possibility of substantially limiting, or even eliminating, the doctrine.See Michigan v. EPA, 576 U.S. ___, ___ (2015) (Thomas, J., concurring) (slip op., at 1).
Opposition
 Federal 
The United States House of Representatives in the 115th Congress passed a bill on January 11, 2017, called the "Regulatory Accountability Act of 2017", which, if made into law, would change the doctrine of Chevron deference. According to Charles Murray in By the People: Rebuilding Liberty Without Permission,
Chevron deference augments that characteristic of prerogative power by giving regulatory bureaucrats a pass available to no private citizen and to no other government officials — including the president and cabinet officers — who function outside the regulatory state. For everyone except officials of the regulatory state, judges do not defer to anything except the text of the law in question and the body of case law accompanying it.
Supreme Court Justice Neil Gorsuch (son of Anne Gorsuch, who was head of EPA at the time of the events which led to the Chevron decision) has also written opinions against Chevron deference, with news commentators believing that Gorsuch may rule against Chevron deference on the Supreme Court.
In the U.S. Supreme Court case City of Arlington, Tex. v. FCC, the dissent by Chief Justice Roberts joined by Justice Kennedy and Justice Alito objected to excessive Chevron deference to agencies:
My disagreement with the Court is fundamental. It is also easily expressed: A court should not defer to an agency until the court decides, on its own, that the agency is entitled to deference.
In Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council Inc., we established a test for reviewing "an agency's construction of the statute which it administers." 467 U.S. 837, 842, 104 S.Ct. 2778, 81 L.Ed.2d 694 (1984). If Congress has "directly spoken to the precise question at issue," we said, "that is the end of the matter." Ibid. A contrary agency interpretation must give way.
"It is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law is." Marbury v. Madison, 1 Cranch 137, 177, 2 L.Ed. 60 (1803). The rise of the modern administrative state has not changed that duty. Indeed, the Administrative Procedure Act, governing judicial review of most agency action, instructs reviewing courts to decide "all relevant questions of law." 5 U.S.C. § 706.
Likewise before joining the U.S. Supreme Court, 10th Circuit Judge Gorsuch in his concurrence in Gutierrez-Brizuela v. Lynch also objected to excessive Chevron deference to agencies:
Quite literally then, after this court declared the statutes' meaning and issued a final decision, an executive agency was permitted to (and did) tell us to reverse our decision like some sort of super court of appeals. If that doesn't qualify as an unconstitutional revision of a judicial declaration of the law by a political branch, I confess I begin to wonder whether we've forgotten what might.
In the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) Congress vested the courts with the power to "interpret ... statutory provisions" and overturn agency action inconsistent with those interpretations. 5 U.S.C. § 706.
For whatever the agency may be doing under Chevron, the problem remains that courts are not fulfilling their duty to interpret the law and declare invalid agency actions inconsistent with those interpretations in the cases and controversies that come before them. A duty expressly assigned to them by the APA and one often likely compelled by the Constitution itself. That's a problem for the judiciary. And it is a problem for the people whose liberties may now be impaired not by an independent decisionmaker seeking to declare the law's meaning as fairly as possible — the decisionmaker promised to them by law — but by an avowedly politicized administrative agent seeking to pursue whatever policy whim may rule the day.
Subsequently, in Waterkeeper Alliance v. EPA the court did not defer to the agency's interpretation.
State
Arizona
At the state level, Arizona has statutorily overturned Chevron deference with respect to most of its own agencies. In April 2018, the state's governor Doug Ducey signed HB 2238 into law, which states in relevant part,
In a proceeding brought by or against the regulated party, the court shall decide all questions of law, including the interpretation of a constitutional or statutory provision or a rule adopted by an agency, without deference to any previous determination that may have been made on the question by the agency.
The bill explicitly exempts health care appeals and actions of agencies created by the state's Corporation Commission.
Florida
In November 2018, voters in Florida approved an amendment to the Florida State Constitution, which states,
In interpreting a state statute or rule, a state court or an officer hearing an administrative action pursuant to general law may not defer to an administrative agency’s interpretation of such statute or rule, and must instead interpret such statute or rule de novo.
The amendment also stopped deference to agencies' interpretation of its own rules, ending Auer deference in the state.
Mississippi
The Mississippi Supreme Court judicially overturned Chevron deference at the state level in King v. Mississippi Military Department (2018).
North Carolina
The North Carolina Supreme Court has rejected Chevron deference, but the state agencies are still entitled to deference comparable to Skidmore deference. Nevertheless some lower courts have continued to give agencies deference under Chevron.
Ohio
The Ohio Supreme Court judicially overturned Chevron deference at the state level in TWISM Enterprises v. State Board of Registration in 2023.
Wisconsin
The Wisconsin Supreme Court judicially overturned Chevron deference at the state level in Tetra Tech, Inc. v. Wisconsin Department of Revenue (2016). In 2018, Governor Scott Walker signed a bill prohibiting courts from deferring to agency interpretations, and thus codifying the end to deference in Wisconsin.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 467
 United States v. Mead Corp. (2001) – more recent case addressing the limits of Chevron deference and the deference to be afforded to informal rule making
 West Virginia v. EPA (2022) - a ruling that codifies the major questions doctrine, a legal theory that partially invalidates the Chevron deference
Further reading
 Wiseman, A., & Wright, J. (2020). "Chevron, State Farm, and the Impact of Judicial Doctrine on Bureaucratic Policymaking." Perspectives on Politics.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:Chevron Corporation
Category:1984 in the environment
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:Natural Resources Defense Council
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Chiafalo v. Washington" ==> """
Chiafalo v. Washington, , was a United States Supreme Court case on the issue of "faithless electors" in the Electoral College stemming from the 2016 United States presidential election. The Court ruled unanimously, by a vote of 8–0, that states have the ability to enforce an elector's pledge in presidential elections. Chiafalo deals with electors who received  fines for not voting for the nominees of their party in the state of Washington. The case was originally consolidated with Colorado Department of State v. Baca, , a similar case based on a challenge to a Colorado law providing for the removal and replacement of an elector who does not vote for the presidential candidate who received the most votes in the state, with the electors claiming they have discretion to vote as they choose under the Twelfth Amendment to the United States Constitution. On March 10, 2020, Justice Sonia Sotomayor recused herself in the Colorado case due to a prior relationship to a respondent, and the cases were decided separately on July 6, 2020. Baca was a per curiam decision that followed from the unanimous ruling in Chiafalo against the faithless electors and in favor of the state.
Background
Faithless electors
In the United States Electoral College, faithless electors are those who either cast electoral votes for someone other than the candidate of the party for whom they pledged to vote or who abstain. Faithless electors are comparatively rare because electors are generally chosen among those who are already personally committed to a party and party's candidate.  Thirty-three states plus the District of Columbia have passed laws to prevent faithless electors, but none had been enforced prior to 2016. In 1952, the constitutionality of state pledge laws was brought before the Supreme Court in Ray v. Blair, . The Court ruled in favor of state laws requiring electors to pledge to vote for the winning candidate in order to be certified as electors, as well as removing electors who refuse to pledge. The Court did not rule whether pledges were enforceable. Nevertheless, the Court also wrote:
In his dissent, Justice Robert H. Jackson, joined by Justice William O. Douglas, wrote:
State law
For the 2016 election, Washington state law RCW 29A.56.320 required electors, selected by their party, to vote for the candidate of their party during the presidential election, or otherwise be subject to a  civil penalty.
Under Colorado law, each presidential elector must vote for the presidential and vice-presidential candidates who received the highest number of votes in Colorado's general election.
Case history
In the 2016 presidential election, the major-party nominees were Hillary Clinton and her running mate Tim Kaine for the Democrats, and Donald Trump and his running mate Mike Pence for the Republicans. Trump eventually won the election with 304 electoral votes to become the 45th President of the United States. There was a grassroots effort to convince electors to vote their conscience in accordance with Alexander Hamilton's Federalist Paper No. 68 to try to sway electors to vote for an alternative Republican candidate, even if this were to violate their pledges, to deny Trump a majority in the electoral college and trigger a contingent election in the United States House of Representatives. While the defection of at least 37 Republican electors was needed to force a contingent election, there were only 2 who did not vote for Donald Trump; most of the faithless votes came from Democratic electors, several of whom also voted for alternative Republican candidates.
Washington
The Democratic ticket of Clinton and Kaine won the popular vote in Washington, thus the slate of twelve Democratic electors were appointed. Four of these electors, who had signed pledges to vote for the Democratic nominee, voted for candidates other than Clinton/Kaine. Per the law, they were each fined. Three of the four electors, Peter Bret Chiafalo, Levi Guerra, and Esther John, challenged the fine as a violation of their constitutional rights, arguing that the state's authority over them as electors ended once they were appointed and they were free to vote as they chose under the Twelfth Amendment to the United States Constitution. At an initial hearing, an administrative law judge upheld the fines, stating he had no jurisdiction to rule on constitutional arguments, only whether the fines were applied in accordance with state law. At the first trial at the Thurston County Superior Court in 2017, the judge ruled against the constitutional argument and deemed the fines permissible. The three electors then appealed to the Washington Supreme Court, which in May 2019 upheld the lower court ruling with an 8–1 vote. The majority opinion states that "The power of electors to vote comes from the State, and the elector has no personal right to that vote" to justify the fine. The lone dissent argues that the plenary power of the state to appoint electors may not be conflated with control over the electors once voting has begun, in line with Justice Jackson's concerns in Ray v. Blair.
Subsequently, Washington Gov. Jay Inslee signed a bill into law in May 2019 that changes the faithless elector law, such that should an elector fail to vote for the candidate of their party, the elector is removed from their position and a new elector is then appointed, rather than allowing the elector to vote faithlessly and be subject to fines after the fact. The new law is analogous to the law in question in the Colorado case.
On October 7, 2019, the three electors appealed their case to the United States Supreme Court.
Colorado
Clinton and Kaine received the most votes in Colorado, a state allotted 9 electoral votes. Two Democratic electors in the 2016 election sought an injunction against the state's law after the results of the general election were tallied in early November 2016 but before the electoral college vote on December 19, 2016. The named plaintiff in the case was former Democratic state senator Polly Baca of Denver, who had indicated she would cast her vote for an alternative Republican candidate. The named defendant was John Hickenlooper, then the Governor of Colorado. They challenged Colorado's law on the basis of their constitutional rights under the Twelfth and Fourteenth Amendments, as well as the Supreme Court's prior ruling in Ray v. Blair that left open whether states can compel electors to vote as specified with penalties. On December 12, 2016, District Judge Wiley Daniel of the United States District Court for the District of Colorado denied the indicative petition, calling the case a "political stunt". Wayne Williams, then the Secretary of State of Colorado, stated that he would replace electors who failed to vote for Hillary Clinton.
The electors' appeal of the decision to the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit was denied on December 16, with the court stating the injunction "would undermine the electoral process and unduly prejudice the American people by prohibiting a successful transition of power". The court did not rule on the state's authority to remove an elector after voting, but declared in a footnote that any attempt to remove electors "after voting has begun" would be "unlikely in light of the text of the Twelfth Amendment".
While both electors ultimately voted for Clinton during the electoral college vote on December 19, a different elector, Micheal  Baca (no relation to Polly), attempted to vote for John Kasich. Before voting for vice president, Williams declared his vote invalid under state law and replaced him with an alternate elector who voted for Clinton and Tim Kaine.
Micheal Baca and the two other electors then filed suit in a new case, Nemanich v. Williams, claiming "The Constitution does not expressly or implicitly give the states any power to restrict Electors' freedom beyond the 12th Amendment's single limitation." Later, the respondent was changed to the Colorado Department of State. On April 10, 2018, Judge Daniel granted the motion to dismiss the case on behalf of Colorado. The electors appealed to the Tenth Circuit, with oral arguments held in January 2019. Both sides filed a joint motion seeking the court to render a decision on the merits of the case, with Colorado claiming to waive immunity from suit. The court ruled in favor of the electors in a 2–1 vote in August 2019, agreeing that Baca's removal as an elector violated the Twelfth Amendment. The majority opinion, written by Circuit Judge Carolyn Baldwin McHugh and joined by Circuit Judge Jerome Holmes, stated that "The text of the Constitution makes clear that states do not have the constitutional authority to interfere with presidential electors who exercise their constitutional right to vote for the President and Vice President candidates of their choice." Circuit Judge Mary Beck Briscoe did not take a position on the merits of the case but dissented on mootness and standing grounds. The court did rule that only Micheal  Baca had standing and officially remanded the case back to the district court. The ruling immediately invalidated faithless elector laws in states within the 10th Circuit, specifically in New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Wyoming.
Instead of seeking an en banc review at the Tenth Circuit, Colorado filed a petition for writ of certiorari to the Supreme Court on October 16, 2019. Colorado's petition identified the circuit split between the Tenth Circuit's decision and that of the Washington Supreme Court in Chiafalo, seeking the Supreme Court's involvement to resolve the split. Colorado's petition urged for an urgent resolution to the case, as the matter may impact the 2020 election.
Supreme Court
On January 17, 2020, the Supreme Court agreed to hear both the Washington case and the Colorado case, Colorado Department of State v. Baca, 19-518, as a consolidated case, with Chiafalo v. Washington the lead case. Oral arguments were originally scheduled for April 28, 2020. However, on March 10, Justice Sonia Sotomayor announced that she would recuse herself from the Colorado case, citing her prior friendship with the respondent Polly Baca. As a separate result, the Supreme Court reversed the consolidation of the two cases in a decision that Sotomayor had no part in due to her connection to Baca. Oral arguments in both cases were rescheduled to be held via teleconference due to the COVID-19 pandemic, which occurred on May 13, 2020. Observers to the arguments for both cases believed the justices were concerned with the chaos that allowing faithless electors to vote how they wanted, or to be influenced by bribes, would have on the election process. Lawrence Lessig, representing the electors in the Washington case, argued that the Constitution does not give the authority to states to restrict how electors can vote, but several justices stated that the Constitution does not block states from such restrictions. In light of oral arguments, some legal scholars thought that the Court may overly weight the potential negative consequences of the constitutional provisions for electors and allow for their original meaning to be overridden.
The Court issued its rulings in both Chiafalo and Baca on July 6, 2020. Chiafalo was a unanimous ruling of the court, affirming the Washington court's decision that states may enforce the pledge of an elector in the presidential election; Baca was decided per curiam (with Sotomayor recused) reversing the Court of Appeals' judgement "for the reasons stated in Chiafalo..." Justice Elena Kagan wrote the majority opinion which all but Justice Clarence Thomas joined. Kagan wrote "Today, we consider whether a State may also penalize an elector for breaking his pledge and voting for someone other than the presidential candidate who won his State's popular vote. We hold that a State may do so...The Constitution's text and the Nation's history both support allowing a State to enforce an elector's pledge to support his party's nominee — and the state voters' choice — for President." Thomas wrote a concurrence that was partially joined by Justice Neil Gorsuch, adding that "nothing in the Constitution prevents States from requiring Presidential electors to vote for the candidate chosen by the people." In Baca, Thomas concurred in the judgment without an opinion.https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/19pdf/19-518_6k47.pdf 
Impact
The Supreme Court's decision was highly anticipated with respect to the upcoming 2020 presidential election. Though faithless electors have never changed the outcome of an election, some argue the possibility that faithless votes could affect the outcome in a close election increased in light of the events of 2016. The Court's ruling was widely seen as a welcome outcome in the interest of avoiding potential election chaos, but some also argued that it reaffirmed the need for Electoral College reform.
The electors in both cases were represented by Lawrence Lessig, who founded the group Equal Citizens that is pursuing litigation to seek democratic election reforms and raise awareness. Lessig argued that both cases offered the Supreme Court the opportunity to rule on the matter of faithless elector laws outside the realm of a contested election where their ruling would have a direct impact on the outcome, as in Bush v. Gore. By clarifying how the Electoral College actually functions, Lessig and Equal Citizens hope to spur Electoral College reform via either a constitutional amendment or the National Popular Vote Interstate Compact. In the latter case, the decision was seen to strengthen the claim that states may choose to appoint electors based on the national popular vote. Others cautioned against reading the case opinion too broadly.
Some legal scholars have questioned the Court's reliance on the appointment power of the states under Article II to justify control over electors, noting that similar Constitutional text that gave state legislatures the power to appoint senators (prior to the 17th Amendment) was never understood to include the power to control how they vote, and that removal and replacement of an elector, as in Baca, directly conflicts with the plain meaning of the text of the 12th Amendment, which mandates that once an elector casts a vote, it must be counted and included on a list that is sent to Congress. Other questions have been raised specifically regarding the brief per curiam decision in Baca, such as why Justice Gorsuch did not also join the 10th Amendment discussion by Justice Thomas in his concurring opinion as he did in Chiafalo or how the justices dealt with the mootness and standing questions specific to Baca raised by several justices at oral argument.
 See also 
 McPherson v. Blacker (1892)
 Ray v. Blair (1952)
 References 
 Further reading 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States One Person, One Vote Legal Doctrine
Category:Colorado law
Category:Washington (state) law
Category:Donald Trump 2016 presidential campaign
Category:Never Trump movement
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit cases
Category:United States presidential elections in Colorado
Category:United States presidential elections in Washington (state)
Category:United States Electoral College
Category:United States Constitution Article Two case law
Category:United States elections case law
Category:Controversies of the 2016 United States presidential election
Category:John Hickenlooper
Category:United States Tenth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Chiarella v. United States" ==> """
Chiarella v. United States, 445 U.S. 222 (1980), is a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that an employee of a printer handling corporate takeover bids who deduced target companies' identities and dealt in their stock without disclosing his knowledge of impending takeovers, had not violated § 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. and SEC Rule 10b-5.
Background
After working in a position that gave petitioner Vincent Chiarella inside information on particular corporate takeover bids, the Securities and Exchanges Commission (SEC) investigated his trading activities. Chiarella and the SEC allegedly came to an agreement where Chiarella "agreed to return the profits he made in the sellers of the shares." A short time after, he was indicted on seventeen counts of violating the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
Question before the Court
Did Chiaraella "violate Section 10(b) of the 1934 Act by failing to disclose the impending takeover before trading in the target company's securities?" 
Decision of the Court
In a 6–3 decision in favor of Chiarella, Justice Powell wrote the opinion of the Supreme Court. The Court held that  "a duty to disclose under section 10(b) does not arise from the mere possession of nonpublic market information." Chiarella had no "fiduciary relationship" with either company, nor was he an agent of either company, Chiarella had no duty to disclose the privileged information, and he did not receive confidential information from the targeted companies.
References
External links
Category:1980 in United States case law
Category:United States securities case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Chicago & Northwestern Railway Co. v. Crane" ==> """
Chicago & Northwestern R. Co. v. Crane, 113 U.S. 424 (1885), was a suit brought by a taxpayer and resident in the Town of Polk City, Iowa, on behalf of himself and all other resident voters, taxpayers and property holders, commenced suit in a state court of Iowa against two companies, praying for a peremptory writ of mandamus to compel the reconstruction and operation of the old line after the Chicago and North Western Railway, an Illinois corporation. changed the line and made it avoid the city, constructing a branch to the latter.  C&NW Railway was leased the line by the D&M Railroad Company, an Iowa Corporation, who had received from a township in Iowa, in consideration of its agreement to construct and maintain a railroad to a city in the township, the proceeds of a special tax and a conveyance of a large amount of swamp lands. It constructed the railroad and operating it for a time before leasing it to C&N Railway.Chicago & Northwestern R. Co. v. Crane, .
The Chicago and Northwestern Railway Company filed its petition for a removal of the cause to the circuit court of the United States. After setting out that the matter and amount in dispute, exclusive of costs, exceeds the sum or value of $500 and that the petitioner is a corporation and citizen of Illinois.
Justice Matthews delivered the opinion of the Court. He recited the facts as stated above and continued:
The right of removal from the state court which is contested in this case is founded on the last clause of the second section of the Act of March 3, 1875, 18 Stat. 470, Richardson's Supplement 173:
"And when in any suit mentioned in this section there shall be a controversy which is wholly between citizens of different states, and which can be fully determined as between them, then either one or more of the plaintiffs or defendants actually interested in such controversy may remove said suit into the Circuit Court of the United States for the proper district."
It is accordingly argued in its support that the sole and real controversy disclosed by the pleadings is between the plaintiff below and the plaintiff in error, to which the Des Moines and Minneapolis Railroad Company is a merely nominal party. The action, it is said, is brought in pursuance of § 3373 of the Iowa Code, which is as follows:
"The action of mandamus is one brought in a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain an order of such court commanding an inferior tribunal, board, corporation, or person to do or not to do an act, the performance or omission of which the law enjoins as a duty resulting from an office, trust, or station."
And by § 3379 it is further provided that
"The pleadings and other proceedings in any action in which a mandamus is claimed shall be the same in all respects as nearly as may be, and costs shall be recovered by either party as in an ordinary action for the recovery of damages. "
It is also declared in § 3375 that
"The plaintiff in any action, except those brought for the recovery of specific, real, or personal property, may also, as an auxiliary relief, have an order of mandamus to compel the performance of a duty established in such action. But if such duty the performance of which is sought to be compelled is not one resulting from an office, trust, or station, it must be one for the breach of which a legal right to damages is already complete at the commencement of the action, and must also be a duty of which a court of equity would enforce the performance."
The proposition that the Des Moines and Minneapolis Railroad Company is a merely nominal and not a real and substantial party to the controversy is maintained on two grounds, (1) that the relief sought against it rests upon the force of the alleged agreements in reference to the location of its line, which constitute the conditions of the taxes voted, lands granted, and stock subscriptions paid to it, and that mandamus will not lie for the purpose of enforcing the specific performance of personal contracts, (2) and that the Des Moines and Minneapolis Railroad Company is not only exonerated but disabled from the performance of the duty sought to be enforced against it, if for such it were amenable to the process of mandamus, by virtue of the lease of its road, property, and franchises to the plaintiff in error, that lease being authorized by § 1300 of the Code of Iowa, as follows:
"Any such corporation may sell or lease its railway property and franchises, or make joint running arrangements with any corporation owning or operating any connecting railway, and the corporation operating the railway of another shall in all respects be liable in the same manner and extent as though such railway belonged to it, subject to the laws of this state."
But to sustain the first point it is necessary to decide the controversy in favor of the Des Moines and Minneapolis Railroad Company, one of the defendants sought to be charged, upon its merits. That necessarily affirms that such a controversy exists, and that, in its turn, proves that the circuit court did not err in holding that it had no jurisdiction to entertain it. 
It may be a question whether the remedy by mandamus is not larger and more extensive under the Iowa Code than the plaintiff in error admits. And at any rate, we cannot strike from the record parts of the plaintiff's case as immaterial without assuming the point to be proved that we have a right to consider its merits at all, for whether they are material may be the substance of the controversy. It may well be that the scope of the plaintiff's case includes the claim that the railway company, having, on the faith of the alleged agreements, made a location of its line, exhausted its corporate power in reference to its establishment, or that even if it still had corporate discretion to change it, the circumstances alleged, including the agreements made on condition of its original location, may not have created a corporate duty, enforceable by mandamus, to maintain and permanently operate it. These are questions certainly which the plaintiff in the action has the right to raise and have tried in any court of his own selection having proper jurisdiction, and they raise a controversy with the Des Moines and Minneapolis Railroad Company, to which it is a necessary party, unless it is relieved from it by the substitution in its place of its lessee by the law under which it transferred its property and franchises to the plaintiff in error.
But that section of the statute already quoted has no such effect. The court found that It does not discharge the lessor company from any of its corporate liabilities. It merely imposes a liability upon the lessee while operating it, and if this liability extends, as is claimed, to obligations of the lessor antecedent to the lease, such as that sought to be enforced in the present proceeding, there is nothing in the statute to exclude the idea that it is a joint liability, enforceable against both.
If it be said that the liability is that of the lessor, but that it is disabled by the lease from its performance, and that that duty is cast by the lease and the law upon the lessee, then the necessity for a joinder in the action is still more apparent for, to obtain a judgment against the plaintiff in error, requiring it to per form a duty devolved upon it merely because it has assumed under the law to perform the duties of another, makes it necessary, upon well settled rules of pleading, also to obtain a judgment against the latter to declare and determine with conclusive force the existence and limits of the duty to be enforced against its guarantor and substitute.
In any view we are justified in taking of the nature of the controversy disclosed by the pleadings in this proceeding, we conclude that both the original defendants are necessary parties to its determination, and that consequently the plaintiff in error was not entitled to remove the suit from the jurisdiction of the state court.
The judgment of the circuit court was accordingly affirmed.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Chicago and North Western Railway
Category:Railway litigation in 1885
"""

From "Chicago Board of Trade v. Christie Grain & Stock Co." ==> """
Chicago Board of Trade v. Christie Grain & Stock Co.,  198 U.S. 236  (1905),  was a decision by the  United States Supreme Court,  which upheld sales of  American  grain for future delivery provided for by the rules of the  Chicago Board of Trade  of the state of Illinois. Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. delivered the majority opinion of the court, in which he wrote:
People will endeavor to forecast the future and to make agreements according to their prophecy.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 198
Clews v. Jamieson (1901)
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:1905 in United States case law
Category:Grain industry of the United States
Category:Grain trade
Category:Chicago Board of Trade litigation
"""

From "Chicago Board of Trade v. United States" ==> """
Chicago Board of Trade v. United States, 246 U.S. 231 (1918), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States applied the "rule of reason" to the internal trading rules of a commodity market. Section 1 of the Sherman Act flatly states: "Every contract, combination in the form of trust or otherwise, or conspiracy, in restraint of trade or commerce among the several States, or with foreign nations, is declared to be illegal."Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890, § 1 (excerpt). However, in evaluating the U.S. government's allegations that the Chicago Board of Trade's rules on grain prices violated the Act, the Supreme Court rejected a strict interpretation of its language: "The true test of legality is whether the restraint imposed is such as merely regulates and perhaps thereby promotes competition or whether it is such as may suppress or even destroy competition."
Facts
Defendant Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) is a commodity market, dealing in spot sales (sales of grain stored in Chicago and ready for delivery), future sales (grain to be purchased for delivery at a later time), and “to arrive” orders (grain which is en route to Chicago).  CBOT introduced a new “call rule” which regulated board members buying or selling sales of “to arrive” orders—at the close of the call session (which at that point was 2:00 p.m Central Time), the price of grain is set and dealers can't sell grain at any other price.  The United States Department of Justice accused CBOT of price-fixing, and in 1913, filed suit against the Board in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois.
At trial, CBOT asserted that the rule did not have any unlawful purpose, but rather was set up to curb certain pre-existing problems and abuses.  CBOT claimed that a group of agents were lowering discounts on commissions to those people buying grain after hours.  These agents would wait until after hours, and then buyers would get cheaper prices.  CBOT wanted to curb the power of these monopsony/oligopsony type of buyers by making prices the same for everyone after hours.  Also, the rule shortened the traders’ work hours, for the convenience of its members.
Ultimately, however, the District Court did not issue an opinion.  The Justice Department and CBOT entered into a consent decree under which enjoined them from acting upon the same or from adopting or acting upon any similar rule.
Judgment
Justice Brandeis, writing for a unanimous court, first observed that every trade association and board of trade imposes some restraint upon the conduct of its members.  He explained the essence of the Rule of Reason:  "The true test of legality is whether the restraint imposed is such as merely regulates and perhaps thereby promotes competition or whether it is such as may suppress or even destroy competition."  Whether or not a rule restrains trade in violation of the Sherman Act thus turns on the facts and circumstances of each particular case.
He then examined the nature, scope, effect, and history of the rule.  He held that the call rule was ultimately procompetitive in purpose and effect.  The scope of the rule was such that it only operated during certain times of day, and affects only small percentage of the grain market.  The rule helped to create public market for grain and made pricing more transparent.  It decreased the market power of dominant sellers and made sure that prices were set by open competitive bidding.  The decree of the District Court was reversed.
See also
US antitrust law
Notes
External links
Category:1918 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States commodity and futures case law
Category:Chicago Board of Trade litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "Chicago Life Insurance Co. v. Needles" ==> """
Chicago Life Insurance Co. v. Needles, 113 U.S. 574 (1885), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court. It involved the writ of error regarding a denial of a motion and final judgment rendered perpetually enjoining Chicago Life Ins. Co. from further prosecution of its business. From that judgment, a writ of error was prosecuted to the supreme court of the state, where, among other things, was assigned for error the refusal of the court of original jurisdiction to adjudge that the said statutes of Illinois were in violation of the Constitution of the United States. The judgment of the inferior court was in all things affirmed by the supreme court of the state, and from that judgment of affirmance the present writ of error is prosecuted.Chicago Life Ins. Co. v. Needles, .
An Act of the General Assembly of Illinois created a body politic and corporate by the name of the Travelers Insurance Company, with authority to carry on the business of insuring persons against the accidental loss of life or personal injury sustained while traveling by railways, steamers, and other modes of conveyance. Another Act formally accepted by the company, its name was changed to that of the Chicago Life Insurance Company, and was invested with power to make insurance upon the lives of individuals, and of persons connected by marital relations, to those applying for insurance, or in whom the applicant had a pecuniary interest as creditor or otherwise, "to secure trusts, grants, annuities, and endowments, and purchase the same in such manner and for such premiums and considerations as the board of directors or executive committee shall direct."  A general law of the state, approved March 26, 1869, and which took effect July 1, 1869, entitled "An act to organize and regulate the business of life insurance" 
Under the authority conferred by the latter statute, the auditor caused an examination to be made by the chief clerk of the insurance department of the state into the condition of this company. That officer reported that it had been doing a losing business for several years, was insolvent within the meaning of the statute, and that immediate steps should be taken to appoint a receiver, to the end that the affairs of the company be wound up as quickly as possible, as being for the best interests of its policyholders. As the result of that examination, the present proceedings were commenced by the auditor in the Circuit Court of Cook County under the said act of 1874. The petition filed by him shows that in his opinion the condition of the company rendered its further continuance in business hazardous to the insured. He prayed that the company be enjoined from further prosecuting its business; that a receiver be appointed to take charge of its real estate and effects, and that such other relief be granted as should be meet. An injunction was issued and a receiver appointed with authority to take possession of the property of the company, the latter being directed to execute all conveyances necessary to vest in him full title to all its property, assets, and choses in action. The company, by its answer, put the plaintiff on proof of all the material allegations of the petition. 
At the final hearing, it moved the court, upon written grounds, for a final decree in its behalf; one of which was that the statutes of the state under which these proceedings were had were in violation of the Constitution of the United States in that they impaired the obligation of the contract between the state and the company, as well as of the contracts between the company and its policyholders and creditors.  This motion was denied and a final judgment rendered perpetually enjoining the company from further prosecution of its business. 
The whole argument in behalf of the company proceeds upon the erroneous assumption that this Court has authority to determine whether the facts make a case under the statutes of 1869 and 1874, and if it be found that they did not, that it must enforce the right of the company to continue in business, despite the final judgment to the contrary by the courts of the state which created it, whereas we have only to inquire whether the statutes in question impair the obligation of any contract which the company has with the state or violate any other provision of the national Constitution. Being of opinion that they are not open to any objection of that character, the judgment must be affirmed without any reference to the weight of the evidence upon any issue of fact made by the pleadings.
The judgment was affirmed.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
"""

From "Chicago Police Dept. v. Mosley" ==> """
Chicago Police Dept. v. Mosley, 408 U.S. 92 (1972), was a United States Supreme Court case which concerned freedom of speech under the First Amendment. Oral argument for this case  was consolidated with Grayned v. City of Rockford, but separate opinions were issued for each. Earl Mosley had protested employment discrimination by carrying a sign on the sidewalk in front of a Chicago high school, until the city of Chicago made it illegal to do so. Although Chicago believed that its ordinance was a time, place, or manner restriction, and therefore was a constitutional law, the Supreme Court ruled that it was a content-based restriction, because it treated labor-related protests differently from other protests. Since the ordinance did not meet the higher standards for content-based restrictions, it was ruled unconstitutional.
Background
 Factual background 
Over the course of seven months in 1967 and 1968, Earl Mosley had frequently picketed the Jones Commercial High School in Chicago with a sign that read: "Jones High School practices black discrimination. Jones High School has a black quota."Mosley v. Chicago Police Dept., 432 F.2d 1256 (7th Cir. 1970) As the city of Chicago would admit during litigation, Mosley's protests were "always peaceful, orderly, and quiet." Still, effective April 5, 1968, Chicago amended its disorderly conduct ordinance in a way that outlawed his protests:
When he saw a notice of the ordinance in a newspaper, Mosley called the police department, who advised him that he'd be arrested if he kept up his protest. Mosley did stop protesting, but he filed a lawsuit in federal court in the Northern District of Illinois to overturn the ordinance.
 Proceedings in lower courts 
The trial court sided with the city and issued a directed verdict upholding the ordinance, reasoning that it met the standards for a time, place, or manner restriction. On appeal, however, the Seventh Circuit ruled that it was overbroad. Because the law could apply to circumstances where the city had not demonstrated any real reason to prohibit all peaceful protests (such as Mr. Mosley's), it prohibited speech more broadly than the constitution would allow:
Chicago appealed the ruling to the U.S. Supreme Court.
 Consolidation with Grayned v. City of Rockford 
The same year, the U.S. Supreme Court also accepted an appeal from the Illinois Supreme Court in Grayned v. City of Rockford. In that case, the Illinois Supreme Court had upheld two of Rockford's ordinances; one was an anti-noise ordinance, and the other an anti-picketing ordinance that was identical to Chicago's ordinance. 
Decision
The Supreme Court unanimously upheld the Seventh Circuit's decision, holding that the ordinance was unconstitutional. Six justices supported the majority opinion, two concurred without writing or joining an opinion, and Chief Justice Burger wrote a separate concurrence.
 Majority opinion 
In an opinion by Justice Thurgood Marshall, the Court ruled that the Chicago's ordinance prohibiting non-labor pickets on school property violated the First Amendment's Freedom to Protest, as well as the Fourteenth Amendment of equal protection under the law.. While some of oral argument focused on whether different possible variations on the ordinance–such as whether a radius smaller than 150 feet would be acceptable, or whether the ordinance could affect just school property as opposed to "a public way" outside–the opinion ultimately focused on the fact that labor disputes were treated differently from any other type of speech. That meant the Court had to consider whether it violated the Equal Protection clause, and it found that it did:
This opinion contains what would become an often-quoted statement about the First Amendment's strong protection for free speech:
 Burger's concurrence 
Chief Justice Warren Burger wrote a short concurrence in order to state that, although he agreed with the majority on this case's outcome, "the First Amendment does not literally mean that we 'are guaranteed the right to express any thought...'"
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:Chicago Police Department
Category:Chicago Public Schools
Category:Thurgood Marshall
"""

From "Chicago, Burlington & Quincy Railroad Co. v. City of Chicago" ==> """
Chicago, Burlington & Quincy Railroad Co. v. City of Chicago, 166 U.S. 226 (1897), was a ruling that determined the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment required states to provide just compensation for seizing private property..
Background
Chicago City Council decided on October 9, 1880 to widen Rockwell Street, which required appropriating land owned by private individuals as well as a right of way owned by Chicago, Burlington & Quincy Railroad Company. In a jury trial, the jury awarded the individual land owners the fair value of their land but awarded the railroad company only $1.166 U.S. at 230. The railroad company appealed.
The City of Chicago contended that due process of law was purely procedural and only required allowing the railroad company's case to be heard: "[T]he question as to the amount of compensation to be awarded to the railroad company was one of local law merely, and ... the company appearing and having full opportunity to be heard, the requirement of due process of law was observed."166 U.S. at 233.
Majority opinion
Justice Harlan delivered the opinion of the court.  Justice Brewer was the sole dissenter, and Chief Justice Melville Fuller took no part.
"Regard must be had to substance, not to form"
Justice Harlan argued that the concept of due process of law required fair compensation to be given for any private property seized by the state. In responding to the City of Chicago's claim that due process of law was served merely by allowing the railroad company's grievance to be heard, Harlan stated that satisfying legislative procedure alone is not enough to satisfy due process: "In determining what is due process of law, regard must be had to substance, not to form."166 U.S. at 235.
Harlan then claims that part of the 'substance' of due process requires the legislation to provide for fair compensation for private property:
The legislature may prescribe a form of procedure to be observed in the taking of private property for public use, but it is not due process of law if provision be not made for compensation. Notice to the owner to appear in some judicial tribunal and show cause why his property shall not be taken for public use without compensation would be a mockery of justice. Due process of law, as applied to judicial proceedings instituted for the taking of private property for public use means, therefore, such process as recognizes the right of the owner to be compensated if his property be wrested from him and transferred to the public.166 U.S. at 237.
"Wanting in the due process of law required by the fourteenth amendment"
The court determined that just compensation was required for a conception of due process of law:
In our opinion, a judgment of a state court, even if it be authorized by statute, whereby private property is taken for the state or under its direction for public use, without compensation made or secured to the owner, is, upon principle and authority, wanting in the due process of law required by the fourteenth amendment of the constitution of the United States, and the affirmance of such judgment by the highest court of the state is a denial by that state of a right secured to the owner by that instrument.166 U.S. at 241.
Having decided that the state is required to give just compensation after seizing private property for public use, the majority then found that just compensation had in fact been given to the railroad company by the state.
Dissenting opinion
In his dissent, Justice Brewer agreed that the due process of law required just compensation but disagreed with the majority finding that just compensation had indeed been given to the railroad. He argued that the $1 in compensation given to the railroad was merely nominal. In response to the majority opinion, Brewer wrote:
It is disappointing, after reading so strong a declaration of the protecting reach of the fourteenth amendment, and the power and duty of this court in enforcing it as against action by a state by any of its officers and agencies, to find sustained a judgment, depriving a party - even though a railroad corporation - of valuable property without any, or at least only nominal, compensation.166 U.S. at 259 (Brewer, J., dissenting).
See also
Chicago B. & Q.R. Co. v. Krayenbuhl
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 166
Incorporation of the Bill of Rights
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:1897 in United States case law
Category:Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad
Category:Incorporation case law
Category:Transportation in Chicago
Category:Railway litigation in 1897
"""

From "Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul Railway Co. v. Minnesota" ==> """
Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul Railway Company v. Minnesota, 134 U.S. 418 (1890), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that procedural due process limits state regulatory power over railroad rates.. A regulatory agency in Minnesota had set railroad rates that the Minnesota Supreme Court had refused to overturn. When the Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railroad appealed the case, the U.S. Supreme Court found that the rates were set without due process of law, specifically without an opportunity to challenge the equality and reasonableness of the charges. The Minnesota court had sanctioned rate-setting without any judicial hearing, requirement of notice or witnesses, "-in fact, nothing which has the semblance of due process of law".134 U.S. at 457.
The court rejected the railroad's argument that the state's contract with the Minnesota railroad line, as it existed in prior state-chartered companies that the railroad later bought, remained in force against state law. Instead, they found that the state's right to regulate industry could not be forfeited except by an explicit declaration in law. However, this issue was subsumed by the court's broader decision regarding due process.
Justice Bradley dissented from the decision, arguing that it practically overturned Munn v. Illinois and other railroad cases that left states to decide toll rates. He indicated that it was the province of the states to decide the policy question of railroad rates, and not that of the judiciary.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 134
References
External links
Category:1890 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Legal history of Minnesota
Category:Rail transportation in Minnesota
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:1890 in Minnesota
Category:Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railroad
"""

From "Chick Kam Choo v. Exxon Corp." ==> """
Chick Kam Choo v. Exxon Corp., 486 U.S. 140 (1988), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a federal court's dismissal of a civil action on the ground that it should be heard in a foreign court, under the doctrine of forum non conveniens, does not preclude the plaintiff from filing the same action in a state court that applies different forum non conveniens rules.
 Background and lower-court proceedings 
In 1977, a resident of Singapore died in a workplace accident while working for a subsidiary of Exxon. His widow, Chick Kam Choo, sued Exxon and other defendants in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas, asserting claims for wrongful death under federal and state law. The defendants moved to dismiss the claims on substantive grounds and on the basis of forum non conveniens. The court dismissed the federal statutory claims on their merits and dismissed the balance of the suit based on grounds of forum non conveniens, finding that the case should be litigated in Singapore rather than the United States. On appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit affirmed the dismissal.
Chick Kam Choo then re-filed her suit in a Texas state court. She sought to re-assert her federal and state-law claims, but soon voluntarily dismissed the federal claims. Exxon then returned to federal court and asked the District Court to grant an injunction prohibiting Chick Kam Choo from relitigating in state court the issues that had already been resolved against her in federal court. The District Court granted an injunction against Chick Kam Choo's pursuing any claims in state court relating to her husband's death. Chick Kam Choo appealed, asserting that this restriction violated the Anti-Injunction Act, 28 U.S.C. § 2283. A three-judge Fifth Circuit panel affirmed the injunction with one judge dissenting.
Chick Kam Choo sought review by the Supreme Court, which granted certiorari.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court modified the Fifth Circuit's decision in a unanimous opinion authored by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor. She noted that under the Anti-Injunction Act, Congress instructed the federal courts not to enjoin legal proceedings in state courts, except under narrow circumstances. One of the authorized exceptions is where an injunction is necessary to protect or effectuate the federal court's judgment. This "relitigation exception was designed to permit a federal court to prevent state litigation of an issue that was previously presented to and decided by the federal court" and is "founded in the well recognized concepts of res judicata and collateral estoppel."
Here, with respect to Chick Kam Choo's state-law wrongful death claim, the federal court's forum non conveniens determination that the case should be heard in Singapore rather than Texas did not preclude re-filing of the claim in Texas state court. Unlike the federal courts, which decide forum non conveniens motions based on a balancing of relevant factors, Texas state courts are bound by an "open courts" provision contained in the Texas State Constitution. Thus, "the only issue decided by the District Court was that [Chick Kam Choo's] claims should be dismissed under the federal forum non conveniens doctrine. Federal forum non conveniens principles simply cannot determine whether Texas courts ... which operate under a broad 'open courts' mandate, would consider themselves an appropriate forum for petitioner's lawsuit."Chick Kam Choo, 486 U.S. at 148. Therefore, "whether the Texas state courts [were] an appropriate forum for petitioner's Singapore law claims [had] not yet been litigated, and an injunction to foreclose consideration of that issue [was] not within the relitigation exception."Chick Kam Choo, 486 U.S. at 149.
The Court also rejected Exxon's argument that the state court was bound by the federal-court forum non conveniens decision because the case involved issues of federal maritime law. However, the Court agreed with the Fifth Circuit that to the extent the prior federal decisions resolved a choice of law issue in the case—determining that Singapore law, rather than Texas law, applied to the wrongful death claim—the Texas courts were bound by that determination.
 Concurring opinion 
Justice White filed a short concurring opinion. While agreeing with the Court's analysis and result, he opined that if the federal court had specifically held that federal maritime law required that the case be heard in Singapore, such a determination could have warranted preclusive effect.
 References 
External links
Category:1988 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Chickasaw Nation v. United States" ==> """
Chickasaw Nation v. United States, 534 U.S. 84 (2001),. was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that Indian tribes were liable for taxes on gambling operations under 25 U.S.C. §§ 2701–2721.Indian Gaming Regulatory Act, .
Background
The Chickasaw Nation operated several business, and used a pull-tab, similar to a scratch-off lottery ticket, to generate revenue for the tribe. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) advised the tribe that the tribe owed excise taxes and federal occupational taxes on revenue generated from the sales of these pull-tabs to the public. The tribe paid the amount sought by the IRS and then filed a claim for reimbursement, averring that the tribe was exempt from such taxes under the provisions of Indian Gaming Regulatory Act (IGRA), . The United States denied the claim, and the tribe filed suit in the Federal District Court, Eastern District of Oklahoma.Chickasaw Nation v. United States, No. 97-CV-511-P (E.D. Okla. 1998) The court granted the government's motion for summary judgment and the tribe appealed. The Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the decision of the trial court and the tribe appealed. The Supreme Court granted certiorari..
Additionally, the Choctaw Nation used the same pull-tab system and also filed suit in Federal District Court,Choctaw Nation of Okla. v. United States, No. 97-CV-510-B (E.D. Okla. 1998) with the same results as the Chickasaw tribe, and at the Tenth Circuit. At the Supreme Court, the appeals were combined.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Stephen Breyer delivered the opinion of the Court, affirming the judgment of the lower courts. The tribes argued that they were exempt from such taxes due to a provision of the IGRA that indicated that the tax laws applied to tribes in the same manner as to the states, which did not have to pay such taxes. The Court held that this was not the case, despite information in the record of the acts authors that stated that the "tax treatment of wagers conducted by tribal governments be the same as that for wagers conducted by state governments..."  The court held that the tribes were liable for the taxes.
Dissent
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor dissented, joined by Justice David Souter. O'Connor pointed out that the standard statutory construction involving Indian tribes require that "statutes are to be construed liberally in favor of the Indians, with ambiguous provisions interpreted to their benefit."Montana v. Blackfeet Tribe of Indians,  She argued that the Court did not do so in this case.
References
External links
 Official Website of the Chickasaw Nation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Native American gaming case law
Category:United States Native American tax case law
Category:Chickasaw
Category:Choctaw
Category:2001 in United States case law
"""

From "Chimel v. California" ==> """
Chimel v. California, 395 U.S. 752 (1969), was a 1969 United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that police officers arresting a person at home could not search the entire home without a search warrant, but police may search the area within immediate reach of the person without a warrant.. The rule on searches incident to a lawful arrest within the home is now known as the Chimel Rule.
Ronald M. George, the young Deputy Attorney General who unsuccessfully argued the State of California's position before the high court, ultimately became Chief Justice of the State of California.
Background
In the court case of Chimel v. California (1969), police officers went into the home of Chimel with a warrant authorizing their arrest of Chimel on counts of burglary from a coin shop.  The police officers were let into Chimel's home by his wife where they awaited his return home to serve him with his arrest warrant.  Upon receiving his warrant for arrest, "Chimel denied the request of officers to look around" his home for further evidence.  Ignoring Chimel, the police officers continued their search of Chimel's home "on the basis of the lawful arrest", and the police even "instructed Chimel's wife to remove items from drawers", where she eventually found coins and metals.  Later at Chimel's trial for burglary charges, "items taken from his home were admitted over objection from Chimel that they had been unconstitutionally seized".  However, a number of these items including the coins and medals that were taken from his home were used to convict Chimel.
The "state courts upheld the conviction" of Chimel, even though he petitioned that the arrest warrant was not a valid warrant, considering that the police officers searched his home and found evidence that they used against him, without having a search warrant for his house.  Prior to Chimel, the Court's precedents permitted an arresting officer to search the area within an arrestee's "possession" and "control" for the purpose of gathering evidence.  Based on the "abstract doctrine," it had sustained searches that extended far beyond an arrestee's grabbing area.
Issue
Could the warrantless search of Chimel's entire house be constitutionally justified as incident to his arrest?
 Decision and significance 
The Supreme Court ruled 6–2 in favor of Chimel. It held that the search of Chimel's house was unreasonable under the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments.
The Court reasoned that searches "incident to arrest" are limited to the area within the immediate control of the suspect. While police could reasonably search and seize evidence on or around the arrestee's person, police were prohibited from rummaging through the entire house without a search warrant. The Court emphasized the importance of warrants and probable cause as necessary bulwarks against government abuse:
It overturned the trial court conviction by stating that the officers could reasonably search only "the petitioner's person and the area from within which he might have obtained either a weapon or something that could have been used as evidence against him."
Criticism 
In a concurring/dissenting opinion in Riley v. California (2014), citing his dissent in Arizona v. Gant (2009), Justice Alito called Chimel'''s reasoning "questionable:" "I think it is a mistake to allow that reasoning to affect cases like these that concern the search of the person of arrestees."Riley v. California, 573 U.S. 373 (2014).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 395
 References 
External links
 Search Incident to Arrest'', US Supreme Court Center.
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1969 in United States case law
Category:1969 in California
Category:Legal history of California
"""

From "China Agritech, Inc. v. Resh" ==> """
China Agritech, Inc. v. Resh, 584 U.S. ___ (2018), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States, holding that upon denial of class certification, a putative class member may not, in lieu of promptly joining an existing suit or promptly filing an individual action, commence a class action anew beyond the time allowed by the applicable statute of limitations., 138 S. Ct. 1800 (2018).
Facts
China Agritech is incorporated in Delaware and operates primarily in Beijing, China. According to the company, it manufactures and sells various agricultural products to Chinese farmers. China Agritech shares were first listed on NASDAQ in 2005. Four years later, in 2009, China Agritech reported a threefold increase in net revenue. NASDAQ initiated delisting proceedings against China Agritech's stock in 2011 after the company's shareholders made allegations of fraudulent business practices.
The company's shareholders filed two successive class action lawsuits in 2011 and 2012, but were denied class certification in both cases. Michael Resh, a shareholder, brought a third class action in 2014.
Procedural history
China Agritech moved to dismiss Resh's complaint because the two year limitations period set by the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 had already passed. The district court granted China Agritech's motion to dismiss. According to the District Court, under the Supreme Court's prior case, American Pipe & Construction v. Utah, individual claims against the company were tolled during the two class actions filed in 2011 and 2012, but the American Pipe did not reach the issue of whether the tolling rule also applied to a new class action based on a "substantially identical" class. The Ninth Circuit reversed the district court, holding that a class action was not time-barred in cases where the plaintiff's were unnamed in the prior lawsuits, even if the complaint was made against many of the same defendants, and based upon the same events.
Supreme Court
In an opinion written by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, the Supreme Court reversed, holding that upon denial of class certification, a plaintiff cannot commence a class action anew beyond the time allowed by the applicable statute of limitations, and must promptly join an existing suit or file an individual action.
References
External links
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Chisholm v. Georgia" ==> """
Chisholm v. Georgia, 2 U.S. (2 Dall.) 419 (1793), is considered the first United States Supreme Court case of significance and impact.Barnett, Randy E. The People or the State?: Chisholm v. Georgia and Popular Sovereignty. Virginia Law Review (2007): 1729-1758. p.1729. Since the case was argued prior to the formal pronouncement of judicial review by Marbury v. Madison (1803), there was little available legal precedent (particularly in U.S. law).. The Court in a 4–1 decision ruled in favor of Alexander Chisholm, executor of an estate of a citizen of South Carolina, holding that Article III, Section 2 grants federal courts jurisdiction in cases between a state and a citizen of another state wherein the state is the defendant.
The case was superseded in 1795 by the Eleventh Amendment to the United States Constitution which was considered binding by the Court in Hollingsworth v. Virginia (1798). The Supreme Court formally established sovereign immunity in federal courts in Hans v. Louisiana (1890) and state courts in Alden v. Maine (1999) using the Eleventh Amendment, effectively overturning their decision.
Background of the case
On October 31, 1777, the Executive Council of Georgia authorized Thomas Stone and Edward Davies, as commissioners of the state, to purchase goods from Robert Farquhar, a South Carolina merchant, to help stationed troops in Savannah who were in dire need of supplies. Stone and Davies agreed to give Farquhar $169,613.33 (in indigo or continental currency) for his merchandise. However, at the time of Farquhar's death in 1784, he had not received payment for his merchandise. The estate filed a claim for the debt with the Georgia legislature in 1789, but was met with a committee report refusing payment. Instead, the committee suggested the estate sue Stone and Davies, as they had withdrawn the funds meant for Farquhar from the state treasury.
 Prior history 
Alexander Chisholm, a merchant in Charleston and an executor to Farquhar's estate, brought suit against the state of Georgia in the U.S. Circuit Court for the District of Georgia. The circuit court heard the case in October 1791 under the caption of Farquhar's Executor v. Georgia.<ref name="Chisholm v. Georgia: Background and Settlement" Chisholm sought £100,000 sterling in payment and damages. Georgia governor Edward Telfair argued that Georgia was "a free, sovereign and independent State...[and] cannot be drawn or compelled... to answer, against the will of the said State of Georgia, before any Justices of the federal Circuit Court for the District of Georgia or before any Justices of any Court of Law or Equity whatsoever", a stance of sovereign immunity. Associate Justice James Iredell, who heard the case while riding circuit, along with U.S. District Court Judge Nathaniel Pendleton, dismissed the case, citing a lack of jurisdiction under the Judiciary Act of 1789, on grounds that a state could not be sued by a citizen of another state in federal circuit court.
 Supreme Court 
Chisholm subsequently filed a new suit before the Supreme Court under its original jurisdiction, likely in the February 1792 term. The case, captioned as Chisholm, Executor v. Georgia, sought damages amounting to $500,000. When no representative for Georgia appeared before the Court in the August 1792 term, plaintiff's counsels John Hallowell and Attorney General Edmund Randolph consented to hold over the case until the February 1793 term. Despite additional provision of notice by the Court, no attorneys or representatives for the state appeared in the February 1793 term. The Court then proceeded to hear Randolph's arguments.
The court's decision
In a four-to-one decision, the Court held for the plaintiff, with Chief Justice John Jay and associate justices William Cushing, James Wilson, and John Blair constituting the majority; only Justice Iredell dissented. (At that time, there was no opinion of the court or majority opinion; the justices delivered their opinions seriatim or individually, in ascending order of seniority.) The Court ruled that Article 3, Section 2, of the Constitution expressly extended federal judicial power to suits between a state and a citizen of another state, and placed that power within the original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. Moreover, it held, the Constitution provided no exception which limited that authority only to suits where the state was the plaintiff.
 Chief Justice John Jay's Opinion 
In his opinion, Chief Justice John Jay begins by breaking down the argument made by the plaintiffs into four different questions:
 Can the State of Georgia, being one of the United States of America, be made a party-defendant in any case, in the Supreme Court of the United States, at the suit of a private citizen, even although he himself is, and his testator was, a citizen of the State of South Carolina?
 If the State of Georgia can be made a party defendant in certain cases, does an action of assumpsit lie against her?
  Is the service of the summons upon the Governor and Attorney General of the State of Georgia, a competent service?
 By what process ought the appearance of the State of Georgia to be enforced?
In the opening words of his opinion, Justice Wilson stated the essential principle on which the case turned: "This is a case of uncommon magnitude. One of the parties to it is a State; certainly respectable, claiming to be sovereign. The question to be determined is, whether this State, so respectable, and whose claim soars so high, is amenable to the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of the United States? This question, important in itself, will depend on others, more important still; and, may, perhaps, be ultimately resolved into one, no less radical than this 'do the people of the United States form a Nation?'"
Justice Iredell’s Dissent 
In his dissenting opinion, Justice Iredell stated, “A general question of great importance here occurs. What controversy of a civil nature can be maintained against a State by an individual? The framers of the Constitution, I presume, must have meant one of two things: either 1. in the conveyance of that part of the judicial power which did not relate to the execution of the other authorities of the general Government (which it must be admitted are full and discretionary, within the restrictions of the Constitution itself), to refer to antecedent laws for the construction of the general words they use; or, 2. to enable Congress in all such cases to pass all such laws as they might deem necessary and proper to carry the purposes of this Constitution into full effect, either absolutely at their discretion, or at least in cases where prior laws were deficient for such purposes, if any such deficiency existed.” Iredell stated that neither of these things was argued in the case, and reasoned that under common law each State was sovereign, just as under English law, and they could not be sued without their consent.
Subsequent developments
Although Justice Iredell's was the only dissenting opinion, his opinion ultimately became the law of the land. The States, surprised by the decision of the Supreme Court, called for the 11th Amendment to the Constitution, which precludes a State from being sued in Federal Court without that State's consent. By February 1795, 12 of the then 15 states had ratified the 11th Amendment; South Carolina ratified it in 1797, and New Jersey and Pennsylvania took no action on ratification. In 1795, the Eleventh Amendment was ratified to negate the holding in Chisholm v. Georgia.  Under the 11th Amendment, citizens of one state or of foreign countries can only sue a state with the state's consent or if Congress, pursuant to a valid exercise of Fourteenth Amendment remedial powers, abrogates the states' immunity from suit.
See also
Hans v. Louisiana, 134 U.S. 1 (1890)
Edelman v. Jordan, 415 U.S. 651 (1974)
Atascadero State Hospital v. Scanlon, 473 U.S. 234 (1985)
Seminole Tribe of Florida v. Florida, 517 U.S. 44 (1996)
Alden v. Maine, 527 U.S. 706 (1999)
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 2
Notes
References
 Jean Edward Smith, John Marshall: Definer Of A Nation, New York: Henry Holt & Company, 1996.
 Jean Edward Smith, The Constitution And American Foreign Policy, St. Paul, MN: West Publishing Company, 1989.
 William Anderson LaBach, The Supreme Court Fails Its First Test: Chisholm v. Georgia, Saarbrücken, Germany, VDM Verlag, 2009.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Jay Court
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States state sovereign immunity case law
Category:Legal history of Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:1793 in United States case law
Category:Abrogated United States Supreme Court decisions
"""

From "Christensen v. Harris County" ==> """
Christensen v. Harris County, 529 U.S. 576 (2000), is a Supreme Court of the United States case holding that a county's policy of requiring employees to schedule time off to avoid accruing time off was not prohibited by the Fair Labor Standards Act.
Background
The Supreme Court addressed in the case whether the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (FLSA), 29 U.S.C. § 201 et seq., forbids a public employer from requiring its employees to use their accumulated compensatory time, absent a pre-existing agreement authorizing compelled use. Compensatory time provides employees time off work with full pay and is granted to employees in lieu of a cash payment for overtime work. The FLSA provides a statutory cap specifying the maximum number of compensatory hours that an employee may accrue prior to an employer's obligation to provide an employee with a cash payment for overtime hours worked. See § 207(o)(3)(A).
In particular, Title 29 U.S.C. § 207(o)(5) provides:
An employee … (A) who has accrued compensatory time off …, and (B) who has requested the use of such compensatory time, shall be permitted by the employee’s employer to use such time within a reasonable period after making the request if the use of the compensatory time does not unduly disrupt the operations of the public agency.
Here, the Sheriff's Department of Harris County, Texas, fearing a budget crisis due to the number of hours of compensatory time accrued by its deputy sheriffs, adopted a policy that required its employees to use their accrued compensatory time in order for the county to avoid being required to provide employees with a cash payment for overtime hours worked as pursuant to the statutory cap provision. 
Harris County wrote to the Wage and Hour Division of the United States Department of Labor for advice on the merits of their policy as a legal matter in regard to the FLSA. In response, the Acting Administrator of the Division sent an opinion letter to the Harris County stating that the county's policy violated the FLSA. Consequently, petitioners, Edward Christensen and 128 other deputy sheriffs of Harris County, sued the county, claiming that the FLSA prohibited the implementation of the county's policy. 
The District Court agreed with the petitioners and ruled in their favor by granting summary judgement and entered a declaratory judgement that the county's policy violated the FLSA. However, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit reversed the District Court's decision, explaining that the FLSA did not address the particular issue raised in the county's policy regarding the compelled use of compensatory time and, as a result, held that the FLSA does not prohibit Harris County from implementing such a policy. 
The petitioners appealed. The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari in Christensen because there was division on the issue among the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth and Ninth Circuits. The Court decided Christensen on May 1, 2000. Just a few weeks later, on May 30, 2000, the Court granted certiorari in United States v. Mead Corp., 533 U.S. 218 (2001).
Decision
The Court held that an opinion letter from the Department of Labor, stating that an employer had to get the employee to agree first before it required the employee to schedule time off, did not receive Chevron deference and instead should receive the less deferential standard of Skidmore v. Swift & Co. The majority attempted to draw a bright line between formal agency documents (such as legislative rules) and less formal ones (such as opinion letters). Therefore, the opinion letter of the Department of Labor was not binding on the court. The court went on to state that there is nothing in the FLSA that prohibited the forced use of compensation time. Justice Thomas delivered the 6–3 decision of the court in favor of Harris County.
In regards to the substantive issue, the Court holds: Section 207(o)(5) of the FLSA does not prohibit employers from requiring employees to utilize their accrued compensatory time.Christensen v. Harris Cty., 529 U.S. 576, 583 (2000); Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, 29 U.S.C. §207(o)(5) 
In Section II of the opinion, J. Thomas addresses the Petitioners' statutory interpretation argument, that employers are statutorily prohibited under 207(o)(5) from requiring employees to utilize accrued compensatory time.Christensen v. Harris Cty., supra note 1, at 582-87 (J. Thomas’s majority opinion) While acknowledging that "nothing in the FLSA expressly prohibits a State or subdivision thereof from compelling employees to utilize accrued compensatory time," both the Petitioners, and the United States as amicus curiae, argued that the FLSA implicitly prohibits such practice.Id. at 582 J Thomas states that Petitioner's argument of implicit prohibition relies on the canon of expressio unius est exclusio alterius.Id. J. Thomas further states that under such canon, the Petitioners contend that the "express grant of control to employees to use compensatory time…implies that all other methods of spending compensatory time are precluded."Id. at 582-83 
J. Thomas rejects the Petitioners’ argument. Implying that the Court accepts the expressio unius canon of interpretation, J. Thomas cites to Raleigh & Gaston R. CO. v. Reid, decided in 1872, and states that the Court accepts the proposition that "[w]hen a statute limits a thing to be done in a particular mode, it includes a negative of any other mode."Christensen v. Harris Cty., supra note 1, at 583 (citing Raleigh & Gaston R. Co. v. Reid, 13 Wall. 269, 270 (1872))  J. Thomas, pulling dicta from Reid, defines the "thing to be done" not as the "expenditure of compensatory time," but rather as "a minimal guarantee that an employee will be able to make some use of compensatory time when he requests to use it."Id. at 583  
J. Thomas concludes that the proper implied prohibition is: in the absence of an agreement, an employer may not deny an employee's request for a reason other than "undue disruption." Accordingly, the statute does not prohibit an employee from requiring employees to utilize accrued compensatory time.Id. 
J. Thomas supports this interpretation by discussing a number of statutory interpretation principles; first, the statutory schema supports the conclusion that the relevant statute is "better read" as a "safeguard" rather than an "exclusive method"; second, protections given in nearby provisions support such a reading; third, Petitioner's interpretation would effectively nullify amendments made to FLSA by Congress; fourth, the relevant statute is silent on the issue.Id. at 583-84 
Lastly, J. Thomas argues that the FLSA in fact grants employers affirmative authority to regulate an employee's compensatory time: “First, employers remain free under the FLSA to decrease the number of hours that employees work. Second, the FLSA permits the employer to cash out accumulated compensatory time by paying the employee his regular hourly wage for each hour accrued.”Id. at 584-85 
Concurring opinions
Justice Scalia joined the judgment of the Court and all of its opinion except Part III. Justice Scalia deviated from the majority because the Court determined that the position of the Department of Labor warranted “Skidmore” deference rather than “Chevron” deference. The Court explained an opinion letter does not carry the same effect as a formal adjudication or notice-and-comment rule which would receive “Chevron” deference. Justice Scalia disagreed. He coined Skidmore v. Swift & Co., 323 U.S. 134 (1944) as an anachronism which has been since vitiated by Chevron U.S.A. Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984). Justice Scalia believed that Chevron deference was the only standard which could be applied. Footnote five illustrates this position:
deference can be inapplicable for only three reasons: (1) the statute is unambiguous, so there is no room for administrative interpretation; (2) no interpretation has been made by personnel of the agency responsible for administering the statute; or (3) the interpretation made by such personnel was not authoritative, in the sense that it does not represent the official position of the expert agency. All of these reasons preclude Skidmore deference as well. . . . Chevron establishes a presumption that ambiguities are to be resolved (within the bounds of reasonable interpretation) by the administering agency. 
Christensen, 529 U.S. at n.5. (emphasis added). Therefore, argued that not only was no longer the standard but even if it was still applicable there could was not a circumstance that would warrant its application. Justice Scalia agreed with the Court that the Dept. of Labor’s opinion letter was insufficient to trigger “Chevron” deference, however, there he believed there was other information available to warrant application of the standard:
But the Solicitor General of the United States, appearing as an amicus in this action, has filed a brief, cosigned by the Solicitor of Labor, which represents the position set forth in the opinion letter to be the position of the Secretary of Labor. That alone, even without existence of the opinion letter, would in my view entitle the position to Chevron deference. 
Id. As such, Justice Scalia believed that the position of the Department of Labor should be given Chevron deference. One year later 5 Justices in the subsequent term the Court adopted Justice Thomas’ opinion in Part III of Christensen v. Harris County which had the effect of summarily dismissing Justice Scalia's concurrence. 
Due to Justice Scalia's refusal to join Justice Thomas’ opinion as it pertains to Part III, this part of the opinion does not represent the views of the Court but only the four justices who signed onto this part. Nonetheless, Part III is important to understand because it influenced the direction the Court took in future cases. 
In Part III of the opinion, Justice Thomas’ concluded that the Department of Labor's opinion letter is not entitled to a Chevron deference because opinion letters are similar to “policy statements, agency manuals, and enforcement guidelines, all of which lack the force of law” and, as such, are not entitled to a Chevron deference. Instead, Justice Thomas ruled that opinion letters are only “entitled to respect” under a Skidmore deference only if the opinion is persuasive. Applying this rationale, Justice Thomas held that the Department of Labor's opinion letter are not persuasive and, as such, do not warrant a Skidmore deference. 
In reaching this conclusion, Justice Thomas argued that the opinion letter centered on the issue of compelled compensatory time, which is an issue that the regulation in question does not address. In particular, Justice Thomas pointed out that the regulation only provides that the “agreement between the employer or employee may include other provisions governing the preservation, use….of compensatory time.” Focusing on “may”, Justice Thomas concluded that since the regulation was written in a “permissive” tone and not a commanding term, the opinion letter's command that the employer must gain the employee's approval before mandating that employee's use their compensatory time is not persuasive and as such is not afforded a Skidmore deference.
Dissent
Stevens J dissented:
In my judgment, the fact that no employer may lawfully make any use of "comp time" without a prior agreement with the affected employees is of critical importance in answering the question whether a particular method of using that form of noncash compensation may be imposed on those employees without their consent. Because their consent is a condition without which the employer cannot qualify for the exception from the general rule, it seems clear to me that their agreement must encompass the way in which the compensatory time may be used.
[...]
The Court concludes that expressio unius does not help petitioners because the "thing to be done" as prescribed by the statute (and because of which all other "things" are excluded) is simply a guarantee that employees will be allowed to make some use of compensatory time upon request, rather than an open-ended promise that employees will be able to choose (subject only to the "reasonable time" limitation) how to spend it. Ibid.
This description of the debate misses the primary thrust of petitioners' position. They do not, as the Court implies, contend that employers generally must afford employees essentially unlimited use of accrued comp time under the statute; the point is rather that rules regarding both the availability and the use of comp time must be contained within an agreement. The "thing to be done" under the Act is for the parties to come to terms. It is because they have not done so with respect to the use of comp time here that the county may not unilaterally force its expenditure.
The case was argued on behalf of the United States by Matthew D. Roberts, for the petitioner by Michael T. Leibig and for Harris County, Texas by Michael P. Fleming.
Notes
Sources
Christensen v. Harris Cty., 529 U.S. 576, 583 (2000);
Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, 29 U.S.C. §207(o)(5)
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 529
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
External links
 https://www.oyez.org/advocates/r/m/matthew_d_roberts  (Oyez website)
 https://www.oyez.org/advocates/f/m/michael_p_fleming  (Oyez website)
 https://www.oyez.org/advocates/l/m/michael_t_leibig  (Oyez website)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:Harris County, Texas
"""

From "Christian Legal Society v. Martinez" ==> """
Christian Legal Society v. Martinez, 561 U.S. 661 (2010), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld, against a First Amendment challenge, the policy of the University of California, Hastings College of the Law, governing official recognition of student groups, which required the groups to accept all students regardless of their status or beliefs in order to obtain recognition.. 
 Background 
Hastings's nondiscrimination policy required that recognized student organizations (RSOs) "'allow any student to participate, become a member, or seek leadership positions in the organization'", regardless of the beliefs or status of that student. In 2004, Christian Legal Society (CLS) applied for RSO status. As an affiliate of the national Christian Legal Society, the group was obliged to adopt bylaws that required "members and officers to sign a 'Statement of Faith' and to conduct their lives in accord with prescribed principles". Those principles included a belief that a marriage between a woman and a man is the only appropriate context for sexual activity; thus, CLS "interprets its bylaws to exclude from affiliation anyone who engages in 'unrepentant homosexual conduct'". In addition, CLS would not admit students whose religious beliefs differed from those set forth in the Statement of Faith.
Hastings denied CLS recognition as a student organization.Liptak, Adam (June 28, 2010), "Justices Rule Against Group That Excludes Gay Students", The New York Times, retrieved July 1, 2010Schmidt, Peter, "Constitutional Rights Clash in Battle of Law School and Christian Group", The Chronicle of Higher Education, March 28, 2010 CLS then asked Hastings for an exemption from its nondiscrimination policy; Hastings declined to provide such an exemption. CLS sued, arguing that the university, as a public institution, could not restrict the group's rights to freedom of speech, association, and religion. The National Center for Lesbian Rights represented Hastings Outlaw, a campus gay rights group that joined Acting Chancellor and Dean Leo P. Martinez to defend the policy. Latham & Watkins decided to represent Hastings pro bono, and former Solicitor General Gregory G. Garre argued the case at the Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
CLS argued that Hastings could alter its policy to allow an RSO to exclude a student if that student's "beliefs and conduct" did not correspond with those of the RSO, but could not allow a student to be excluded from an organization based on the student's "status"—that is, race or gender. The Court, in a majority opinion authored by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, held that such a policy would require Hastings to review each RSO's exclusionary rules to determine "whether a student organization cloaked prohibited status exclusion in belief-based garb". The Court offered the example of a hypothetical "Male-Supremacy Club" that forbade a female member from running for its presidency, leaving Hastings to determine whether her election bid was denied because of her sex or because she did not adhere to the doctrine of male supremacy. Since the particular issue in the case involved the exclusion of homosexual students, CLS had asserted that it did not restrict membership based on sexual orientation but based on "conduct and belief that the conduct is not wrong". The Court rejected that distinction, noting that with respect to sexual orientation, the court had "declined to distinguish between status and conduct" and offering a parallel from Bray v. Alexandria Women's Health Clinic:. "A tax on wearing yarmulkes is a tax on Jews".
The Court's analysis explained how the instant case differed from two earlier cases involving university funding of student groups. In Healy v. James, 408 U.S. 169 (1972), the Court required Central Connecticut State College to recognize a chapter of the Students for a Democratic Society,. and in Rosenberger v. University of Virginia (1995), the Court ruled that student religious publications were entitled to equal funding at the University of Virginia.. In these cases, the educational institutions singled out a group for unfavorable treatment based on that group's purpose (leftist activism in the first case and Christian evangelism in the second). In the instant case, by contrast, the Court held that Hastings sought to treat all student groups equally; the CLS, on the other hand, sought an exemption for their particular membership policies.Bravin, Jess and Nathan Koppel, "School Can Deny Funding to Group", The Wall Street Journal, June 29, 2010
Thus, the Court held that the Hastings nondiscrimination policy was a reasonable, viewpoint-neutral restriction that did not violate the First Amendment.
 Stevens' concurrence 
In his concurring opinion, Justice John Paul Stevens noted that CLS denies membership to those who engage in "unrepentant homosexual conduct" and reasoned that the same argument could be made by groups that "may exclude or mistreat Jews, blacks, and women – or those who do not share their contempt for Jews, blacks, and women".Barnes, Robert (June 29, 2010),  "Justices say school can require student groups to accept all who are interested", The Washington Post, retrieved July 1, 2010
 Kennedy's concurrence 
In his concurring opinion, Justice Anthony Kennedy observed that like-minded students may be less effective when forced to accept members of different viewpoints, but found the benefits of an all-inclusive condition more valuable. Kennedy opined that Hastings' all-comers policy promotes student development and growth, which is a legitimate purpose for a limited forum.
 Dissent 
Justice Samuel Alito wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Chief Justice Roberts and Justices Scalia and Thomas. The dissent disagreed on a major point: whether Hastings' policy was an "all-comers" policy or a "nondiscrimination" policy. If the latter, the Society would not be able to reject members based on their legally protected status but could discriminate on the basis of conduct or belief. Alito likened the case to Boy Scouts v. Dale, where the "message" of the group was burdened by the forced inclusion of unwanted members.
 Subsequent developments 
The court's decision, especially Ginsburg's discussion of "status" and "conduct", was promptly cited by plaintiffs in Perry v. Schwarzenegger as Supreme Court precedent that sexual orientation is "an identifiable class", opposing the defense's argument that sexual orientation is "behavioral".Mauro, Tony (July 1, 2010),  "High court's Christian Legal Society ruling already making waves" , First Amendment Center, retrieved July 1, 2010Liptak, Adam (July 19, 2010) "Looking for Time Bombs and Tea Leaves on Gay Marriage", The New York Times, retrieved July 20, 2010
On June 30, 2010, Peter Schmidt wrote in the Chronicle of Higher Education that it was unlikely that the ruling would end litigation over policies on student groups and that colleges should not think that their policies on student groups are immune to legal challenges as a result of the decision.Schmidt, Peter, "Ruling Is Unlikely to End Litigation Over Policies on Student Groups", The Chronicle of Higher Education, June 30, 2010 Others warned that the decision threatened the rights of on-campus student media organizations.
 See also 
Employment Division v. Smith
 References 
External links
 CLS v. Martinez at SCOTUSwiki
 Transcript of oral arguments
Category:University of California litigation
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States LGBT rights case law
Category:2010 in religion
Category:2010 in LGBT history
"""

From "Christiansburg Garment Co. v. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission" ==> """
Christiansburg Garment Co. v. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 434 U.S. 412 (1978), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States that interpreted 42 U.S.C. §1988(b) to generally not require unsuccessful plaintiffs in civil rights cases to pay attorney's fees to the defendant.  There would be an exception, however, for plaintiffs that brought frivolous claims.  This decision has essentially helped create one way fee shifting for plaintiffs in civil rights cases.Yeazell, S.C.  Civil Procedure, Seventh Edition.  Aspen Publishers, New York, NY: 2008, p. 306
 References 
 External links 
 Text of opinion at Justia.com
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States civil procedure case law
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Equal employment opportunity
"""

From "Christopher v. SmithKline Beecham Corp." ==> """
Christopher v. SmithKline Beecham Corp., 567 U.S. 142 (2012), is a US labor law case of the United States Supreme Court.. It held that pharmaceutical sales representatives were not eligible for overtime pay. The court ruled in a majority opinion written by Justice Samuel Alito that sales representatives were classified as "outside salesmen" who are exempt from the Department of Labor's regulations regarding overtime pay.
Facts
Michael Christopher and Frank Buchanan worked for GlaxoSmithKline, and claimed overtime pay under the Fair Labor Standards Act. They argued they were employees under 29 USC § 207(a),. while GSK contended they were acting ‘in the capacity of outside salesman’ under § 213(a).. In turn 29 C.F.R. § 541.500 defined ‘outside salesman’ as ‘any employee’ whose duty was ‘making sales’ under § 203(k) which said that included ‘any sale, exchange, contract to sell’ and so on.. Christopher and Buchanan were sales representatives for around four years from 2003, who marketed to physicians to buy the company's products. They spent 40 hours a week calling physicians, and another 10 to 20 hours attending events and performing other miscellaneous tasks. Their pay included a salary and bonus pay, based on performance in selling. In a class action lawsuit, they sought time and a half for over 40 hours work.
The United States District Court for the District of Arizona granted a judgment in favor of GlaxoSmithKline. After the Department of Labor filed an amicus in a related case in the Second Circuit, they appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in California, which affirmed the lower court's decision. The plaintiffs then appealed to the Supreme Court.
Judgment
Supreme Court held, by a five to four majority, that Christopher and Buchanan were not entitled to overtime pay under the Fair Labor Standards Act, because they were effecting sales within the Act's exception in § 213(a). Justice Alito delivered the opinion of the court, in which Chief Justice Roberts, and Justices Scalia, Kennedy and Thomas joined.
Justice Breyer filed a dissenting opinion, in which Justices Ginsburg, Sotomayor and Kagan joined.
See also
US labor law
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States labor case law
Category:2012 in United States case law
Category:GSK plc litigation
"""

From "Chung Fook v. White" ==> """
Chung Fook v. White, 264 U.S. 443 (1924), was a Supreme Court case. In line with the plain meaning rule, the Court determined that a native-born citizen of the United States was not automatically entitled to rights granted by a statute for naturalized citizens, despite the doctrine of absurdity.
The proviso of § 22 of the Immigration Act of 1917 allowed for the wife of a "naturalized" citizen (who married his wife after the naturalization) to be brought over to the United States. It was argued that Chung Fook, a native-born citizen, would then be allowed to bring over his wife, as it would not make sense to give a particular right to a naturalized citizen that a native-born citizen was not permitted. The Court rejected this argument and wrote "The words of the statute being clear, if it unjustly discriminates against the native-born citizen, or is cruel and inhuman in its results, as forcefully contended, the remedy lies with Congress, and not with the courts. Their duty is simply to enforce the law as it is written, unless clearly unconstitutional."
The Court opinion was delivered by Justice Sutherland.
 Background 
"Chung Fook is a native-born citizen of the United States. Lee Shee, his wife, is an alien Chinese woman, ineligible for naturalization. In 1922, she sought admission to the United States, but was refused and detained at the immigration station on the ground that she was an alien, affected by a dangerous contagious disease. No question is raised as to her alienage or the effect and character of her disease, but the contention is that, nevertheless, she is entitled to admission under the proviso found in § 22 of the Immigration Act of February 5, 1917, 39 Stat. 891, c. 29."
External links
Category:1924 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:United States political question doctrine case law
Category:Marriage law in the United States
Category:History of San Francisco
Category:Chinese-American history
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
"""

From "Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah" ==> """
Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye, Inc. v. Hialeah, 508 U.S. 520 (1993), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that an ordinance passed in Hialeah, Florida, forbidding the "unnecessar[y]" killing of "an animal in a public or private ritual or ceremony not for the primary purpose of food consumption", was unconstitutional.
Background
Santería is an Afro-Cuban religion developed as a syncretism of Roman Catholicism and Yoruba religion by Yoruba people brought as slaves from Yorubaland to Cuba by the Atlantic slave trade.Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye, Inc. v. Hialeah, 508 U.S. 520 at 524 (1993).  Adherents can fulfill their destiny through the aid of beings known as orishas, who subsist off blood from animal sacrifice.Lukumi, 508 U.S. at 524.  Animals, usually chickens, killed during ritual slaughter are then cooked and eaten by the celebrants, except during death and healing rituals, where sick energy is believed to have passed into the sacrifice.Lukumi, 508 U.S. at 525.  Santeria has been subject to widespread persecution in Cuba, so it is traditionally practiced in secret, employing saint symbolism.
The Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye, Inc., is a Florida nonprofit organized in 1973 by Ernesto Pichardo, who was an Italero-level priest in the Santeria faith.Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah, 723 F. Supp. 1467 (S.D. Fla. 1989).  The Lucumí language is used in the Santeria liturgy and Babalú-Ayé is the spirit of wrath and disease.  In April 1987, the Church leased a property at 173 W. 5th Street, Hialeah, in Miami-Dade County, Florida and announced its intention to use the site to openly practice the faith.Lukumi, 723 F. Supp. at 1477.
The Hialeah City Council held an emergency public session on June 9, 1987.Lukumi, 508 U.S. at 526.  At the session, Councilman Silvio Cardoso stated that the religion is "in violation of everything this country stands for"; Councilman Andres Mejides observed that the Bible does not allow this particular type of animal sacrifice; and Councilman Julio Martinez noted (to audience applause) that in Cuba "people were put in jail for practicing this religion."Lukumi, 508 U.S. at 541 (opinion of Kennedy, J.).  Hialeah's police chaplain testified that the Church worshipped "demons" and the city attorney testified that "This community will not tolerate religious practices abhorrent to its citizens."Lukumi, 508 U.S. at 542 (opinion of Kennedy, J.).  Pichardo's brief testimony was met with taunts from the audience.
At the end of the session the city council passed a resolution announcing its commitment to prohibit "all religious groups which are inconsistent with public morals, peace or safety”.  The city further passed a resolution incorporating Florida's animal cruelty statute into the city code and the city attorney obtained a Florida Attorney General's Opinion from Bob Butterworth concluding that the state statute did not permit ritual animal sacrifice.Lukumi, 508 U.S. at 527, citing Fla. Op. Atty. Gen. 87-56, Annual Report of the Atty. Gen. 146, 147, 149 (1988).
In September 1987, the city council unanimously passed three new ordinances that criminalized “sacrifices of animals for any type of ritual, regardless of whether or not the flesh or blood of the animal is to be consumed.”Lukumi, 508 U.S. at 527.  The city council exempted Kosher slaughterhouses, regular slaughterhouses, hunting, fishing, pest extermination, euthanasia of stray animals, and feeding live rabbits to greyhounds.Lukumi, 508 U.S. at 537.
The Church sued in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Florida.  On June 10, 1988, U.S. District Judge Eugene P. Spellman granted absolute immunity to the individual city council members and the mayor.Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah, 688 F. Supp. 1522 (S.D. Fla. 1988).  On October 5, 1989, after a nine-day bench trial, Judge Spellman granted summary judgment to the city.Lukumi, 723 F. Supp. 1467.  In 1991, the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit affirmed in an unsigned one-paragraph per curiam decision, where it noted that Judge Spellman "employed an arguably stricter standard" than that applied in Employment Division v. Smith (1990), which had in the interim found Native Americans could be fired for their ritual use of peyote.936 F. 2d 586 (1991).  In Smith, Justice Antonin Scalia had even cited Judge Spellman's opinion as authority, which the city highlighted in their appeals brief.
The Court in Wisconsin v. Yoder (1972) had explicitly provided Amish parents a religious exemption from mandatory school attendance under the Free Exercise Clause.  However, in the years since, free-exercise claimants had lost every case before the Court, with the exception of a line of employment decisions cases terminated by Smith.  The Church's petition for certiorari from the Supreme Court of the United States was granted, with Douglas Laycock appearing for the Church during oral arguments on November 4, 1992.https://www.oyez.org/cases/1992/91-948 
Supreme Court
Opinion of the Court
On June 11, 1993, the Supreme Court unanimously reversed the appeals court's decision.  Justice Anthony Kennedy, in an Opinion of the Court joined in parts by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, and Justices Byron White, John Paul Stevens, Antonin Scalia, David Souter, and Clarence Thomas concluded that the city's ordinances violated the Free Exercise Clause of the United States Constitution.
Kennedy read the Smith decision as requiring a compelling governmental interest if a law is not of neutral and general applicability.Lukumi, 508 U.S. at 531.  Kennedy went on, in a section Souter and White refused to join, to conclude that although the ordinances were facially neutral, they were religiously “gerrymandered with care” to only apply to religious killings.Lukumi, 508 U.S. at 542.  Kennedy, in a section only joined by Stevens, details the ordinances’ legislative history, even citing taped excerpts of the Hialeah City Council Meeting.  Next, in a section Souter refused to join, Kennedy notes the numerous exemptions in the Florida statute, concluding the law is not generally applicable because it effectively applies “only against conduct motivated by religious belief.”Lukumi, 508 U.S. at 545.  Finally, in a section joined by the full seven justice majority, Kennedy applies strict scrutiny, which the city ordinances fail.Lukumi, 508 U.S. at 547.
Because the ordinance suppressed more religious conduct than was necessary to achieve its stated ends, it was deemed unconstitutional, with Justice Anthony Kennedy stating in the decision, “religious beliefs need not be acceptable, logical, consistent or comprehensible to others in order to merit First Amendment protection”."Criminal Law and Procedure By Daniel E. Hall - Cengage Learning, July 2008 - p. 266  In sum the Court concluded:
We conclude, in sum, that each of Hialeah's ordinances pursues the city's governmental interests only against conduct motivated by religious belief. The ordinances "ha[ve] every appearance of a prohibition that society is prepared to impose upon [Santeria worshippers] but not upon itself." Florida Star v. B. J. F., 491 U. S. 524, 542 (1989) (SCALIA, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment). This precise evil is what the requirement of general applicability is designed to prevent.
III
A law burdening religious practice that is not neutral or not of general application must undergo the most rigorous of scrutiny. To satisfy the commands of the First Amendment, a law restrictive of religious practice must advance" 'interests of the highest order'" and must be narrowly tailored in pursuit of those interests. McDaniel v. Paty, 435 U. S., at 628, quoting Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U. S. 205, 215 (1972). The compelling interest standard that we apply once a law fails to meet the Smith requirements is not "water[ed] ... down" but "really means what it says." Employment Div., Dept. of Human Resources of Ore. v. Smith, 494 U. S., at 888. A law that targets religious conduct for distinctive treatment or advances legitimate governmental interests only against conduct with a religious motivation will survive strict scrutiny only in rare cases. It follows from what we have already said that these ordinances cannot withstand this scrutiny.
First, even were the governmental interests compelling, the ordinances are not drawn in narrow terms to accomplish those interests. As we have discussed, see supra, at 538540, 543-546, all four ordinances are overbroad or underinclusive in substantial respects. The proffered objectives are not pursued with respect to analogous nonreligious conduct, and those interests could be achieved by narrower ordinances that burdened religion to a far lesser degree. The absence of narrow tailoring suffices to establish the invalidity of the ordinances. See Arkansas Writers' Project, Inc.
Respondent has not demonstrated, moreover, that, in the context of these ordinances, its governmental interests are compelling. Where government restricts only conduct protected by the First Amendment and fails to enact feasible measures to restrict other conduct producing substantial harm or alleged harm of the same sort, the interest given in justification of the restriction is not compelling. It is established in our strict scrutiny jurisprudence that "a law cannot be regarded as protecting an interest 'of the highest order' ... when it leaves appreciable damage to that supposedly vital interest unprohibited." Florida Star v. B. J. F., supra, at 541-542 (SCALIA, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment) (citation omitted). See Simon & Schuster, Inc. v. Members of N. Y. State Crime Victims Bd., 502 U. S. 105, 119-120 (1991). Cf. Florida Star v. B. J. F., supra, at 540541; Smith v. Daily Mail Publishing Co., 443 U. S. 97, 104105 (1979); id., at 110 (REHNQUIST, J., concurring in judgment). As we show above, see supra, at 543-546, the ordinances are underinclusive to a substantial extent with respect to each of the interests that respondent has asserted, and it is only conduct motivated by religious conviction that bears the weight of the governmental restrictions. There can be no serious claim that those interests justify the ordinances.
IV
The Free Exercise Clause commits government itself to religious tolerance, and upon even slight suspicion that proposals for state intervention stem from animosity to religion or distrust of its practices, all officials must pause to remember their own high duty to the Constitution and to the rights it secures. Those in office must be resolute in resisting importunate demands and must ensure that the sole reasons for imposing the burdens of law and regulation are secular. Legislators may not devise mechanisms, overt or disguised, designed to persecute or oppress a religion or its practices. The laws here in question were enacted contrary to these constitutional principles, and they are void."
Scalia's concurrence in part
Justice Scalia joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist, defended the Smith decision and attacked the use of legislative intent, opining that there would be no constitutional violation if “the Hialeah City Council set out resolutely to suppress the practices of Santeria, but ineptly adopted ordinances that failed to do so”.Lukumi, 508 U.S. at 558 (Scalia, J., concurring in part).
Souter's concurrence in part
Justice Souter, writing alone for eighteen pages, noted that “The Smith rule, in my view, may be reexamined consistently with principles of stare decisis.”Lukumi, 508 U.S. at 571 (Souter, J., concurring in part).
Blackmun's concurrence in the judgment
Justice Harry Blackmun, joined by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, concurred in the judgment only.  Refusing to endorse the approach used in the majority opinion, Blackmun wrote, “I continue to believe that Smith was wrongly decided”.  Blackmun goes on, citing an amicus curiae brief by People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, to observe that had this case presented “a law that sincerely pursued the goal of protecting animals from cruel treatment”, the result may have been different.Lukumi, 508 U.S. at 580 (Blackmun, J., concurring in judgment).
Subsequent developments
Somewhat similarly in 2009, a freedom of religion case related to animal sacrifice was taken to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit in the case of Merced v. Kasson.Merced v. Kasson, 577 F.3d 578 (5th Cir. 2009). Merced was a Santeria priest and the president of Templo Yoruba Omo Orisha Texas, Inc., a Santeria religious group. He challenged Euless, Texas city ordinances prohibiting the slaughter of four-legged animals. The court ruled that the ordinances "substantially burden plaintiff's free exercise of religion without advancing a compelling governmental interest using the least restrictive means" and that Merced was entitled under the Texas Religious Freedom Restoration Act (TRFRA) to an injunction preventing the city from enforcing its ordinances that burdened his religious practices relating to the use of animals. The court did not reach Merced's claims under the First and Fourteenth Amendments.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 508
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
Further reading
Carter, Stephen L. (1993), "The Resurrection of Religious Freedom?", Harvard Law Review, Vol. 107, p. 118.
Palmie, Stephan. “Whose centre, whose margin? Notes towards an archaeology of US Supreme Court Case 91-948, 1993 Church of the Lukumi vs. City of Hialeah, South Florida,” in Inside and outside the law: anthropological studies of authority and ambiguity, ed. Olivia Harris (Routledge, 1996).
External links
Category:Santería
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1993 in United States case law
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:Religion in Florida
Category:History of Hialeah, Florida
Category:1993 in religion
Category:Animal sacrifice
"""

From "Church of the Holy Trinity v. United States" ==> """
Church of the Holy Trinity v. United States, 143 U.S. 457 (1892), was a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States regarding an employment contract between The Church of the Holy Trinity, New York and an English (Anglican) priest.. 
 1885 law 
Contracts to import labor were forbidden by Federal law, and specifically by the Alien Contract Labor Law, an Act of Congress passed in 1885 prohibiting "the importation and migration of foreigners and aliens under contract or agreement to perform labor or service of any kind in the United States, its territories, and the District of Columbia".The Foreign Contract Labor Bill Passed. The Senate Makes Several Amendments To The House Bill--Only Nine Votes Against It, The New York Times, February 19, 1885
 Court decision 
The court held that a minister was not a foreign laborer under the statute even though he was a foreigner.  Page 143 U. S. 471 includes the following quotes:
The court used the soft plain meaning rule to interpret the statute in this case. Justice David Josiah Brewer made a principle of statutory construction that "It is a familiar rule, that a thing may be within the letter of the statute and yet not within the statute, because not within its spirit, nor within the intention of its makers." Its decision stated that "the circuit court did err when it held that the contract hiring an English rector was within the prohibition of the statute, which disallowed a '... person, company, partnership, or corporation, in any manner whatsoever to prepay the transportation, or in any way assist or encourage the importation or migration, of any alien or aliens, any foreigner or foreigners, into the United States ... under contract or agreement ... to perform labor or service of any kind in the United States.
 Christian nation 
The case is famous for Brewer's statements that America is a "Christian nation".
In a 1905 book titled: The United States: A Christian Nation, Brewer explained further:
 Legislative intent 
This case is cited most often in legal cases for its holding on how legislative intent can be determined.  For example, in the case of [[United Steelworkers v. Weber|United Steelworkers of America v. Weber]], 443 U.S. 193 (1979), in which the Supreme Court held that the prohibitions against racial discrimination in Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 did not bar all affirmative action programs by private employers which favored racial minorities, the Supreme Court quoted, as part of its analysis, Holy Trinity's principle of statutory interpretation that "[i]t is a 'familiar rule, that a thing may be within the letter of the statute and yet not within the statute, because not within its spirit, nor within the intention of its makers. Weber, 443 U.S. at 201, quoting Holy Trinity, 143 U.S. at 459.  The Weber Court said that the language of Title VII "must therefore be read against the background of the legislative history of Title VII and the historical context from which the Act arose". Id.Justice Antonin Scalia, referring to the holding in the Holy Trinity decision as the "prototypical case" in which a judge follows the intent of the legislature rather than the text of the statute, wrote that this was in opposition to his judicial philosophy of textualism. The textualist position holds that courts should follow the text of a law rather than attempt to read exceptions into the law in accordance with the legislative intent. Scalia has thus criticized the principle of the Holy Trinity case as "nothing but an invitation to judicial lawmaking".Antonin Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation: Federal Courts and the Law 21 (1998)
In Public Citizen v. Department of Justice'', 491 U.S. 440 (1989),. Justice Anthony Kennedy, joined by Chief Justice William Rehnquist and Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, rejected this approach to determining congressional intent. Kennedy wrote:
See also
History of religion in the United States
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 143
References
External links
Language and Law on Holy Trinity Church v. U.S. (1892)
Category:1892 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:Episcopal Diocese of New York
"""

From "Chy Lung v. Freeman" ==> """
Chy Lung v. Freeman, 92 U.S. 275 (1876), was a US Supreme Court case that ruled that the powers to set rules surrounding immigration and to manage foreign relations rest with the US federal government, rather than that of the states.. The case has been cited in other Supreme Court cases related to government authority on matters relating to immigration policy and immigration enforcement, most recently in Arizona v. United States (2012)..
 Background 
Immigration from China to the Western United States, particularly California, had picked up in the mid-19th century because of the California Gold Rush. There was hostility to Chinese immigration from many Californian settlers, particularly among labor unions representing white laborers. The California State Legislature enacted a number of laws to make the state unwelcoming to Chinese immigration, including the Anti-Coolie Act in 1862.
The US federal government, on the other hand, was pursuing a more friendly approach to the Chinese government. In 1868, both countries agreed to the Burlingame Treaty in which China was granted most favored nation status for trade, and both countries would freely permit immigration of the citizens of the other country but without any promise of a path to citizenship. Indeed, the Naturalization Act of 1870 explicitly restricted naturalization to blacks and whites, but citizenship at birth was still open to all, as the Supreme Court would affirm in United States v. Wong Kim Ark (1878).
In 1875, California passed a statute authorizing the immigration commissioner to inspect passengers arriving in California at a cost of 75 cents per inspection, which was levied on the passenger, and giving him the authority to deny entry to passengers who were suspected of being lewd and debauched. However, those suspected could still be allowed entry if the captain of the ship paid a bond for them.
 Similar statutes and associated court cases 
Two other United States states, New York and Louisiana, had similar statutes, which were challenged around the same time:
 Henderson v. Mayor of City of New York, 92 U.S. 259 (1875): A lawsuit by the owners of the steamship Ethiopia from Great Britain, which had arrived at New York City, challenged the statutes of New York and Louisiana that required the owner of a ship to post a bond for landing immigrants to cover indemnities if they proved to need state assistance. The court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs and argued that the power to set immigration policy rested with the federal government. It decided that the requirement of a bond was a policy with a sufficiently-significant impact on international movement to be the exclusive domain of the federal government..
 Commissioners of Immigration v. North German Lloyd was a case that involved almost identical circumstances.
 Facts 
There were 22 women from China, including Chy Lung, among the passengers on the steamer Japan that journeyed from China to San Francisco, arriving in 1875. The immigration commissioner examined the passengers and identified Chy Lung and the other women as "lewd and debauched women." The captain of the ship had the option of paying a $500 bond () per woman to allow her to land for the ostensible purpose to "indemnify all the counties, towns, and cities of California against liability for her support or maintenance for two years," but the captain  refused to pay the bond and detained the women on board.
They sued out a writ of habeas corpus, which led to them being moved into the custody of the Sheriff of the County and City of San Francisco,  where they stayed awaiting deportation upon the return of Japan, which had already left for China.
The women refused to be deported to China and appealed the decision to deport them. The California Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the statute that was used to deny them entry, and it upheld their deportation. The women appealed the decision in the US Supreme Court, the first case to appear there that involved a Chinese litigant.
 Decision 
Justice Stephen Johnson Field ordered the release of all of the women from the sheriff's custody. However, Chy Lung still pressed the case to the Supreme Court and sought to test the constitutionality of the statute that had been used to imprison her and her companions.
On October 1, 1875, the Supreme Court decided unanimously in favor of Chy Lung. Its primary argument was that the federal government, rather than that of the states, was in charge of immigration policy and diplomatic relations with other nations. Therefore, it was not up to California to impose restrictions on Chinese immigration. The Supreme Court also noted that the action by California could jeopardize foreign relations for the US government by running afoul of its treaty obligations., pp. 269-271
The Supreme Court noted that although states could make reasonable and necessary regulations concerning paupers and convicted criminals, the statute went far beyond that and was therefore extortionary.
The court was also critical of the government of California, the Commissioner of Immigration, and the Sheriff of San Francisco for not presenting any arguments on their behalf in the case.
The court was also critical of the lack of due process governing the immigration commissioner's decisions to mark particular immigrants as lewd and debauched.
 Page Act 
Around the time that the case was decided, the US federal government passed its first official policy significantly restricting immigration along lines similar to the California statute that had been deemed unconstitutional. The Page Act of 1875 prohibited the entry of immigrants considered "undesirable," a category that was intended to include forced laborers and female prostitutes and applied to people of Chinese citizenship and descent. The bar on female prostitutes was the Act's most heavily-enforced aspect. The implementation mechanics involved prescreening of Chinese women in Hong Kong to ascertain their good moral character and to certify that they were not prostitutes. That was very different from the operation of the California statute, which involved inspection by the immigration commissioner after the ship had landed.
In subsequent years, with the Angell Treaty of 1880 and Chinese Exclusion Act (1882), the US government would significantly restrict Chinese immigration. Later decisions on cases litigated by Chinese litigants challenging US immigration enforcement tended to be decided against the litigants and for the government (the most important of them, also known as the Chinese Exclusion Case, was Chae Chan Ping v. United States). However, as far as the decisions deferred to the federal government's authority, they were consistent with Chy Lung v. Freeman.
 Significance 
Judge Denny Chin, a circuit court judge in the United States who famously sentenced Bernie Madoff, arranged for the enactment of a courtroom drama about the case. He considered the case historic because it was the first by a Chinese litigant and one that ruled for the litigant at a time of rising sentiment against Chinese and other immigration, with the Page Act coming into force.
The case has also since been cited in arguments made by legal counsel and in opinions given by judges in Supreme Court decisions. Most recently, in Arizona v. United States (2012), the Supreme Court ruled unconstitutional sections of Arizona's SB 1070, a law to devote state law enforcement resources to enforce some aspects of federal immigration law. The Supreme Court cited Chy Lung v. Freeman as a precedent.
 See also 
 Good moral character
 Moral turpitude
 Chae Chan Ping v. United States
 Arizona v. United States
 Page Act of 1875
 References 
External links
 Text of Chy Lung v. Freeman, Casetext
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:1876 in United States case law
Category:Chinese-American culture in San Francisco
Category:Anti-Chinese sentiment in the United States
Category:China–United States relations
"""

From "Cipollone v. Liggett Group, Inc." ==> """
thumb|400x400px|Surgeon General's Warning; Live Press Conference; January 1964 First Report on Smoking
Cipollone v. Liggett Group, Inc., 505 U.S. 504 (1992), was a United States Supreme Court case. In a split opinion, the Court held that the Surgeon General's warning  did not preclude lawsuits by smokers against tobacco companies on the basis of several claims. The case examined whether tobacco companies could be liable for not warning the consumer "adequately" of the dangers of  cigarettes as well as ultimately held the stance that smoking was in fact a free choice. The ruling also questioned the Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act of 1965 to determine whether the warning labels on the cigarette products by law had to be less or more alarming than the warning issued ..
The warning at issue said: "Warning: The Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health."
thumb|9th Surgeon General of the United States, Luther Terry
The court's holding and some of Justice Stevens's reasoning enjoyed majority support, but the opinion eventually gained full majority support 16 years later in Altria Group v. Good.
 Background 
The relationship that the American people has had with tobacco companies can be said to be tumultuous and is documented. Tobacco has always been a staple economic resource in the fabric of the American economy, even in trade amongst Native American tribes. Tobacco crops were instrumental in the early economic development of the United States in colonial times. Following this period was a rise in the cigarette. Tobacco and smoking began to be engraved in the culture and lifestyle of the American public, associated with things such as "sexy, cool, masculine".Brandt, Allan M. "The Cigarette Century: the Rise, Fall, and Deadly Persistence of the Product That Defined America." New York: Basic, 2009,  
The popularity of tobacco was soon replaced with skepticism and many wanting to know the health risks of smoking. Research and analysis followed in order to understand these risks, with shocking conclusions and connections to diseases( coronary disease, coronary heart disease, peripheral arterial occlusive disease, cerebrovascular disease, lung cancer, cancer of the larynx, oral cancer, cancer of the esophagus, cancer of the bladder, cancer of the pancreas) that left many in shock. Public Health advocates urged for the banning of cigarette sales and the overall production of cigarettes in order to protect the public.
With the battle between tobacco companies and public health advocates ensuing, litigation against tobacco companies became the next step. From the 1950s on, there began to be litigation filed against tobacco companies to be liable for injuries and/or consequences from smoking cigarettes. Cases such as Pritchard v. Liggett & Myers Tobacco Co., Fine v. Philip Morris, Inc. consisted of patients blaming cigarettes for their current health conditions and wanting tobacco companies to be held liable. Many of these cases were victories for tobacco companies, often being that litigants in the beginning of this new era of lawsuits against tobacco were not able to prove the concrete association between smoking and diseases aforementioned.
By the 1970s, the cultural tide on smoking had once again changed. With medical evidence more advanced than in previous decades, the association between smoking and diseases like cancer was becoming ever more prevalent, leaving tobacco companies less options to hide from this truth. Furthermore, the Surgeon General's Warning in 1964 served as a final piece needed to close the gap between the two concepts. In addition to liability laws being changed from the time of the 1950s, plaintiffs no longer had to prove negligence on the part of the company with regards to their product but expose a defect. With the restrictions becoming more laxed, new lawsuits surged once again against tobacco companies.
 Life of Rose Cipollone 
Rose Cipollone began smoking at the age of sixteen. She continually smoked Chesterfield cigarettes—up to a pack and a half a pack per day. It wasn't until she was pregnant and at her husband  Antonio Cipollone's request that she attempted to quit smoking. Though she cut down on her regular smoking of a pack and a half per day, she still secretly smoked during her pregnancy. In 1955,  Rose switched to Liggett and Myer brand of cigarettes on the basis that their “pure white Miracle Tip” filter appeared to be a healthier alternative compared to Chesterfield Cigarettes.  In 1968, Rose switched to smoking Parliament brand cigarettes, citing conditions attributed to her health as her reasoning. Parliaments were advertised to have a recessed filter and lower tar content than that of other competitive cigarette brands. Finally, Rose switched to Lorillard's True cigarettes under the recommendation of her physician. Her options at this point were to either quit smoking or switch to this brand of cigarette with its advertised plastic filter inserts. Rose chose the latter option, and continued to smoke with the suggested brand of her physician.
While Rose was trying to decide which brand of cigarettes was right for her, she simultaneously was suffering the health effects of smoking. In the mid-1960s, Rose began to develop a smokers’ cough, as well as problems such as chest pain and hypertension. In 1981, doctors found a carcinomatous spot on her right lung and performed a partial lung resection. After the multitudes of consultations and operations so far in her life, Rose still continued to smoke, “though often now in secret", claimed Rose from an unknown source. In 1982, the cancer had spread to her lower and middle right lung, and Cipollone had surgery to remove the entire lung as well as a large adrenal mass in 1983. Rose Cipollone died on October 24, 1984, after her lung cancer had spread and become inoperable.
It wasn't until the year before Rose Cipollone's death that she met Marc Edell. Recommended by her chest surgeon, Marc Edell was skilled in the art of going after companies and their negligence to protect consumer health. Edell had previously represented the Asbestos Companies in their defense in regard to the health-related claims brought against them. From that case, Edell became familiar with “pulmonary pathology and risks of smoking” and became interested in litigation against the tobacco industry. In need of a client, Edell took on Cipollone's case and filed suit in U.S. District Court for the District of New Jersey against Liggett and Myers, Philip Morris, and Lorillard composed of fourteen tort complaints on August 1, 1983, just over a year before her death. The action was brought in federal court as a Diversity of citizenship case.
 Trial 
 First case 
Edell planned to argue a case based on the cause of Cipollone's death: nicotine from her cigarettes. He gathered facts to bring a series of claims to the court that argued the following:
 Tobacco companies had failed to and were negligent in putting better designs of cigarettes on the market when they had the resources to do so
 They had committed fraud by failing to act on their knowledge of the harms of smoking 
 They had failed to fully inform the public of the true risks of smoking 
 The cigarette makers had breached express warranty by making health claims in their advertising and promotions, which fraudulently overshadowed the mandated health warnings 
 There was a conspiracy by tobacco companies to prevent other third party groups from releasing health information on the hazards of cigarettes  
 Pain and suffering were alleged results of her illness and under the liability rules and law should be compensated for  
Liggett and Myers, Philip Morris, and Lorillard all cited the  1965 Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertisement Act. The companies argued the act supported preempted independent state regulation of tobacco and therefore prevented state litigation, making the tobacco industry immune to suits. From there, they moved to dismiss the case. The trial judge, H. Lee Sarokin, ruled in favor of Cipollone, stating that while state legislatures are prohibited from requiring specific warning labels and regulation of them, Edell's tactic of calling into question the inadequacy of the ones already present under the government was acceptable. The ruling was later overturned on interlocutory appeal by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit. However,  the appellate court did allow the case to be retried in district court on the condition that no claims regarding advertisement and promotion could be made. Edell accepted that condition and prepared for retrial.
 Second case 
In the retrial, Edell was not allowed to enter evidence claiming that Liggett & Myers had worked on the creation of a safer cigarette. He also was not allowed to bring evidence regarding the tobacco industry's “duty to warn” of the dangers of cigarette smoking.
Edell strengthened his case with his access to 300,000 pages of internal documents of the tobacco companies. These documents included compelling and damaging evidence that the tobacco companies had proof, backed by research dating back to the 1940s, that nicotine was addictive and potentially carcinogenic. Before the trial could begin however, the battle over the use of these documents was carried out. The tobacco companies unsuccessfully struggled to suppress the evidence papers obtained by Edell on the grounds that it would "divulge trade secrets"; the trial court judge, Sarokin, ruled that the people and the court had the Constitutional right to know what the companies know and granted the use of the papers. The tobacco companies still made an effort to thwart the efforts of Edell to use the papers. They not only appealed to the Third Circuit Court of Appeals, which upheld the ruling, but also the Supreme Court, which declined to hear the case. It was established that the evidence would be used in trial.
Alongside the tobacco industry documents, Edell argued that the powerful advertising for the brands Cipollone smoked was an unscrupulous strategy utilized by the tobacco industry to not only overshadow the warning labels mandated by the federal government, but also to promote cigarette use and nicotine addiction as a marketing strategy for company profit. Edell also claimed that Cipollone's tobacco use stemmed from her nicotine addiction, which was encouraged by the advertising of Liggett and Myers, Philip Morris, and Lorillard by the use of both health claims and advertising. Edell made sure that Cipollone was portrayed as a woman who was disparaged by her powerful addiction to the tobacco industry's product; expert testimony showed that she even displayed withdrawal symptoms, sometimes digging through “the trash for butts when she ran out of cigarettes”. Edell was heavily committed to the case. He was seen working seven days a week and spending his every waking minute on the case. He sacrificed time with both his wife and children to ensure his arguments were strong. After presenting his case that the tobacco industry's advertising of cigarettes and knowledge of risk related to Cipollone's claims, the tobacco companies' defense moved for dismissal. The motion was denied. They were going to have to answer to Edell's claims.
The tobacco industry argued that Rose Cipollone was fully aware of the risks of smoking both before and during her cigarette use. "She was an independent woman, making an independent decision to continue smoking, and she was in control, not the nicotine" claimed the tobacco industries. Furthermore, even if the cigarettes had caused her death, it was in no way the responsibility of the industry. As research and the industry documents were used in trial, Edell failed to show any explicit proof that lung cancer is linked directly to smoking. Furthermore, expert testimony revealed that the type of lung cancer affecting Cipollone was not associated with smoking. Cipollone's constant switching between “healthier” brands also showed her acknowledgment of the dangers of smoking, argued by the defense.
 Ruling 
thumb|New Jersey District Court
 District Court 
The jury deliberated for 6 days, and reached the verdict on June 3, 1988—considering the conspiracy claims and the lack of expression in warranty and warning argued by Edell. The jury was composed of 3 non-smokers, 2 former smokers, and 1 smoker. The group of 6 had concluded that:
 Cipollone was 80% at fault, based on their assessment of her personal choice to smoke being a factor
 All claims for failure to warn were dropped against Philip Morris and Lorillard, since Cipollone began smoking their cigarettes after the 1966 federally mandated warning labels appeared on the packages
 Only Liggett & Myers could be held liable, as Cipollone smoked their cigarettes before the 1966 warning labels
 Court ruled that the company did in fact contribute to her death.
 The jury awarded $400,000 in damages to Mr. Antonio Cipollone, who had continued to fight the case after his wife's death.
 The claim regarding the tobacco industry's withholding of a production of a safer cigarette was dismissed on the grounds that it involved speculation to  whether Cipollone would have in fact chosen to smoke the safer option if given the opportunity
Edell was pleased that they had received some monetary reward and saw it as a victory. However, he comments on his hope that the courts would've gone further with their condemnation of big tobacco in an interview sometime after the ruling.
thumb|Emblem for the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit
 Court of Appeals 
After the District Court Ruling, the tobacco companies appealed to the Court of Appeals of the Third Circuit in hopes of reversing the verdict.
In 1990, the Third Circuit appellate court threw out the verdict and:
 Set aside the $400,000 in damages on the grounds that there was no proof that Cipollone relied on the Liggett & Myers advertisements in question.
 Allowed Edell to file suit on the basis of design and advertising. He was able to claim that prior to the 1966 Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertisement Act, tobacco companies did not inform the average unaware smoker on the dangers of smoking while they in fact knew this information.
 Edell could argue the case that the tobacco industry could be held liable on a live claim that the company made Cipollone unaware of the product's dangers outweighing the benefits.
Five days after the appellate ruling, Antonio Cipollone died, Rose Cipollone's son continued on with the case after her husband's death. Both the plaintiff and the defense in this case were looking for a concrete doctrine regarding the ability to litigate regarding preemption, state regulation of tobacco, and the Act cited in the first trial of the case.
thumb|269x269px|United States Supreme Court, Washington D.C.
 Supreme Court 
The Supreme Court addressed the issue of preemption of federal law in regard to state law regulating the tobacco industry and whether common law damages constitute a requirement based on smoking and health based on state law in regard to advertisements and promotion. The Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act of 1966, which excludes all manufacturers who label their packages with proper warnings from requirement or prohibition, led the majority of the court to the opinion that: 
 The filing of a “failure-to-warn” claim against the tobacco industry by Edell was invalid and prohibited 
 Cases involving the neutralization of federal warnings in advertisements on the grounds that the Act preempted, or overrode, state laws were also invalid and prohibited 
 Limited common law claims preempted by statute   
The majority ruling by the Supreme Court limited the potential litigants in lawsuits against tobacco industries to only smokers who developed diseases prior to 1969. The opinion did not exclude fraud and conspiracy or express warranty, as section 5b of the 1969 Act does not explicitly define this;
The Supreme Court also stated that if the plaintiff, Edell and Cipollone's son in this case, could prove any of the following:
 the industry conspired to hide evidence concerning the harms of smoking
 or lied to the public about them,
 or if express warranties were breached
then a new case can be filed, as there is no discussion of tort litigation or damage claims in the Act. 
The concurring opinion of the court found that no damage claims were preempted rather than not discussed. The dissenting justices found that all state laws were preempted by the act.
 Public outcry and media attention 
thumb|318x318px|United States Capital Building, Washington D.C.
The case caught the attention of many: Congress, Wall Street, and legal communities across the country. Legal communities, those opposed to and supportive of tobacco companies, analyzed the victor in the trials and what it entailed for future liability suits against tobacco companies. Congressional leaders watched, some supporters of big tobacco and others some of its strongest critics. A new conversation in the public forum had been opened with Cipollone v Liggett Group Inc, with the public becoming more informed on the dangers of smoking. However, this can only be said for a small few, as others did know the dangers before the case and the warning of Surgeon General Terry. The smoking population stayed constant through the trial, with no substantial change occurring during the course of the trials. .
Aftermath
thumb|312x312px
The U.S. Supreme Court remanded Cipollone v. Liggett Group, Inc. for a new trial. The retrial never occurred; the $400,000 verdict for Cipollone from the original trial was far eclipsed by the exorbitant costs and length of the lawsuit. Since the case was filed, almost half the ten years was spent on post-trial matters. In 1988, Phillip Morris was quoted as saying: "Almost 200 lawsuits have been brought in the last five and a half years and the cigarette manufacturers have not ... paid a penny to settle one." As of 1992, the law firms handling Cipollone and seven other tobacco litigation cases had "incurred approximately $1.2 million in out-of-pocket expenses ... The firms have also spent well over $5 million in lawyer and paralegal time".
Rose Cipollone's son filed for a voluntary withdrawal of the lawsuit on November 4, 1992. Six other tobacco liability cases were withdrawn the same month as well. The firm handling Cipollone was denied withdrawal in the last remaining case, Haines v. Liggett Group, Inc. Haines dragged on for another decade and then some, until a settlement order was approved on April 13, 2004.
 Legacy 
Cipollone v. Liggett Group, Inc. was one of the costliest liability lawsuits spanning the course of five years. Tobacco companies before the case were succeeding in the court room—no  plaintiffs had ever been like Edell in previous cases. Many earlier plaintiffs were not able to make the scientific correlation between smoking cigarettes and the diseases that are linked to them. Many plaintiffs were out financed by big tobacco companies as well, with companies having what seemed to be unlimited pools of financial resources while plaintiffs struggled with countless court fees. With Cipollone v Liggett Inc, finances were not a major problem for Edell and his team. They were the first to introduce the concept of a conspiracy by tobacco companies to keep the public misinformed on the dangers of smoking and that there was a "safer cigarette"  hidden in the shadows. After the case, tobacco companies viewed the ruling as a victory in their favor. However, this proclamation did not stop a wave of hundreds of lawsuits to follow in liability after Cipollone v Liggett Inc. Cipollone v Liggett Group Inc is viewed by some commentators as a monumental achievement in the anti-tobacco crusade.
However, many say that even with the surge in liability lawsuits against tobacco companies, it will be hard for any more progress to ensue. The same problems are still standing in the way of future plaintiffs who decide to go after big tobacco:
 The financial resources of tobacco companies surpasses that of all plaintiffs 
 The limitations placed by the Supreme Court on who can still litigate against tobacco companies ( those who developed diseases prior to 1969)
 If the argument of smoking being free choice is still intact, there will always be blame to put on the plaintiff and cannot solely rest on tobacco companies
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States federal preemption law
Category:United States tobacco case law
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:Liggett Group
Category:Smoking in the United States
"""

From "Circuit City Stores, Inc. v. Adams" ==> """
Circuit City Stores, Inc. v. Adams, 532 U.S. 105 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case that concerned whether the "section one exemption" of the Federal Arbitration Act applied to an employment contract of an employee at Circuit City Stores. The Court held that the exemption was limited to the specific listing of professions contained in the text. This decision meant that general employment contracts, like the one Adams sued under, would have to be arbitrated in accordance with the federal statute.
Background
In 1995, Saint Clair Adams, who was hired as a sales counselor, signed an employment application with Circuit City. A provision in Adams' application required all employment disputes to be settled by arbitration. Specifically, it stated:
I agree that I will settle any and all previously unasserted claims, disputes or controversies arising out of or relating to my application or candidacy for employment, employment and/or cessation of employment with Circuit City, exclusively by final and binding arbitration before a neutral Arbitrator....
In 1997, Adams filed an employment discrimination lawsuit against Circuit City in California state court, alleging violations of state employment law. Circuit City then filed suit in Federal District Court, seeking to enjoin the state-court action and to compel arbitration of Adams' claims under the Federal Arbitration Act.Adams, 532 U.S. at 108. The District Court entered an order to that effect because it decided that Adams was obligated by the arbitration agreement. In reversing, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals found that the arbitration agreement between Adams and Circuit City was contained in a "contract of employment," and thus not subject to the Act under section 1 of the Act. Section 1 of the FAA excludes "contracts of employment of seamen, railroad employees, or any other class of workers engaged in foreign or interstate commerce" from the Act's coverage. Circuit City appealed to the Supreme Court which agreed to hear the case.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote the majority opinion, reversing the Ninth Circuit and holding that the exception did not apply to this case. The main reason for this finding was the decision that section one's exemption would only be confined to "transportation workers".Adams, 532 U.S. at 112. "The wording of [section one] calls for the application of the maxim ejusdem generis, the statutory canon that 'where general words follow specific words in a statutory enumeration, the general words are construed to embrace only objects similar in nature to those objects enumerated by the preceding specific words...'".Adams, 532 U.S. at 114. Under this method of reading the statute, he would be able to reach an understanding of what the exemption meant. He wrote, "Under this rule of construction the residual clause should be read to give effect to the terms 'seamen' and 'railroad employees,' and should itself be controlled and defined by reference to the enumerated categories of workers which are recited just before it; the interpretation of the clause pressed by respondent fails to produce these results".Adams, 532 U.S. at 115. Therefore, section one "exempts from the FAA only contracts of employment of transportation workers".Adams, 532 U.S. at 116. Kennedy's decision was joined by four other Justices to create a 5-justice majority.
Dissenting opinions
Justice John Paul Stevens wrote a dissent, with which Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen Breyer joined. Justice David Souter joined all sections of Stevens' dissent besides a critique of previous decision of the Supreme Court in arbitration case law. Stevens examined the history of arbitration and the purpose of it throughout the century. The Federal Arbitration Act was designed, he explained, to maintain the enforceability of contractual agreements. But private arbitration is a whole other situation. Stevens wrote, "As the history of the legislation indicates, the potential disparity in bargaining power between individual employees and large employers was the source of organized labor’s opposition to the Act, which it feared would require courts to enforce unfair employment contracts".Adams, 532 U.S. at 132 (Stevens, J., dissenting). He went on to quote the former Chief Justice of the Israeli Supreme Court, Aharon Barak in supporting the idea that the Court should look at the purpose of the act rather than its pure statutory language.
Justice Souter wrote a separate dissent which was joined by the other three Justices who signed onto Stevens' dissent as listed above. He mainly attacked the method of the majority's statutory reading and its failure to look at the statute "as a whole".Adams, 532 U.S. at 137 (Souter, J., dissenting). He wrote, "It is imputing something very odd to the working of the congressional brain to say that Congress took care to bar application of the Act to the class of employment contracts it most obviously had authority to legislate about in 1925..."Adams, 532 U.S. at 138 (Souter, J., dissenting). With that understanding of the Act, he would have affirmed the decision and holding of the Ninth Circuit.
Subsequent history
The case was remanded to the Ninth Circuit, which declared the arbitration agreement unconscionable under California law. That precluded arbitration proceedings and allowed Adams to pursue a regular lawsuit in California courts. Adams was then able to pursue the original claims notwithstanding the decision by Justice Kennedy. In the aftermath of the case, legal analysts said that this case would be important for future arbitration case law.Gaffney, Glen R. "Circuit City v. Adams", EE Advocate, 2003.
See also
 Contract of adhesion
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States arbitration case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "CITGO Asphalt Refining Co. v. Frescati Shipping Co." ==> """
CITGO Asphalt Refining Co. v. Frescati Shipping Co., 589 U.S. ___ (2020), was a United States Supreme Court case dealing with the responsibility of costs of cleanup resulting from a 2004 oil spill on the Delaware River near Paulsboro, New Jersey from the result of a hull rupture. The ship's owner, the Frescati Shipping Company, was responsible for the costs of the cleanup, coming to more than , but under the Oil Pollution Act of 1990, believed that Citgo, who had ordered the shipment, bore responsibly for the shipping route through shallow waters that led to the spill. After years of litigation, the Supreme Court ruled in its 7–2 decision that the contract language established between Citgo and Frescati established that Citgo would provide safe berth for the vessel, and thus ultimately responsible for the spill..
Case background
On November 26, 2004, the Athos I, a  single-hull oil tanker carrying  of oil that had traveled from Venezuela was maneuvering to dock at a Citgo dock on the Delaware River near its refinery at Paulsboro. An anchor in the river's bed, known to have been there since at least 2001, caught on the ship's hull and tore a  gash into it, releasing more than  of oil into the river. The spill spread downstream affecting the shoreline in more than three states (Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Delaware), killing over 11,000 birds, temporarily shut down the Salem Nuclear Power Plant, and halted commercial use of the river for several weeks during cleanup efforts. At the time, it was considered the second worst oil spill in the United States following the Exxon Valdez oil spill, with cleanup costs over . The spill led to passage of the Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation Act of 2006 which among provisions, tripled fines resulting from oil spills from single-hulled vessels to encourage double-hull use, as well as requiring those with knowledge of obstructions in waterways to inform the Coast Guard for immediate removal.
The Athos I was under a time charter from the Frescati Shipping Co. to Star Tankers Inc. under a multi-year contract, while the specific transport from Venezuela to New Jersey was a standard voyage charter between Star Tanker and Citgo. Under the Oil Pollution Act of 1990, Frescati was considered to be the responsible party and was to pay for more than  in cleanup, though the Act limited Frescati's responsibility to about , with the rest paid out of the government's Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund, approximately . The United States Coast Guard also bore some of the costs. 
As the Oil Pollution Act allows for recovery of cleanup funds from liable parties after the matter, Frescati and the United States Government filed suit against Citgo in 2011 to recover their costs, asserting it was their responsibility to make sure the area around their docks had safe berth for the vessel. The anchor was found to be just within the  safe berth clause in the Star-Citgo voyage charter. Frescati sought to recover their  with the  interest in addition to  in costs to repair the Argos I. Heard in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, Judge John P. Fullam ruled in favor of Citgo, stating in his ruling that the ultimate responsible was on the party that left the anchor in the river, which was impossible to identify as any markings had long worn off from it. Frescati appealed to the Third Circuit, which partially vacated the District Court's ruling. The Third Circuit stated that the District Court had ignored the language of the contract law that still applied to the matter, and remanded the case back for review on this matter. 
On review, District Judge Joel Slomsky (taking over for the retiring Judge Fullam) did affirm in his 2016 ruling that it was Citgo's responsibly to provide safe berth to the Athos I near its port under terms of the contract, and thus partially responsible for the cleanup spills, ordering Citgo to pay  ( and interest) to Frescati and  to the government. Citgo appealed again to the Third Circuit, arguing on the terms that the safe berth passage was considered a duty of due diligence rather than an assurance of safe passage. The Third Circuit rejected Citgo's argument and upheld the ruling in 2018 and further found that Citgo should be held responsible for more of the government's sought damages, as it rejected Citgo's claim that removing the anchor was the Coast Guard's responsibility. In their opinion, the Third Circuit stated that Citgo was attempting to argue for equitable relief in terms of splitting the costs for cleanup, but the case was about contractual relief under the terms of the charter contracts and the Oil Pollution Act.
Supreme Court
Citgo petitioned to the Supreme Court on the question of the safe berth clause being an assurance of safe travel or duty of due diligence, as their case along with others from the Second and Fifth Circuits created a split decision. The Supreme Court accepted the writ of certiorari in April 2019.
Oral arguments were heard on November 9, 2019. Reporters found the Justices mostly sided on a strict contract reading supporting the intention that the safe berth clause was to be read as an assurance of safe travel, as if Citgo wanted to use other less-strict language to reduce their liability, there was many other contract mechanisms available they could have used.
The Court issued its decision on March 30, 2020, affirming the Third Circuit's decision. In the 7-2 majority opinion, Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote that "We conclude that the language of the safe-berth clause here unambiguously establishes a warranty of safety", and thus Citgo was responsible for assuring the safe berth for the Athos I and the subsequent cleanup from the oil spill. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion joined by Justice Samuel Alito, in which he wrote that the language of the safe berth clause was not clear that it implied a warranty, and that there should be an evaluation if this was considered a standard practice in the industry.
References
External links
Category:2004 disasters in the United States
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:Maritime incidents in 2004
Category:Maritime incidents in the United States
Category:Oil spills in the United States
Category:United States admiralty case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Delaware River
Category:Citgo
"""

From "Citizens Against Rent Control v. City of Berkeley" ==> """
Citizens Against Rent Control v. City of Berkeley, 454 U.S. 290 (1981), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States invalidated a California law that set limits on contributions to ballot issue campaigns.  The ruling relies heavily on the Court's earlier decisions in Buckley v. Valeo, holding that limits on contributions to political candidates implicate the First Amendment, and First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, holding that the state governments have no compelling interest in limiting spending on speech about ballot issues..
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 454
Rent regulation
References
External links
 Supreme Court of California opinion
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States elections case law
Category:1981 in United States case law
Category:20th century in Berkeley, California
United States case law
Category:Housing in California
"""

From "Citizens to Preserve Overton Park v. Volpe" ==> """
Citizens to Preserve Overton Park v. Volpe, 401 U.S. 402 (1971), is a landmark decision by the Supreme Court of the United States that established the basic legal framework for judicial review of the actions of administrative agencies. It substantially narrowed the Administrative Procedure Act's Section 701(a)(2) exception from judicial review. It also stands as a notable example of the power of litigation by grassroots citizen movements to block government action..
Background
The case concerned the decision by the Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe to approve the construction of Interstate 40 through Overton Park in Memphis, Tennessee pursuant to his powers under the Department of Transportation Act of 1966 and the Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1968. These acts prohibited the Secretary from financing interstate construction through public parks if a "feasible and prudent" alternative route existed. Further, if no alternative route was found by the secretary, the secretary could only allow the construction through the park if "all possible planning to minimize harm" had been conducted.
During the Interstate Highway System building boom of the late 1950s and early 1960s, public parks were viewed as desirable construction sites because approval did not require invocation of eminent domain. That changed after passage of the Department of Transportation Act of 1966, which required the government to demonstrate that there were no "feasible and prudent" alternatives to building through public lands.Department of Transportation Act of 1966 § 4(f)
Procedural history
After Secretary Volpe approved the Tennessee Department of Highways proposal to construct the highway through Overton Park, a group called Citizens to Preserve Overton Park brought suit against him in the Western District of Tennessee for violation of § 4(f) of the Department of Transportation Act. The Secretary responded by filing a motion for summary judgment, which was granted by the District Court. On appeal, the 6th Circuit affirmed the grant of summary judgment. At the Supreme Court, the case was "decided on an expedited timetable". 
Decision
On March 3, 1971, the U.S. Supreme Court reversed the Circuit Court and held that that summary judgment was improperly granted. While the Secretary was not required to make formal findings, the Secretary's sole reliance on litigation affidavits was insufficient in light of the "feasible and prudent" clause of § 4(f). The Court held that the Secretary's decision did not fall into the Administrative Procedure Act's Section 701(a)(2) exception from judicial review for action "committed to agency discretion."Overton Park, 401 U.S. at 410-11. The Court stated that the exception was "very narrow" and that it was applicable when statutes were "drawn in such broad terms that in a given case there is no law to apply." This marked the Court's first general explanation of Section 701(a)(2). Because the agency's decision was classified as informal adjudication, the Court found that it would be reviewed under the "arbitrary or capricious" standard of review under Section 706.  
Justice Thurgood Marshall, writing for the Court, held § 4(f) "is a plain and explicit bar to the use of federal funds for construction of highways through parks; only the most unusual situations are exempted." The Court rejected the Secretary's proposed understanding of "prudent" as a grant of discretion to weigh costs and benefits to determine whether alternatives exist.Overton Park, 401 U.S. at 411. Because the costs of building through parks were demonstrably low, as construction before 1966 had shown, the Court held that the 1966 enactment of the "feasible and prudent" clause "indicates that protection of parkland was to be given paramount importance."Overton Park, 401 U.S. at 412-13. The Court remanded the case to the District Court for further proceedings.Overton Park, 401 U.S. at 406. Justice Black, joined by Justice Brennan, concurred in vacating the summary judgment. However, they would have remanded the case to the Secretary of Transportation rather than the District Court.Overton Park, 401 U.S. at 421-22. "I dissent from the Court's failure to send the case back to the Secretary, whose duty has not yet been performed."
 Impact 
Overton Park is one of "the most important cases in the administrative law repertoire". It marked a shift in how lawyers attacked federal regulation, and is considered a landmark case. Besides being the first interpretation of Section 701(a)(2) of the APA, it provided scholars with a "great deal" of information on Section 706 of the APA. Its conclusion that courts must examine the entire record of an agency's decision established the "hard look" doctrine further expanded upon by State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. v. Campbell (1983). 
The "no law to apply doctrine" that originated from Overton Park "engenders confusion among courts and commentators" due to its ambiguity. It is a standard that is rarely met because Congress typically attempts to give statutory guidance to agencies.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 401
References
External links
Category:1971 in the environment
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:History of Memphis, Tennessee
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Interstate 40
"""

From "Citizens United v. FEC" ==> """
Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission, 558 U.S. 310 (2010), was a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States regarding campaign finance laws and free speech under the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. It was argued in 2009 and decided in 2010. The court held 5–4 that the free speech clause of the First Amendment prohibits the government from restricting independent expenditures for political campaigns by corporations, including nonprofit corporations, labor unions, and other associations.
The case began after Citizens United, a conservative non-profit organization, sought to air and advertise a film critical of  then Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton shortly before the 2008 Democratic primary elections. Broadcasting the film would have been a violation of the 2002 Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act, which prohibited any corporation, non-profit organization, or labor union from making an "electioneering communication" within 30 days of a primary or 60 days of an election, or making any expenditure advocating the election or defeat of a candidate at any time. Citizens United challenged the constitutionality of this law, and its case reached the Supreme Court.
In a majority opinion joined by four other justices, Associate Justice Anthony Kennedy held that the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act's prohibition of all independent expenditures by corporations and unions violated the First Amendment's protection of free speech. The court overruled Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce (1990), which had allowed a prohibition on election spending by incorporated entities, as well as a portion of McConnell v. FEC (2003) that had upheld restricted corporate spending on "electioneering communications". The ruling effectively freed corporations (including incorporated non-profit organizations) to spend money on electioneering communications and to directly advocate for the election or defeat of candidates. In a dissenting opinion, Associate Justice John Paul Stevens argued that the court's ruling represented "a rejection of the common sense of the American people, who have recognized a need to prevent corporations from undermining self government".
The decision remains highly controversial, generating much public discussion and receiving strong support and opposition from various groups. Senator Mitch McConnell commended the decision, arguing that it represented "an important step in the direction of restoring the First Amendment rights". By contrast, former President Barack Obama stated that the decision "gives the special interests and their lobbyists even more power in Washington". The ruling represented a turning point on campaign finance, allowing unlimited election spending by corporations and labor unions, and setting the stage for Speechnow.org v. FEC, which authorized the creation of "Independent Expenditure Committees", more commonly known as Super PACs, and for later rulings by the Roberts Court, including McCutcheon v. FEC (2014), striking down other campaign finance restrictions. While the long-term legacy of this case remains to be seen, early studies by political scientists have concluded that Citizens United worked in favor of the electoral success of Republican candidates.
 Case summary 
In the case, ,
the incorporated non-profit organization Citizens United wanted to air a film that was critical of Hillary Clinton and to advertise the film during television broadcasts, in violation of the 2002 Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act, commonly known as the McCain–Feingold Act or "BCRA" (pronounced "bik-ruh"), which prohibited "electioneering communications" by incorporated entities. Section 203 of BCRA defined an "electioneering communication" as a broadcast, cable, or satellite communication that mentioned a candidate within 60 days of a general election or 30 days of a primary, and prohibited such expenditures by corporations and unions. The United States District Court for the District of Columbia held that §203 of BCRA applied and prohibited Citizens United from paying to have the film Hillary: The Movie shown on television within 30 days of the 2008 Democratic primaries; however, Citizens United would be able to broadcast the advertisements for the film as they fell in the "safe harbor of the FEC's prohibition regulations implementing WRTL". The Supreme Court reversed this decision, striking down those provisions of BCRA that prohibited corporations (including nonprofit corporations) and unions from making independent expenditures for "electioneering communications". The majority decision overruled Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce (1990) and partially overruled McConnell v. Federal Election Commission (2003).  The court, however, upheld requirements for public disclosure by sponsors of advertisements (BCRA §201 and §311). The case did not involve the federal ban on direct contributions from corporations or unions to candidate campaigns or political parties, which remain illegal in races for federal office.
 Background 
Section 203 of the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002 (known as BCRA or McCain–Feingold Act) modified the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971,  to prohibit corporations and unions from using their general treasury to fund "electioneering communications" (broadcast advertisements mentioning a candidate in any context) within 30 days before a primary or 60 days before a general election. During the 2004 presidential campaign, Citizens United, a nonprofit 501(c)(4) organization, filed a complaint before the Federal Election Commission (FEC) charging that advertisements for Michael Moore's film Fahrenheit 9/11, a docudrama critical of the Bush administration's response to the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, produced and marketed by a variety of corporate entities, constituted political advertising and thus could not be aired within the 30 days before a primary election or 60 days before a general election. The FEC dismissed the complaint after finding no evidence that broadcast advertisements featuring a candidate within the proscribed time limits had actually been made.FEC finding August 6, 2004 The FEC later dismissed a second complaint which argued that the movie itself constituted illegal corporate spending advocating the election or defeat of a candidate, which was illegal under the Taft–Hartley Act of 1947 and the Federal Election Campaign Act Amendments of 1974. In dismissing that complaint, the FEC found that:
In response, Citizens United produced the documentary Celsius 41.11, which is highly critical of both Fahrenheit 9/11 and 2004 Democratic presidential nominee John Kerry. The FEC, however, held that showing the movie and advertisements for it would violate the Federal Election Campaign Act, because Citizens United was not a bona fide commercial film maker."Advisory Opinion 2004-30" Federal Election Commission, September 10, 2004
In the wake of these decisions, Citizens United sought to establish itself as a bona fide commercial film maker before the 2008 elections, producing several documentary films between 2005 and 2007. By early 2008, it sought to run three television advertisements to promote its political documentary Hillary: The Movie and to air the movie on DirecTV.
In the District Court
In December 2007, Citizens United filed a complaint in U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia challenging the constitutionality of several statutory provisions governing "electioneering communications". It asked the court to declare that the prohibition on corporate and union funding were facially unconstitutional, and also as applied to Hillary: The Movie and to the 30-second advertisement for the movie, and to enjoin the Federal Election Commission from enforcing its regulations. Citizens United also argued that the Commission's disclosure and disclaimer requirements were unconstitutional as applied to the movie pursuant to the Supreme Court decision in Federal Election Commission v. Wisconsin Right to Life, Inc..  It also sought to enjoin funding, disclosure and disclaimer requirements as applied to Citizens United's intended ads for the movie.
In accordance with special rules in section 403 of the BCRA, a three-judge panel was convened to hear the case. On January 15, 2008, the court denied Citizens United's motion for a preliminary injunction, finding that the suit had little chance of success because the movie had no reasonable interpretation other than as an appeal to vote against Senator Clinton, that it was therefore express advocacy, not entitled to exemption from the ban on corporate funding of electioneering communications. The court held that the Supreme Court in McConnell v. FEC (2003) had found the disclosure requirements constitutional as to all electioneering communications, and Wisconsin RTL did not disturb this holding because the only issue of that case was whether speech that did not constitute the functional equivalent of express advocacy could be banned during the relevant pre-election period. However, Citizens United's complaint that § 203 of the BCRA violates the First Amendment as applied to the 30-second advertisement "Questions" was denied as moot, since "The FEC, in its filings and at oral argument, conceded that the advertisement is exempt from the Prohibition".
On July 18, 2008, the District Court granted summary judgment to the Federal Election Commission. In accordance with the special rules in BCRA, Citizens United appealed to the Supreme Court which docketed the case on August 18, 2008 and noted probable jurisdiction on November 14, 2008.
The Supreme Court heard oral argument on March 24, 2009 and then asked for further briefs on June 29; the re-argument was heard on September 9, 2009.
Arguments before the Supreme Court
During the original oral argument, Deputy Solicitor General Malcolm L. Stewart (representing the FEC) argued that under Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce, the government would have the power to ban books if those books contained even one sentence expressly advocating the election or defeat of a candidate and were published or distributed by a corporation or labor union.  In response to this line of questioning, Stewart further argued that under Austin the government could ban the digital distribution of political books over the Amazon Kindle or prevent a union from hiring an author to write a political book.
According to a 2012 article in The New Yorker by Jeffrey Toobin, the court expected after oral argument to rule on the narrow question that had originally been presented—Can Citizens United show the film? At the subsequent conference among the justices after oral argument, the vote was 5–4 in favor of Citizens United being allowed to show the film. The justices voted the same as they had in Federal Election Commission v. Wisconsin Right to Life, Inc., a similar 2007 case, with Chief Justice Roberts and Justices Scalia, Kennedy, Thomas and Alito in the majority.
Chief Justice John Roberts wrote the initial opinion of the court, holding that BCRA allowed the showing of the film. A draft concurring opinion by Justice Kennedy argued that the court could and should have gone much further. The other justices in the majority agreed with Kennedy's reasoning, and convinced Roberts to reassign the writing and allow Kennedy's concurrence to become the majority opinion.
On the other side, John Paul Stevens, the most senior justice in the minority, assigned the dissent to David Souter, who announced his retirement from the court while he was working on it. The final draft went beyond critiquing the majority. Toobin described it as "air[ing] some of the Court's dirty laundry", writing that Souter's dissent accused Roberts of having manipulated court procedures to reach his desired result—an expansive decision that, Souter claimed, changed decades of election law and ruled on issues neither party to the litigation had presented.
According to Toobin, Roberts agreed to withdraw the opinion and schedule the case for reargument. When he did, the "Questions Presented" to the parties were, however, more expansive, touching on the issues Kennedy's opinion had identified. According to Toobin, the eventual result was therefore a foregone conclusion from that point on. Toobin's account has been criticized for drawing conclusions unsupported by the evidence in his article.
On June 29, 2009, the last day of the term, the court issued an order directing the parties to re-argue the case on September 9 after briefing whether it might be necessary to overrule Austin and/or McConnell v. Federal Election Commission to decide the case. Justice Stevens noted in his dissent that in its prior motion for summary judgment, Citizens United had abandoned its facial challenge of BCRA §203's constitutionality, with the parties agreeing to the dismissal of the claim.
Justice Sotomayor sat on the bench for the first time during the second round of oral arguments. This was the first case argued by then-Solicitor General and future Supreme Court Justice Elena Kagan. Former Bush Solicitor General Ted Olson and First Amendment lawyer Floyd Abrams argued for Citizens United, and former Clinton Solicitor General Seth Waxman defended the statute on behalf of various supporters. Legal scholar Erwin Chemerinsky called it "one of the most important First Amendment cases in years".
 Decision 
On January 21, 2010, the court issued a 5–4 decision in favor of Citizens United that struck down BCRA's restrictions on independent expenditures from corporate treasuries as violations of the First Amendment.
Opinion of the court
175px|thumb|Justice Kennedy, the author of the court's opinion
Five justices formed the majority and joined an opinion written by Justice Anthony Kennedy. The court found that BCRA §203 prohibition of all independent expenditures by corporations and unions violated the First Amendment's protection of free speech.Syllabus : Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission, Supreme Court of the United States. The majority wrote, "If the First Amendment has any force, it prohibits Congress from fining or jailing citizens, or associations of citizens, for simply engaging in political speech."
Justice Kennedy's opinion also noted that because the First Amendment does not distinguish between media and other corporations, the BCRA restrictions improperly allowed Congress to suppress political speech in newspapers, books, television, and blogs. The court overruled Austin, which had held that a state law that prohibited corporations from using treasury money to support or oppose candidates in elections did not violate the First and Fourteenth Amendments. The court also overruled that portion of McConnell that upheld BCRA's restriction of corporate spending on "electioneering communications". The court's ruling effectively freed corporations and unions to spend money both on "electioneering communications" and to directly advocate for the election or defeat of candidates (although not to contribute directly to candidates or political parties).
The majority ruled that the Freedom of the Press clause of the First Amendment protects associations of individuals in addition to individual speakers, and further that the First Amendment does not allow prohibitions of speech based on the identity of the speaker. Corporations, as associations of individuals, therefore have free speech rights under the First Amendment. Because spending money is essential to disseminating speech, as established in Buckley v. Valeo, limiting a corporation's ability to spend money is unconstitutional, because it limits the ability of its members to associate effectively and to speak on political issues.
The decision overruled Austin both because that decision allowed an absolute prohibition on corporate electoral spending, and because it permitted different restrictions on speech-related spending based on corporate identity.  Most importantly, the decision said that Austin was based on an "equality" rationale—trying to equalize speech between different speakers—that the court had previously rejected as illegitimate under the First Amendment in Buckley. The Michigan statute at issue in Austin had distinguished between corporate and union spending, prohibiting the former while allowing the latter. The Austin court, over the dissent by Justices Scalia, Kennedy, and O'Connor, had held that such distinctions were within the legislature's prerogative. In Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission, however, the majority argued that the First Amendment purposefully keeps the government from interfering in the "marketplace of ideas" and "rationing" speech, and it is not up to the legislatures or the courts to create a sense of "fairness" by restricting speech.
The majority also criticized Austin's reasoning that the "distorting effect" of large corporate expenditures constituted a risk of corruption or the appearance of corruption. Rather, the majority argued that the government had no place in determining whether large expenditures distorted an audience's perceptions, and that the type of "corruption" that might justify government controls on spending for speech had to relate to some form of "quid pro quo" transaction: "There is no such thing as too much speech."  The public has a right to have access to all information and to determine the reliability and importance of the information. Additionally, the majority did not believe that reliable evidence substantiated the risk of corruption or the appearance of corruption, and so this rationale did not satisfy strict scrutiny.
The court's opinion relied heavily on the reasoning and principles of the landmark campaign finance case of Buckley and First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, in which the court struck down a broad prohibition against independent expenditures by corporations in ballot initiatives and referendums. Specifically, the court echoed Bellotti's rejection of categories based on a corporation's purpose.  The majority argued that to grant Freedom of the Press protections to media corporations, but not others, presented a host of problems; and so all corporations should be equally protected from expenditure restrictions.
The court found that BCRA §§201 and 311, provisions requiring disclosure of the funder, were valid as applied to the movie advertisements and to the movie itself. The majority ruled for the disclosure of the sources of campaign contributions, saying thatprompt disclosure of expenditures can provide shareholders and citizens with the information needed to hold corporations and elected officials accountable for their positions and supporters. Shareholders can determine whether their corporation's political speech advances the corporation's interest in making profits, and citizens can see whether elected officials are "in the pocket" of so-called moneyed interests ... This transparency enables the electorate to make informed decisions and give proper weight to different speakers and messages.
 Concurrences 
Chief Justice Roberts, with whom Justice Alito joined, wrote separately "to address the important principles of judicial restraint and stare decisis implicated in this case".Roberts opinion et ibid.
Roberts wrote to further explain and defend the court's statement that "there is a difference between judicial restraint and judicial abdication."  Roberts explained why the court must sometimes overrule prior decisions. Had prior courts never gone against stare decisis (that is, against precedent), for example, "segregation would be legal, minimum wage laws would be unconstitutional, and the Government could wiretap ordinary criminal suspects without first obtaining warrants".  Roberts's concurrence recited a plethora of case law in which the court had ruled against precedent.  Ultimately, Roberts argued that "stare decisis ... counsels deference to past mistakes, but provides no justification for making new ones".
Justice Scalia joined the opinion of the court, and wrote a concurring opinion which Justice Alito joined in full and Justice Thomas joined in part. Scalia addressed Justice Stevens' dissent, specifically with regard to the original understanding of the First Amendment. Scalia wrote that Stevens's dissent was "in splendid isolation from the text of the First Amendment ... It never shows why 'the freedom of speech' that was the right of Englishmen did not include the freedom to speak in association with other individuals, including association in the corporate form."  He further considered the dissent's exploration of the Framers' views about the "role of corporations in society" to be misleading, and even if valid, irrelevant to the text. Scalia principally argued that the First Amendment was written in "terms of speech, not speakers" and that "Its text offers no foothold for excluding any category of speaker."Scalia opinion at ibid.  Scalia argued that the Free Press clause was originally intended to protect the distribution of written materials and did not only apply to the media specifically.  This understanding supported the majority's contention that the Constitution does not allow the court to separate corporations into media and non-media categories.
Justice Thomas wrote a separate opinion concurring in all but the upholding of the disclosure provisions. In order to protect the anonymity of contributors to organizations exercising free speech, Thomas would have struck down the reporting requirements of BCRA §201 and §311 as well, rather than allowing them to be challenged only on a case-specific basis. Thomas's primary argument was that anonymous free speech is protected and that making contributor lists public makes the contributors vulnerable to retaliation, citing instances of retaliation against contributors to both sides of a then-recent California voter initiative. Thomas also expressed concern that such retaliation could extend to retaliation by elected officials. Thomas did not consider "as-applied challenges" to be sufficient to protect against the threat of retaliation.Thomas opinion at ibid.
 Dissent 
175px|left|thumb|Justice Stevens, the author of the dissenting opinion
A dissenting opinion by Justice StevensSteven's opinion at ibid. was joined by Justice Ginsburg, Justice Breyer, and Justice Sotomayor. To emphasize his unhappiness with the majority, Stevens read part of his 90-page dissent from the bench. Stevens concurred in the court's decision to sustain BCRA's disclosure provisions but dissented from the principal holding of the court. He argued that the court's ruling "threatens to undermine the integrity of elected institutions across the Nation. The path it has taken to reach its outcome will, I fear, do damage to this institution." He added: "A democracy cannot function effectively when its constituent members believe laws are being bought and sold."
Stevens also argued that the court addressed a question not raised by the litigants when it found BCRA §203 to be facially unconstitutional, and that the majority "changed the case to give themselves an opportunity to change the law". He argued that the majority had expanded the scope beyond the questions presented by the appellant and that therefore a sufficient record for judging the case did not exist. Stevens argued that at a minimum the court should have remanded the case for a fact-finding hearing, and that the majority did not consider other compilations of data, such as the Congressional record for justifying BCRA §203.
Corruption concerns
Stevens argued that the court had long recognized that to deny Congress the power to safeguard against "the improper use of money to influence the result [of an election] is to deny to the nation in a vital particular the power of self protection".Burroughs v. United States, 290 U.S. 534 (1934)  After recognizing that in Buckley v. Valeo the court had struck down portions of a broad prohibition of independent expenditures from any sources, Stevens argued that nevertheless Buckley recognized the legitimacy of "prophylactic" measures for limiting campaign spending and found the prevention of "corruption" to be a reasonable goal for legislation.  Consequently, Stevens argued that Buckley left the door open for carefully tailored future regulation.  Although the majority echoed many of the arguments in First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, Stevens argued that the majority opinion contradicted the reasoning of other campaign finance cases—in particular, of course, the two cases the majority expressly overruled, Austin v. Michigan State Chamber of Commerce and McConnell v. Federal Election Commission.
Stevens argued that the majority failed to recognize the possibility for corruption outside strict quid pro quo exchanges.  He referenced the record from "McConnell v. FEC" to argue that, even if the exchange of votes for expenditures could not be shown, contributors gain favorable political access from such expenditures. The majority, however, considered mere access to be an insufficient justification for limiting speech rights.
Stevens responded that in the past, even when striking down a ban on corporate independent expenditures, the court "never suggested that such quid pro quo debts must take the form of outright vote buying or bribes" (Bellotti). Buckley, he said, also acknowledged that large independent expenditures present the same dangers as quid pro quo arrangements, even though Buckley struck down limits on such independent expenditures. Using the record from "McConnell", he argued that independent expenditures were sometimes a factor in gaining political access and concluded that large independent expenditures generate more influence than direct campaign contributions.  Furthermore, Stevens argued that corporations could threaten Representatives and Senators with negative advertising to gain unprecedented leverage, citing Caperton v. A.T. Massey Coal Co.,Caperton v. A.T. Massey Coal Co., 556 U.S. _ (2009) (holding that $3 million in independent expenditures in a judicial race raised sufficient questions about a judge's impartiality to require the judge to recuse himself in a future case involving the spender). Stevens argued that it was contradictory for the majority to ignore the same risks in legislative and executive elections, and argued that the majority opinion would exacerbate the problem presented in Caperton because of the number of states with judicial elections and increased spending in judicial races.
The appearance of corruption
Second, Stevens argued that the majority did not place enough emphasis on the need to prevent the "appearance of corruption" in elections.  Earlier cases, including Buckley, recognized the importance of public confidence in democracy.  Stevens cited recent data indicating that 80% of the public view corporate independent expenditures as a method used to gain unfair legislative access.  Stevens predicted that if the public came to believe that corporations dominate elections, disaffected voters would stop participating.
Corporations as part of the political process
Third, Stevens argued that the majority's decision failed to recognize the dangers of the corporate form. Austin held that the prevention of corruption, including the distorting influence of a dominant funding source, was a sufficient reason for regulating corporate independent expenditures. In defending Austin, Stevens argued that the unique qualities of corporations and other artificial legal entities made them dangerous to democratic elections. These legal entities, he argued, have perpetual life, the ability to amass large sums of money, limited liability, no ability to vote, no morality, no purpose outside profit-making, and no loyalty. Therefore, he argued, the courts should permit legislatures to regulate corporate participation in the political process.
Legal entities, Stevens wrote, are not "We the People" for whom our Constitution was established. Therefore, he argued, they should not be given speech protections under the First Amendment. The First Amendment, he argued, protects individual self-expression, self-realization and the communication of ideas. Corporate spending is the "furthest from the core of political expression" protected by the Constitution, he argued, citing Federal Election Commission v. Beaumont,Federal Election Commission v. Beaumont, 539 U.S. 146 (2003) and corporate spending on politics should be viewed as a business transaction designed by the officers or the boards of directors for no purpose other than profit-making.  Stevens called corporate spending "more transactional than ideological".  Stevens also pointed out that any member of a corporation may spend personal money on promoting a campaign because BCRA only prohibited the use of general treasury money.
Freedom of speech concerns
Stevens critiqued the majority's main argument that prohibiting limits on spending protects free speech and allows the general public to receive all available information. Citing Austin, Stevens argued that corporations unfairly influence the electoral process with vast sums of money that few individuals can match.  This process, he argued, puts disproportionate focus on supporting this type of speech and gives the impression of widespread acclaim regardless of actual support.
Media censorship concerns
Fifth, Stevens criticized the majority's fear that the government could use BCRA §203 to censor the media. The focus placed on this hypothetical fear made no sense to him because it did not relate to the facts of this case—if the government actually attempted to apply BCRA §203 to the media (and assuming that Citizens United could not constitute media), the court could deal with the problem at that time. Stevens described the majority's supposed protection of the media as nothing more than posturing. According to him, it was the majority's new rule in this case, that prohibited a law from distinguishing between speakers or funding sources. This new rule would be the only reason why media corporations could not be exempted from BCRA §203.
Stevens recognized that "[t]he press plays a unique role not only in the text, history, and structure of the First Amendment but also in facilitating public discourse," and even grants that the majority "raised some interesting and difficult questions about Congress' authority to regulate electioneering by the press, and about how to define what constitutes the press." In response he argued (emphasis in original) "that [this question of regulating and defining the press] is not the case before us."  Stevens's opinion expresses his view that the institutional press can be distinguished from other persons and entities that are not the press while the majority opinion viewed "freedom of the press" as an activity, applicable to all citizens or groups of citizens seeking to publish views.  However, while Stevens has been interpreted as implying the press clause specifically protects the institutional press it isn't clear from his opinion.  In footnote 62 Stevens does argue that the free press clause demonstrates "that the drafters of the First Amendment did draw distinctions—explicit distinctions—between types of "speakers", or speech outlets or forms" but the disjunctive form of the sentence doesn't clearly entail that the distinction must have been between types of speakers rather than outlets or forms.
Losing faith in our democracy
Sixth, Stevens claimed that the majority failed to give proper deference to the legislature.  Stevens predicted that this ruling would restrict the ability of the states to experiment with different methods for decreasing corruption in elections.  According to Stevens, this ruling virtually ended those efforts, "declaring by fiat" that people will not "lose faith in our democracy". Stevens argued that the majority's view of a self-serving legislature, passing campaign-spending laws to gain an advantage in retaining a seat, coupled with "strict scrutiny" of laws, would make it difficult for any campaign finance regulation to be upheld in future cases.
Shareholders rights
Seventh, Stevens argued that the majority opinion ignored the rights of shareholders.  A series of cases protects individuals from legally compelled payment of union dues to support political speech.Abood v. Detroit Board of Education, 431 U.S. 209 (1977)  Because shareholders invest money in corporations, Stevens argued that the law should likewise help to protect shareholders from funding speech that they oppose.  The majority, however, argued that ownership of corporate stock was voluntary and that unhappy shareholders could simply sell off their shares if they did not agree with the corporation's speech. Stevens also argued that  Political Action Committees (PACs), which allow individual members of a corporation to invest money in a separate fund, are an adequate substitute for general corporate speech and better protect shareholder rights. The majority, by contrast, argued that most corporations are too small and lack the resources and raw number of shareholders and management staff necessary to support the legal compliance, accounting and administrative costs of a PAC. In this dispute, the opposing views essentially discussed differing types of entities: Stevens focused his argument on large, publicly held corporations, while the majority, and particularly Justice Scalia's concurring opinion, placed an emphasis on small, closely held corporations and non-profits.
Stevens called the majority's faith in "corporate democracy" an unrealistic method for a shareholder to oppose political funding.  A derivative suit is slow, inefficient, risky and potentially expensive.  Likewise, shareholder meetings only happen a few times a year, not prior to every decision or transaction.  Rather, the officers and boards control the day-to-day spending, including political spending.  According to Stevens, the shareholders have few options, giving them "virtually nonexistent" recourse for opposing a corporation's political spending.  Furthermore, most shareholders use investment intermediaries, such as mutual funds or pensions, and by the time a shareholder may find out about a corporation's political spending and try to object, the damage is done and the shareholder has funded disfavored speech.
 Subsequent developments 
The decision was highly controversial and remains a subject of widespread public discussion. There was a wide range of reactions to the case from politicians, academics, attorneys, advocacy groups and journalists.
Support
Politicians
Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, a plaintiff in the earlier related decision McConnell v. FEC, said: 
Republican campaign consultant Ed Rollins opined that the decision adds transparency to the election process and will make it more competitive.
Advocacy groups
Citizens United, the group filing the lawsuit, said, "Today's U.S. Supreme Court decision allowing Citizens United to air its documentary films and advertisements is a tremendous victory, not only for Citizens United but for every American who desires to participate in the political process." During litigation, Citizens United had support from the United States Chamber of Commerce and the National Rifle Association.
Campaign finance attorney Cleta Mitchell, who had filed an amicus curiae brief on behalf of two advocacy organizations opposing the ban, wrote that "The Supreme Court has correctly eliminated a constitutionally flawed system that allowed media corporations (e.g., The Washington Post Co.) to freely disseminate their opinions about candidates using corporate treasury funds, while denying that constitutional privilege to Susie's Flower Shop Inc. ... The real victims of the corporate expenditure ban have been nonprofit advocacy organizations across the political spectrum."
Heritage Foundation fellow Hans A. von Spakovsky, a former Republican member of the Federal Election Commission, said "The Supreme Court has restored a part of the First Amendment that had been unfortunately stolen by Congress and a previously wrongly-decided ruling of the court."
Libertarian Cato Institute analysts John Samples and Ilya Shapiro wrote that restrictions on advertising were based on the idea "that corporations had so much money that their spending would create vast inequalities in speech that would undermine democracy". They continued, "To make campaign spending equal or nearly so, the government would have to force some people or groups to spend less than they wished. And equality of speech is inherently contrary to protecting speech from government restraint, which is ultimately the heart of American conceptions of free speech."
The American Civil Liberties Union filed an amicus brief that supported the decision,"Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission", American Civil Liberties Union, July 29, 2009, retrieved June 27, 2011 saying that "section 203 should now be struck down as facially unconstitutional", though membership was split over the implications of the ruling, and its board sent the issue to its special committee on campaign finance for further consideration. On March 27, 2012, the ACLU reaffirmed its stance in support of the Supreme Court's Citizens United ruling.
Academics and attorneys
Bradley A. Smith, professor of law at Capital University Law School, former chairman of the FEC, founder of the Institute for Free Speech, and a leading proponent of deregulation of campaign finance, wrote that the major opponents of political free speech are "incumbent politicians" who "are keen to maintain a chokehold on such speech". Empowering "small and midsize corporations—and every incorporated mom-and-pop falafel joint, local firefighters' union, and environmental group—to make its voice heard" frightens them. In response to statements by President Obama and others that the ruling would allow foreign entities to gain political influence through U.S. subsidiaries, Smith pointed out that the decision did not overturn the ban on political donations by foreign corporations and the prohibition on any involvement by foreign nationals in decisions regarding political spending by U.S. subsidiaries, which are covered by other parts of the law.
Campaign finance expert Jan Baran, a member of the Commission on Federal Ethics Law Reform, agreed with the decision, writing that "The history of campaign finance reform is the history of incumbent politicians seeking to muzzle speakers, any speakers, particularly those who might publicly criticize them and their legislation. It is a lot easier to legislate against unions, gun owners, 'fat cat' bankers, health insurance companies and any other industry or 'special interest' group when they can't talk back."  Baran further noted that in general conservatives and libertarians praised the ruling's preservation of the First Amendment and freedom of speech, but that liberals and campaign finance reformers criticized it as greatly expanding the role of corporate money in politics.
Attorney Kenneth Gross, former associate general counsel of the FEC, wrote that corporations relied more on the development of long-term relationships, political action committees and personal contributions, which were not affected by the decision. He held that while trade associations might seek to raise funds and support candidates, corporations which have "signed on to transparency agreements regarding political spending" may not be eager to give.
The New York Times asked seven academics to opine on how corporate money would reshape politics as a result of the court's decision. Three of the seven wrote that the effects would be minimal or positive: Christopher Cotton, a University of Miami School of Business assistant professor of economics, wrote that "There may be very little difference between seeing eight ads or seeing nine ads (compared to seeing one ad or two). And, voters recognize that richer candidates are not necessarily the better candidates, and in some cases, the benefit of running more ads is offset by the negative signal that spending a lot of money creates. Eugene Volokh, a professor of law at UCLA, stated that the "most influential actors in most political campaigns" are media corporations which "overtly editorialize for and against candidates, and also influence elections by choosing what to cover and how to cover it". Holding that corporations like Exxon would fear alienating voters by supporting candidates, the decision really meant that voters would hear "more messages from more sources". Joel Gora, a professor at Brooklyn Law School who had previously argued the case of Buckley v. Valeo on behalf of the American Civil Liberties Union, said that the decision represented "a great day for the First Amendment" writing that the court had "dismantled the First Amendment 'caste system' in election speech".
Journalists
The Editorial Board of the San Antonio Express-News criticized McCain–Feingold's exception for media corporations from the ban on corporate electioneering, writing that it "makes no sense" that the paper could make endorsements up until the day of the election but advocacy groups could not. "While the influence of money on the political process is troubling and sometimes corrupting, abridging political speech is the wrong way to counterbalance that influence."
Anthony Dick in National Review countered a number of arguments against the decision, asking rhetorically, "is there something uniquely harmful and/or unworthy of protection about political messages that come from corporations and unions, as opposed to, say, rich individuals, persuasive writers, or charismatic demagogues?" He noted that "a recent Gallup poll shows that a majority of the public actually agrees with the Court that corporations and unions should be treated just like individuals in terms of their political-expenditure rights". A Gallup poll taken in October 2009 and released soon after the decision showed 57 percent of those surveyed agreed that contributions to political candidates are a form of free speech and 55 percent agreed that the same rules should apply to individuals, corporations and unions. Sixty-four percent of Democrats and Republicans believed campaign donations are a form of free speech.
Chicago Tribune editorial board member Steve Chapman wrote "If corporate advocacy may be forbidden as it was under the law in question, it's not just Exxon Mobil and Citigroup that are rendered mute. Nonprofit corporations set up merely to advance goals shared by citizens, such as the American Civil Liberties Union and the National Rifle Association, also have to put a sock in it. So much for the First Amendment goal of fostering debate about public policy."
Opposition
Politicians
President Barack Obama stated that the decision "gives the special interests and their lobbyists even more power in Washington—while undermining the influence of average Americans who make small contributions to support their preferred candidates". Obama later elaborated in his weekly radio address saying, "this ruling strikes at our democracy itself" and "I can't think of anything more devastating to the public interest". On January 27, 2010, Obama further condemned the decision during the 2010 State of the Union Address, stating that, "Last week, the Supreme Court reversed a century of lawThis has been argued to refer to the Tillman Act of 1907 and subsequent campaign finance laws like the 1947 Taft–Hartley Act, brookings.edu, blogs.wsj.com. Others suggested that he simply was paraphrasing a sentence in Justice Stevens's dissent: "[t]he Court today rejects a century of history when it treats the distinction between corporate and individual campaign spending as an invidious novelty born of Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce, 494 U.S. 652 (1990)." jurist.law.pitt.edu  to open the floodgates for special interests—including foreign corporations—to spend without limit in our elections. Well, I don't think American elections should be bankrolled by America's most powerful interests, or worse, by foreign entities." On television, the camera shifted to a shot of the SCOTUS judges in the front row directly in front of the President while he was making this statement, and Justice Samuel Alito was frowning, shaking his head side to side while mouthing the words "Not true".
Democratic Senator Russ Feingold, a lead sponsor of the 2002 Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act, stated "This decision was a terrible mistake. Presented with a relatively narrow legal issue, the Supreme Court chose to roll back laws that have limited the role of corporate money in federal elections since Teddy Roosevelt was president." Representative Alan Grayson, a Democrat, stated that it was "the worst Supreme Court decision since the Dred Scott case, and that the court had opened the door to political bribery and corruption in elections to come. Democratic congresswoman Donna Edwards, along with constitutional law professor and Maryland Democratic State Senator Jamie Raskin, have advocated petitions to reverse the decision by means of constitutional amendment. Rep. Leonard Boswell introduced legislation to amend the constitution. Senator John Kerry also called for an Amendment to overrule the decision. On December 8, 2011, Senator Bernie Sanders proposed the Saving American Democracy Amendment, which would reverse the court's ruling.
Republican Senator John McCain, co-crafter of the 2002 Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act and the party's 2008 presidential nominee, said "there's going to be, over time, a backlash ... when you see the amounts of union and corporate money that's going to go into political campaigns". McCain was "disappointed by the decision of the Supreme Court and the lifting of the limits on corporate and union contributions" but not surprised by the decision, saying that "It was clear that Justice Roberts, Alito and Scalia, by their very skeptical and even sarcastic comments, were very much opposed to BCRA." Republican Senator Olympia Snowe opined that "Today's decision was a serious disservice to our country."
Although federal law after Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission still prohibited corporate contributions to all political parties, Sanda Everette, co-chair of the Green Party, stated that "The ruling especially hurts the ability of parties that don't accept corporate contributions, like the Green Party, to compete." Another Green Party officer, Rich Whitney, stated "In a transparently political decision, a majority of the US Supreme Court overturned its own recent precedent and paid tribute to the giant corporate interests that already wield tremendous power over our political process and political speech."
Ralph Nader condemned the ruling, saying that "With this decision, corporations can now directly pour vast amounts of corporate money, through independent expenditures, into the electoral swamp already flooded with corporate campaign PAC contribution dollars." Writing for CounterPunch, he called for shareholder resolutions asking company directors to pledge not to use company money to favor or oppose electoral candidates.
Pat Choate, former Reform Party candidate for Vice President, stated, "The court has, in effect, legalized foreign governments and foreign corporations to participate in our electoral politics."
Senator Bernie Sanders, a contender in the 2016 Democratic Primary, has filed a constitutional amendment to overturn the Supreme Court's Decision. Further, both Sanders and Hillary Clinton said that, if they were elected, they would only have appointed Supreme Court Justices who were committed to the repeal of Citizens United. In September 2015, Sanders said that "the foundations of American Democracy are being undermined" and called for sweeping campaign finance reform. Sanders repeated such calls in the years since.
When asked about the April 2014 ruling, former President Jimmy Carter called the United States "an oligarchy with unlimited political bribery" in an interview with Thom Hartmann.
International
Ambassador Janez Lenarčič, speaking for the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe's Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (which has overseen over 150 elections) said the ruling may adversely affect the organization's two commitments of "giving voters a genuine choice and giving candidates a fair chance" in that "it threatens to further marginalize candidates without strong financial backing or extensive personal resources, thereby in effect narrowing the political arena".
Academics and attorneys
The constitutional law scholar Laurence H. Tribe wrote that the decision "marks a major upheaval in First Amendment law and signals the end of whatever legitimate claim could otherwise have been made by the Roberts Court to an incremental and minimalist approach to constitutional adjudication, to a modest view of the judicial role vis-à-vis the political branches, or to a genuine concern with adherence to precedent" and pointed out, "Talking about a business corporation as merely another way that individuals might choose to organize their association with one another to pursue their common expressive aims is worse than unrealistic; it obscures the very real injustice and distortion entailed in the phenomenon of some people using other people's money to support candidates they have made no decision to support, or to oppose candidates they have made no decision to oppose."
Former Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, whose opinions had changed from dissenting in Austin v. Michigan State Chamber of Commerce to co-authoring (with Stevens) the majority opinion in McConnell v. Federal Election Commission twelve years later, criticized the decision only obliquely, but warned, "In invalidating some of the existing checks on campaign spending, the majority in Citizens United has signaled that the problem of campaign contributions in judicial elections might get considerably worse and quite soon."
Richard L. Hasen, professor of election law at Loyola Law School, argued that the ruling "is activist, it increases the dangers of corruption in our political system and it ignores the strong tradition of American political equality". He also described Justice Kennedy's "specter of blog censorship" as sounding more like "the rantings of a right-wing talk show host than the rational view of a justice with a sense of political realism".
Kathleen M. Sullivan, professor at Stanford Law School and Steven J. Andre, adjunct professor at Lincoln Law School, argued that two different visions of freedom of speech exist and clashed in the case.  An egalitarian vision skeptical of the power of large agglomerations of wealth to skew the political process conflicted with a libertarian vision skeptical of government being placed in the role of determining what speech people should or should not hear. Wayne Batchis, Professor at the University of Delaware, in contrast, argues that the Citizens United decision represents a misguided interpretation of the non-textual freedom of association.Wayne Batchis, Citizens United and the Paradox of "Corporate Speech": From Freedom of Association to Freedom of The Association, 36 NYU Rev. L. & Soc. Change  5 (2012).
The four other scholars of the seven writing in the aforementioned The New York Times article were critical. Richard L. Hasen, Distinguished Professor of election law at Loyola Law School argued differently from his Slate article above, concentrating on the "inherent risk of corruption that comes when someone spends independently to try to influence the outcome of judicial elections", since judges are less publicly accountable than elected officials. Heather K. Gerken, Professor of Law at Yale Law School wrote that "The court has done real damage to the cause of reform, but that damage mostly came earlier, with decisions that made less of a splash." Michael Waldman, director of the Brennan Center for Justice at N.Y.U. School of Law, opined that the decision "matches or exceeds Bush v. Gore in ideological or partisan overreaching by the court", explaining how "Exxon or any other firm could spend Bloomberg-level sums in any congressional district in the country against, say, any congressman who supports climate change legislation, or health care, etc." and Fred Wertheimer, founder and president of Democracy 21 considered that "Chief Justice Roberts has abandoned the illusory public commitments he made to 'judicial modesty' and 'respect for precedent' to cast the deciding vote for a radical decision that profoundly undermines our democracy", and that "Congress and presidents past have recognized this danger and signed numerous laws over the years to prevent this kind of corruption of our government."
In a Time magazine survey of over 50 law professors, Richard Delgado (University of Alabama), Cass Sunstein (Harvard), and Jenny Martinez (Stanford) all listed Citizens United as the "worst Supreme Court decision since 1960", with Sunstein noting that the decision is "undermining our system of democracy itself."
Journalists
The New York Times stated in an editorial, "The Supreme Court has handed lobbyists a new weapon. A lobbyist can now tell any elected official: if you vote wrong, my company, labor union or interest group will spend unlimited sums explicitly advertising against your re-election." Jonathan Alter called it the "most serious threat to American democracy in a generation". The Christian Science Monitor wrote that the court had declared "outright that corporate expenditures cannot corrupt elected officials, that influence over lawmakers is not corruption, and that appearance of influence will not undermine public faith in our democracy".
Business leaders
In 2012, Ben Cohen, the co-founder of Ben & Jerry's ice cream, founded Stamp Stampede, a sustained protest to demonstrate widespread support for a proposed constitutional amendment to overturn Citizens United. The campaign encourages people to rubber stamp messages such as "Not To Be Used for Bribing Politicians" on paper currency. In 2014, Cohen told Salon, "As long as the Supreme Court rules money is speech, corporations and the wealthy are using it by giving piles of it to politicians to pass or not pass laws that they want. Now, the rest of the people, [those] who don't have that money, can actually make their voice heard by using money to stamp a message out."
Media coverage
Political blogs
Most blogs avoided the theoretical aspects of the decision and focused on more personal and dramatic elements, including the Barack Obama–Samuel Alito face-off during the President's State of the Union address. There, President Obama argued that the decision "reversed a century of law" (the federal ban on corporate contributions dates back to the 1907 Tillman Act, and the ban on union and corporate expenditures dates from 1947) and that it would allow "foreign corporations to spend without limits in our elections", during which Justice Alito, in the audience, perceptibly mouthed the words "not true". This event received extensive comment from political bloggers, with a substantial amount of the coverage concentrated on whether or not foreign corporations would be able to make substantial political contributions in US elections. In the opinion, the court had specifically indicated it was not overturning the ban on foreign contributions.
Opinion polls
thumb|200px|right|ABC-Washington Post poll results.
An ABC–The Washington Post poll conducted February 4–8, 2010, showed that 80% of those surveyed opposed (and 65% strongly opposed) the Citizens United ruling, which the poll described as saying "corporations and unions can spend as much money as they want to help political candidates win elections". Additionally, 72% supported "an effort by Congress to reinstate limits on corporate and union spending on election campaigns". The poll showed large majority support from Democrats, Republicans and independents.Washington Post-ABC News poll of February 4–8, 2010.Gary Langer, In Supreme Court Ruling on Campaign Finance, the Public Dissents, ABC News, February 17, 2010.Dan Eggan, Poll: Large majority opposes Supreme Court's decision on campaign financing, The Washington Post, February 17, 2010.
A Gallup Poll conducted in October 2009, after oral argument, but released after the Supreme Court released its opinion, found that 57 percent of those surveyed "agreed that money given to political candidates is a form of free speech" and 55 percent agreed that the "same rules should apply to individuals, corporations and unions". In the same poll, however, respondents by 52% to 41% prioritized limits on campaign contributions over protecting rights to support campaigns and 76% thought the government should be able to place limits on corporation or union donations.Lydia Saad, Public Agrees With Court: Campaign Money Is "Free Speech" but have mixed views on other issues at heart of new Supreme Court ruling, Gallup, January 22, 2010Jordan Fabian, Poll: Public agrees with principles of campaign finance decision, The Hill, January 23, 2010.
Separate polls commissioned by various conservative organizations, including the plaintiff Citizens United and the Institute for Free Speech, using different wording, found support for the decision. In particular, the Center for Competitive Politics poll found that 51% of respondents believed that Citizens United should have a right to air ads promoting Hillary: The Movie. The poll also found that only 22 percent had heard of the case.
Polling conducted by Ipsos in August 2017 found that 48% of Americans oppose the decision and 30% support it, with the remainder having no opinion. It also found that 57% percent of Americans favored "limits on the amount of money super PACs can raise and spend".Chris Jackson, Majority of Americans Support Campaign Finance Reform , August 31, 2017.
Further court rulings
SpeechNow v. FEC
SpeechNow is a nonprofit, unincorporated association organized as a section 527 entity under the U.S. Internal Revenue Code. The organization was formed by individuals who seek to pool their resources to make independent expenditures expressly advocating the election or defeat of federal candidates. SpeechNow planned to accept contributions only from individuals, not corporations or other sources prohibited under the Federal Election Campaign Act. On February 14, 2008, SpeechNow and several individual plaintiffs filed a complaint in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia challenging the constitutionality of the Federal Election Campaign Act provisions governing political committee registration, contribution limits and disclosure. The plaintiffs contended that the Act unconstitutionally restricts their association guaranteed under the First Amendment. By requiring registration as a political committee and limiting the monetary amount that an individual may contribute to a political committee, SpeechNow and the other plaintiffs asserted that the Act unconstitutionally restricted the individuals' freedom of speech by limiting the amount that an individual can contribute to SpeechNow and thus the amount the organization may spend. SpeechNow also argued that the reporting required of political committees is unconstitutionally burdensome.
On March 26, 2010, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit ruled in SpeechNow.org. v. FEC that the contribution limits of 2 U.S.C. §441a were unconstitutional as applied to individuals' contributions to SpeechNow. The court also ruled that the reporting requirements of 2 U.S.C. §§432, 433 and 434(a) and the organizational requirements of 2 U.S.C. §431(4) and §431(8) can be constitutionally applied to SpeechNow. A unanimous nine-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals struck down the federal limits on contributions to federal political committees that make only independent expenditures and do not contribute to candidates or political parties. This type of "independent expenditure committee" is inherently non-corruptive, the court reasoned, and therefore contributions to such a committee can not be limited based on the government's interest in preventing political corruption. In light of the Supreme Court's decision in Citizens United v. FEC, in which the Supreme Court held that the government has no anti-corruption interest in limiting independent expenditures, the appeals court ruled that "contributions to groups that make only independent expenditures cannot corrupt or create the appearance of corruption." As a result, the court of appeals held that the government has no anti-corruption interest in limiting contributions to an independent group such as SpeechNow. Contribution limits as applied to SpeechNow "violate the First Amendment by preventing [individuals] from donating to SpeechNow in excess of the limits and by prohibiting SpeechNow from accepting donations in excess of the limits." The court noted that its holding does not affect direct contributions to candidates, but rather contributions to a group that makes only independent expenditures. The appeals court held that, while disclosure and reporting requirements do impose a burden on First Amendment interests, they "'impose no ceiling on campaign related activities'" and "'do not prevent anyone from speaking.'" Furthermore, the court held that the additional reporting requirements that the Commission would impose on SpeechNow if it were organized as a political committee are minimal, "given the relative simplicity with which SpeechNow intends to operate." Since SpeechNow already had a number of "planned contributions" from individuals, the court ruled that SpeechNow could not compare itself to "ad hoc groups that want to create themselves on the spur of the moment." Since the public has an interest in knowing who is speaking about a candidate and who is funding that speech, the court held that requiring such disclosure and organization as a political committee are sufficiently important governmental interests to justify the additional reporting and registration burdens on SpeechNow.
Public electoral financing
On June 27, 2011, ruling in the consolidated cases of Arizona Free Enterprise Club's Freedom Club PAC v. Bennett (No. 10-238) and McComish v. Bennett (No. 10-239), the Supreme Court deemed unconstitutional an Arizona law that provided extra taxpayer-funded support for office seekers who have been outspent by privately funded opponents or by independent political groups. A conservative 5–4 majority of justices said the law violated free speech, concluding the state was impermissibly trying to "level the playing field" through a public finance system. Arizona lawmakers had argued there was a compelling state interest in equalizing resources among competing candidates and interest groups. Opponents said the law violated free-speech rights of the privately financed candidates and their contributors, inhibiting fundraising and spending, discouraging participation in campaigns and limiting what voters hear about politics. Chief Justice John Roberts said in the court's majority opinion that the law substantially burdened political speech and was not sufficiently justified to survive First Amendment scrutiny.
As a consequence of the decision, states and municipalities are blocked from using a method of public financing that is simultaneously likely to attract candidates fearful they will be vastly outspent and sensitive to avoiding needless government expense. "The government can still use taxpayer funds to subsidize political campaigns, but it can only do that in a manner that provides an alternative to private financing" said William R. Maurer, a lawyer with Institute for Justice, which represented several challengers of the law. "It cannot create disincentives." The ruling meant the end of similar matching-fund programs in Connecticut, Maine and a few other places according to David Primo, a political science professor at University of Rochester who was an expert witness for the law's challengers.
State campaign-spending limits
Despite the Citizens United ruling, in December 2011, the Montana Supreme Court, in Western Tradition Partnership, Inc. v. Attorney General of Montana, upheld that state's law limiting corporate contributions. Examining the history of corporate interference in Montana government that led to the Corrupt Practices Law, the majority decided that the state still had a compelling reason to maintain the restrictions. It ruled that these restrictions on speech were narrowly tailored and withstood strict scrutiny and thus did not contradict Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission.
While granting permission to file a certiorari petition, the US Supreme Court agreed to stay the Montana ruling, although Justices Ginsburg and Breyer wrote a short statement urging the court "to consider whether, in light of the huge sums of money currently deployed to buy candidate's allegiance, Citizens United should continue to hold sway". In June 2012, over the dissent of the same four judges who dissented in Citizens United, the court simultaneously granted certiorari and summarily reversed the decision in American Tradition Partnership, Inc. v. Bullock, 567, U.S. __ (2012). The Supreme Court majority rejected the Montana Supreme Court arguments in a two paragraph, twenty line per curiam opinion, stating that these arguments "either were already rejected in Citizens United, or fail to meaningfully distinguish that case." The ruling makes clear that states cannot bar corporate and union political expenditures in state elections.
McCutcheon v. FEC
In addition to limiting the size of donations to individual candidates and parties, the Federal Election Campaign Act also includes aggregate caps on the total amount that an individual may give to all candidates and parties. In 2012, Shaun McCutcheon, a Republican Party activist, sought to donate more than was allowed by the federal aggregate limit on federal candidates. McCutcheon et al filed suit against the Federal Election Commission (FEC). In 2014, the US Supreme Court reversed a ruling of the DC District Court's dismissal of McCutcheon v. FEC and struck down the aggregate limits. The plurality opinion invalidated only the aggregate contribution limits, not limits on giving to any one candidate or party. The decisive fifth vote for McCutcheon came from Justice Thomas, who wrote a concurring opinion stating that all contribution limits are unconstitutional.
Legislative responses
Legislative impact
The New York Times reported that 24 states with laws prohibiting or limiting independent expenditures by unions and corporations would have to change their campaign finance laws because of the ruling.
After Citizens United and SpeechNow.org numerous state legislatures raised their limits on contributions to candidates and parties. At the federal level, lawmakers substantially increased contribution limits to political parties as part of the 2014 budget bill. Such changes are widely perceived as efforts to place candidates and parties on something closer to equal footing with organizations making independent expenditures.
While many states and the federal government have raised contribution limits in response to Citizens United, proposals aimed at discouraging political spending, or providing for public financing of campaigns, have been less successful.
Senator Dick Durbin (D-IL) proposed that candidates who sign up small donors receive $900,000 in public money, but the proposal has not been acted on by Congress. Others proposed that laws on corporate governance be amended to assure that shareholders vote on political expenditures.
In February 2010, Senator Charles E. Schumer of New York, immediate past Chairman of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, and Representative Chris Van Hollen of Maryland, Chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, outlined legislation aimed at undoing the decision.  In April 2010, they introduced such legislation in the Senate and House, respectively. On June 24, 2010, H.R.5175 (The DISCLOSE Act) passed in the House of Representatives but failed in the Senate. It would have required additional disclosure by corporations of their campaign expenditures.  The law, if passed, would also have prohibited political spending by U.S. companies with twenty percent or more foreign ownership, and by most government contractors. The DISCLOSE Act included exemptions to its rules given to certain special interests such as the National Rifle Association and the American Association of Retired Persons. These gaps within the proposal attracted criticism from lawmakers on both political parties. "They are auctioning off pieces of the First Amendment in this bill ... The bigger you are, the stronger you are, the less disclosure you have", said Republican Congressman Dan Lungren of California. Democratic Congressman Adam Schiff of California commented, "I wish there had been no carve-outs".
The bill was criticized as prohibiting much activity that was legal before Citizens United.
The DISCLOSE Act twice failed to pass the U.S. Senate in the 111th Congress, in both instances reaching only 59 of the 60 votes required to overcome a unified Republican filibuster. A scaled down version of the DISCLOSE Act was reintroduced in both the House and Senate in 2012 but did not pass.
Some have argued for a constitutional amendment to overturn the decision. Although the decision does not address "corporate personhood", a long-established judicial and constitutional concept, much attention has focused on that issue. Move to Amend, a coalition formed in response to the ruling,Ocean Beach Rag . July 6, 2011. seeks to amend the Constitution to abolish corporate personhood, thus stripping corporations of all rights under the Constitution.Movement to Abolish Corporate Personhood Gaining Traction. Boulder Weekly July 14, 2011. In an online chat with web community Reddit, President Obama endorsed further consideration of a constitutional amendment and stated "Over the longer term, I think we need to seriously consider mobilizing a constitutional amendment process to overturn Citizens United (assuming the Supreme Court doesn't revisit it)". He further elaborated that "Even if the amendment process falls short, it can shine a spotlight on the super-PAC phenomenon and help apply pressure for change."
Legislative reactions by state and local lawmakers
Members of 16 state legislatures have called for a constitutional amendment to reverse the court's decision: California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Illinois, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Montana, New Jersey, New Mexico, Oregon, Rhode Island, Vermont, and West Virginia.
Most of these are non-binding resolutions, but three states—Vermont, California, and Illinois—called for an Article V Convention to draft and propose a federal constitutional amendment to overturn Citizens United.  In Minnesota, the Minnesota Senate passed a similar resolution, "Senate File No. 17", on May 2, 2013, but the House of Representatives returned the measure to the General Calendar (meaning the measure did not pass) on May 15, 2013. Thirty-four states are needed to call an Article V convention.
On a local level, Washington D.C. and 400 other municipalities passed resolutions requesting a federal constitutional amendment.
Since Citizens United, however, 13 states have actually raised their contribution limits.
Political impact
Critics predicted that the ruling would "bring about a new era of corporate influence in politics", allowing companies and businesspeople to "buy elections" to promote their financial interests. Instead, large expenditures, usually through "Super PACS", have come from "a small group of billionaires", based largely on ideology. This has shifted power "away from the political parties and toward the ... donors themselves. In part, this explains the large number and variety of candidates fielded by the Republicans in 2016."
According to a 2021 study, the ruling weakened political parties while strengthening single-issue advocacy groups and Super PACs funded by billionaires with pet issues. The ruling made it easier for self-promoting politicians to undermine political processes and democratic norms to promote themselves.
Super PACs
Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission has often been credited for the creation of "super PACs", political action committees which make no financial contributions to candidates or parties, and so can accept unlimited contributions from individuals, corporations and unions. Certainly, the holding in Citizens United helped affirm the legal basis for super PACs by deciding that, for purposes of establishing a "compelling government interest" of corruption sufficient to justify government limitations on political speech, "independent expenditures, including those made by corporations, do not give rise to corruption or the appearance of corruption".
It took another decision, by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, Speechnow.org v. Federal Election Commission, to actually authorize the creation of super PACs. While Citizens United held that corporations and unions could make independent expenditures, a separate provision of the Federal Election Campaign Act, at least as long interpreted by the Federal Election Commission, held that individuals could not contribute to a common fund without it becoming a PAC. PACs, in turn, were not allowed to accept corporate or union contributions of any size or to accept individual contributions in excess of $5,000. In Speechnow.org, the D.C. Circuit, sitting en banc, held 9–0 that in light of Citizens United, such restrictions on the sources and size of contributions could not apply to an organization that made only independent expenditures in support of or opposition to a candidate but not contributions to a candidate's campaign.
Citizens United and SpeechNOW left their imprint on the 2012 United States presidential election, in which single individuals contributed large sums to "super PACs" supporting particular candidates. Sheldon Adelson, the gambling entrepreneur, gave approximately fifteen million dollars to support Newt Gingrich. Foster Friess, a Wyoming financier, donated almost two million dollars to Rick Santorum's super PAC. Karl Rove organized super PACs that spent over $300 million in support of Republicans during the 2012 elections. 
In addition to indirectly providing support for the creation of super PACs, Citizens United allowed incorporated 501(c)(4) public advocacy groups (such as the National Rifle Association, the Sierra Club, and the group Citizens United itself) and trade associations to make expenditures in political races. Such groups may not, under the tax code, have a primary purpose of engaging in electoral advocacy. These organizations must disclose their expenditures, but unlike super PACs they do not have to include the names of their donors in their FEC filings. A number of partisan organizations such as Karl Rove's influential conservative Crossroads Grassroots Policy Strategies and the liberal 21st Century Colorado have since registered as tax-exempt 501(c)(4) groups (defined as groups promoting "social welfare") and engaged in substantial political spending. This has led to claims of large secret donations, and questions about whether such groups should be required to disclose their donors. Historically, such non-profits have not been required to disclose their donors or names of members. See National Association for the Advancement of Colored People v. Alabama.
In an August 2015 essay in Der Spiegel, Markus Feldkirchen wrote that the Citizens United decision was "now becoming visible for the first time" in federal elections as the super-rich have "radically" increased donations to support their candidates and positions via super PACs. Feldkirchen also said in the first six months of 2015 the candidates and their super PACs received close to $400 million: "far more than in the entire previous campaign". He opined that super-rich donating more than ever before to individual campaigns plus the "enormous" chasm in wealth has given the super-rich the power to steer the economic and political direction of the United States and undermine its democracy. In October 2015, The New York Times observed that just 158 super-rich families each contributed $250,000 or more, while an additional 200 families gave more than $100,000 for the 2016 presidential election. Both groups contributed almost half of the "early money" for candidates in the 2016 presidential election as of June 30, 2015 through channels like super PACs legalized by the Supreme Court's Citizens United decision.
Weakening of "establishment" forces
At least in the Republican Party, the Citizens United ruling has weakened the fund raising power of the Republican "establishment" in the form of the "three major" Republican campaign committees (Republican National Committee, National Republican Congressional Committee, National Republican Senatorial Committee). Columnist Thomas B. Edsall notes that in 2008, "the last election before the Citizens United decision", the three campaign committees "raised six times" the money that "nonparty conservative organizations" did—$657.6 million vs. $111.9 million. By 2016 those party committees raised less than the independent groups—$652.4 million v. $810.4 million. Thus the new funding "freed candidates to defy" the party establishment, although not, it seems, to move policy making away from traditional Republican priorities.
From 2010 to 2018, super PACs spent approximately $2.9 billion on federal elections. Notably, the bulk of that money comes from just a few wealthy individual donors. In the 2018 election cycle, for example, the top 100 donors to super PACs contributed nearly 78 percent of all super PAC spending. The Brennan Center opined, the "decision further tilted political influence toward wealthy donors and corporations."
 Republican advantage 
Studies have shown that the Citizens United ruling gave Republicans an advantage in subsequent elections. One study by political scientists at University of Chicago, Columbia University and the London School of Economics found "that Citizens United increased the GOP's average seat share in the state legislature by five percentage points. That is a large effect—large enough that, were it applied to the past twelve Congresses, partisan control of the House would have switched eight times. In line with a previous study, we also find that the vote share of Republican candidates increased three to four points, on average." A 2016 study in The Journal of Law and Economics found "that Citizens United is associated with an increase in Republicans' election probabilities in state house races of approximately 4 percentage points overall and 10 or more percentage points in several states. We link these estimates to on-the-ground evidence of significant spending by corporations through channels enabled by Citizens United." According to a 2020 study, the ruling boosted the electoral success of Republican candidates.
See also
 1996 United States campaign finance controversy
 2009 term opinions of the Supreme Court of the United States
 Bank of the United States v. Deveaux (1809)
 James Bopp
 David Bossie
 End Citizens United
 Issue advocacy ads
 US corporate law
 Bowman v United Kingdom [1998] ECHR 4, (1998) 26 EHRR 1, case under the European Convention on Human Rights allowing restrictions on spending money to promote political equality
 Harper v. Canada (Attorney General) [2004] SCR 827, restrictions on spending in Canada
 Animal Defenders International v United Kingdom [2013] ECHR 362, the leading case in Europe held that the UK's total ban on political advertising was compatible with freedom of expression "given the danger of unequal access based on wealth and to political advertising" which goes "to the heart of the democratic process."[2013] ECHR 362, [117] and see [2008] UKHL 15, [28]-[29] and [47]-[51]
 Electoral reform in the United States, which discusses efforts to overturn Citizens United among other electoral reform initiatives.
 McConnell v. FEC
 Buckley v. Valeo
 McCutcheon v. FEC
 FEC v. National Conservative PAC
 FEC v. Wisconsin Right to Life, Inc.
 FEC v. Massachusetts Citizens for Life
References
Further reading
 Alexander M. "Citizens United and equality forgotten" 35 New York University Review of Law & Social Change (2011) 499.
 Brown, W. "Law and Legal Reason", Undoing the Demos: Neoliberalism's Stealth Revolution (Zone Books, 2015): 151–173.
 Dawood, Yasmin. "Campaign Finance and American Democracy." Annual Review of Political Science (2015) Abstract & download
 Gerken H. "The real problem with Citizens United: Campaign finance, dark money, and shadow parties" 97 Marquette Law Review (2014) 903.
 Hansen, Wendy L., Michael S. Rocca, and Brittany Leigh Ortiz. "The effects of Citizens United on corporate spending in the 2012 presidential election." Journal of Politics 77.2 (2015): 535–545. in JSTOR
 Kang M. "The end of campaign finance law" 98 Virginia Law Review (2012)  1.
 Kuhner T. Capitalism v. Democracy: Money in Politics and the Free Market Constitution (Stanford University Press, 2014)
 Ewan McGaughey, 'Fascism-Lite in America (or the social idea of Donald Trump)' (2016) TLI Think! Paper 26/2016
 Post, Robert, ed. Citizens Divided: Campaign Finance Reform and the Constitution (Harvard University Press, 2014)
External links
 "Did the Citizens United Ruling Shut Out Your Voice?"
 Court documents. Dead link.
 Court documents
 Oral Argument Transcript, PDF links to one of the two oral arguments.
 Text of Supreme Court decision, PDF
 Text of Supreme Court decision, HTML
 Seligman, Joel, "Is The Corporation The Person? Reflections on Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission", speech May 6, 2010; with thanks by Seligman to John Field for assistance.
 Zephyr Teachout, The Anti-Corruption Principle, 94 Cornell L. Rev. 341 (2009).
 Citizens United and the Scope of Professor Teachout's Anti-Corruption Principle, 107 Nw. U. L. Rev. 399; 107 Nw. U. L. Rev. Colloquy 1 (2012).
 "Money Unlimited: How John Roberts Orchestrated Citizens United" by Jeffrey Toobin, published in The New Yorker on May 21, 2012. An article about the beginnings of campaign finance law i.e. the Tillman Act of 1907, the Supreme Court case history regarding campaign finance before Citizens United, the court proceedings leading to the Citizens United ruling, and the aftermath of Citizens United.
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:Corporate personhood
Category:Federal Election Commission litigation
Category:Campaign finance in the United States
Category:United States elections case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:Judicial activism
"""

From "Citizens' Savings & Trust Co. v. Illinois Central Railway Co." ==> """
Citizens' Sav. & Trust Co. v. Illinois Central R. Co., 205 U.S. 46 (1907), was a suit brought in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Illinois against the Illinois Central Railroad Company, the Belleville & Southern Illinois Railroad Company, the St. Louis, Alton & Terre Haute Railroad Company (205 U.S. 46, 47), all Illinois corporations (to be hereafter called, respectively, the Illinois, the Belleville, and Terre Haute companies), and the United States Trust Company, a New York corporation. The lastnamed corporation was never served with process and did not appear in the suit.Citizens' Sav. & Trust Co. v. Illinois Central R. Co., . The case presents a question as to the jurisdiction of the court below. 
Arguments and rulings
The plaintiff, an Ohio corporation, was the holder of 400 shares of the common stock of the Belleville company, and sued on its own and on behalf of all other stockholders of that company.
The bill charged that certain deeds were illegally and fraudulently procured by the Illinois Central Railroad Company, and by means of those instruments, and by various improper schemes, it had acquired not only complete control over and possession of the Belleville company and all its properties, but managed those properties in its own interest and in total disregard of the rights of holders of the common stock of the Belleville company. It was charged that the Illinois Central Railroad Company had practically destroyed the value of such stock. 
The plaintiff also asked for a decree ordering the defendant, the Illinois Central Railroad Company, to account for and pay over to the Belleville company, or to a receiver to be appointed for that company, such proportion of the yearly gross earnings as the Belleville company is entitled to under the lease executed by and between the Belleville company and the Terre Haute Railroad Company, bearing date October 1, 1866; such accounting to cover each fiscal year, or part thereof, from the time when the Illinois Central Railroad Company first acquired the railroad properties of the Belleville company as lessee or sublessee under the lease executed on or about the 1st of April, 1896, up to the time of such accounting; further, for 'an order appointing a receiver for the Belleville & Southern Illinois Railroad Company, with the usual powers of such receivers; and that the Illinois Central Railroad Company, through its officers and agents, be ordered to surrender and deliver to said receiver all the corporate assets (205 U.S. 46, 49), books, papers, and everything that rightfully belongs to the Belleville & Southern Illinois Railroad Company, and that the Illinois Central Railroad, Company be ordered to account to such receiver, as is hereinbefore prayed. That the defendant, the Illinois Central Railroad Company, its officers and agents, be restrained from further violating the rights of your orator, and be ordered, directed, and restrained in particular from interfering in any way with said receiver, or with the operation of said Belleville company as an independent and separate railroad company; and for such other and further relief as the equity of the case may require.' 
The Belleville company pleaded under protest that the court below was without jurisdiction to proceed against it, in that the defendant was an inhabitant of the northern division of the northern district of Illinois, having its residence in that division and district at Chicago, where its corporate meetings were held and its corporate business transacted. 
By its final order the court sustained the pleas to the jurisdiction, and dismissed the suit. (205 U.S. 46, 50) Messrs. Edward C. Eliot and William B. Sanders for appellant. 
The plaintiff contends that this condition was waived, and the general appearance of the defendants entered, when their counsel, at the hearing as to the sufficiency of the pleas to the jurisdiction, argued the merits of the case as disclosed by the bill. This is too harsh an interpretation of what occurred in the court below. There was no motion for the dismissal of the bill for want of equity. The discussion of the merits was permitted or invited by the court in order that it might be informed on that question in the event it concluded to consider the merits along with the question of the sufficiency of the pleas to the jurisdiction. We are satisfied that the defendants did not intend to waive the benefit of their qualified appearance at the time of filing the pleas to the jurisdiction. 
The high court found that the suit was of such a nature as to bring it within the jurisdiction of the circuit court for the eastern district, under the Jurisdiction and Removal Act of 1875. The judgment must was reversed and the cause remanded, that the plaintiff may proceed, as it may be advised, with the preparation of its case under the act of 1875 
It was so ordered.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 205
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:1907 in United States case law
"""

From "City News & Novelty, Inc. v. City of Waukesha" ==> """
City News & Novelty, Inc. v. Waukesha, 531 U.S. 278 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case decided in 2001. The case concerned the denial of a business license for an adult store which sold sexually explicit materials. The Court eventually dismissed the case as the store had withdrawn their application to renew their license.
Background
In Freeman v. Maryland the United States Supreme Court announced procedural requirements necessary to guard against unconstitutional prior restraint. Under this regime, the state of Wisconsin set up an administrative review process for reconsidering denials of licenses for adult stores. City News & Novelty, Inc., requested a renewal to operate their business in the city of Waukesha.  Their application was denied. 
Wisconsin state courts upheld the denial and the store appealed to the Supreme Court, arguing that they were not afforded proper judicial review of their matter before lower courts. The Supreme Court accepted the case to resolve a split amongst state and federal courts over how swift judicial review in these matters must be.
Jeff Scott Olson, the attorney for the store, called the Supreme Court appeal important. According to Olson, "prompt judicial review" is important because municipal decisions on license matters can sometimes happen for a "distaste" of the particular business.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote the decision for a unanimous court, dismissing the case. The basis for the dismissal was that City News had withdrawn its renewal application entirely. This meant that there was no "cognizable interest in the outcome" of the case. While expressing a desire to resolve the important question in this case regarding judicial review of state censorship, there was no way for the matter to survive when there was no live controversy.
See also
 Free speech in the United States
Notes
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Wisconsin
Category:Waukesha, Wisconsin
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Pornography in the Americas
"""

From "City of Akron v. Akron Center for Reproductive Health" ==> """
City of Akron v. Akron Center for Reproductive Health, 462 U.S. 416 (1983), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court affirmed its abortion rights jurisprudence. In an opinion by Justice Powell, the Court struck down several provisions of an Ohio abortion law, including portions found to be unconstitutionally vague..
Hospital requirement
One provision of the statute required abortions after the first trimester to be performed in a hospital. The Court found that to be unconstitutional. The state has a compelling interest in regulating abortion after the first trimester, but accepted medical practice does not recommend for all second-trimester abortions to be performed in a hospital. The regulation imposed an unnecessary burden that has the effect of infringing upon the constitutional right to an abortion.
Prohibition on unmarried minors
Another provision stated that a physician may not perform an abortion on an unmarried minor under 15 without obtaining either consent from one of her parents or a judicial bypass.
The Court likewise struck down the provision, as the law and the Ohio courts provided no suitable mechanism for a minor to gain a judicial bypass, as the relevant laws and courts concerning juveniles did not mention abortion or establish the authority to determine the maturity or emancipation of a minor.
Information requirements
The statute also stated that before performing an abortion, the physician must inform the patient of the status of the pregnancy, stage of fetal development, expected date of viability, health risks of abortion, and the availability of adoption agencies and childbirth resources. The Court found the provision to be unconstitutional, as the script, ostensibly provided to ensure informed consent, was found to be geared towards influencing the patient to decide against an abortion.
The state may not attempt to influence the patient's choice between abortion and childbirth. The Ohio regulation extends the state's interest in informed consent beyond permissible limits, interfering with the discretion of the physician and placing unreasonable obstacles in his path.
The requirement for doctors to tell patients that the fetus is "a human life from the moment of conception" also violates the provision in Roe v. Wade that "a State may not adopt one theory of when life begins to justify its regulation of abortions."
The detailed description of the fetus that doctors are required to provide is speculative.
The list of risks of abortion that the doctor is required to provide is "intended to suggest that abortion is a particularly dangerous procedure" and also overrides the physician's judgment, as he must tell his patient specific risks even if they do not apply to that patient.
24-hour waiting period
Another provision mandated a 24-hour waiting period after the patient signs a consent form. The Court struck the provision down, as no state interest is served by the imposition of an "arbitrary and inflexible" waiting period.
Disposal requirements
The final challenged provision required physicians to ensure that fetal remains are disposed of in a "humane and sanitary manner."  The majority deemed that to be unconstitutional, as criminal sanctions are imposed upon doctors who break the law, but "humane" was unconstitutionally vague and so a violation of due process.  Rather than strike down "humane" and preserve "sanitary," the Court struck down the entire provision.
Dissent
In her dissenting opinion, Sandra Day O'Connor, joined by Byron White and William Rehnquist, urged "the 'unduly burdensome' standard" from two prior cases, Maher v. RoeMaher v. Roe, 432 U. S. 464 (1977) - US Supreme Court Cases from Justia & Oyez (1977) and Bellotti v. Baird (1979) to "be applied to the challenged regulations throughout the entire pregnancy without reference to the particular 'stage' of pregnancy involved." The "undue burden" test was later to gain acceptance by a plurality of the Court in Planned Parenthood v. Casey (1992), which replaced the earlier "strict scrutiny" standard of review of abortion regulations with the lesser "undue burden" standard, a standard which remained in effect until the ruling in Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization in 2022.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 462
References
External links
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:Right to abortion under the United States Constitution
Category:Right to privacy under the United States Constitution
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:Void for vagueness case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:History of Akron, Ohio
Category:Legal history of Ohio
Category:History of women in Ohio
"""

From "City of Austin v. Reagan National Advertising of Austin, LLC" ==> """
City of Austin v. Reagan National Advertising of Austin, LLC, 596 U.S. ___ (2022), was a United States Supreme Court case dealing with the application of zoning restrictions on digital billboards in the city of Austin, Texas. In a 6–3 ruling, the Court ruled that the Austin regulation against off-premise digital signs was content-neutral and thus should be reviewed as a facial challenge rather than a strict scrutiny following from the reasoning in Reed v. Town of Gilbert.
Background
Austin is one of 350 cities and towns in Texas that enacted bans related to digital billboards along the sides of highways, generally as a long-term effect of the Highway Beautification Act as well as to avoid distractions for drivers along these highways. Austin's city codes includes a Sign Code that distinguishes between signage that is located on-premises, including signs in shop windows and mounted street signs on the property, and those off-premises, like billboards. On-premise signs are generally unregulated and may be updated and improved without any limitations, including improvements to digital signage. Off-premise signage, however, are restricted from such improvements. In addition, the city has banned the installation of new billboards.
Around 2017, two advertising companies that operated static billboard in Austin, Lamar Advantage Outdoor Company and Reagan National Advertising of Austin, sued the city as the city council denied over 80 applications to allow them to convert existing static billboards into digital billboards. The advertising companies contended that the city had allowed some digital signage such as that on the Austin Convention Center, and believed the ban was unconstitutional. They were joined by the Austin Police Association and supporters of local emergency services, believing that such digital billboards could be used to provide information such as Amber Alerts. The case was first filed in a state district court before the city moved it to the United States District Court for the Western District of Texas in 2017. The district court selected to review the matter under intermediate scrutiny based on Metromedia, Inc. v. San Diego, rather than the strict scrutiny content-based standard of Reed v. Town of Gilbert, as the off-premise versus on-premise standard was content-neutral. Under this distinction, the District Court ruled for the city. Though the city amended the sign code in 2017 after litigation had started, the changes did not impact the case nor render it moot.
The advertisers appealed to the Fifth Circuit. In October 2020, the Fifth Circuit reversed the District's ruled in favor of the advertisers. The Fifth Circuit used the strict scrutiny standard of Reed to evaluate the city codes, as it determined that because to determine whether a sign was on or off-premises, one had to consider the message it was conveying, and that meant that this was a content-based restriction. Given this assessment, the rationale the city had given to maintain the ban against digital signage – to assure the safety of drivers and maintain the beauty of the landscape – were not sufficient reasons to violate the First Amendment rights of the advertisers, and thus ruled the city's sign code unconstitutional.
Supreme Court
The city petitioned the Supreme Court to review the Fifth Circuit's ruling, stating that the court implied a content-based meaning in the city code that doesn't exist. The Court granted certiorari on June 28, 2021. The case was argued on November 10, 2021. On April 21, 2022, the court reversed the Fifth Circuit's decision in a 6–3 vote. The majority opinion was written by Justice Sonia Sotomayor and was joined by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justices Stephen Breyer, Elena Kagan, and Brett Kavanaugh. The majority opinion by Sotomayor, held that Austin's on/off premises regulation was written as content neutral under Reed, and thus should be reviewed through a facial challenge rather than strict scrutiny. The case was remanded to review the advertisers' challenge on based on the facial review of the regulation. Justice Breyer wrote a separate concurrence that argued that Reed decision that applied strict scrutiny was wrong to begin with, and that instead there would be a better solution that used a measure of common sense in making the judgment if such regulations discriminated on content. Justice Samuel Alito wrote an opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part, agreeing that the Fifth Circuit's judgement should be reversed, but believed that there should be considerations when strict scrutiny should apply depending on the content of the signage.
The dissenting opinion was written by Justice Clarence Thomas, who had written the majority opinion from Reed. Thomas' dissent was joined by Justices Neil Gorsuch and Amy Coney Barrett. Thomas argued that the on/off premise regulation was content-based, since these messages would be like to promote on or off-site services, and thus was unconstitutional through a strict scrutiny review under Reed as well as Hill v. Colorado.
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:2022 in United States case law
"""

From "City of Boerne v. Flores" ==> """
City of Boerne v. Flores, 521 U.S. 507 (1997), was a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States concerning the scope of Congress's power of enforcement under Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment. The case also had a significant impact on historic preservation.
Facts
The basis for dispute arose when the Catholic Archbishop of San Antonio, Patrick Flores, applied for a building permit to enlarge the 1923 mission-style St. Peter's Church in Boerne, Texas, which was originally built by German residents.Miller, Julia. "U.S. Supreme Court Declares RFRA Unconstitutional in Texas Religious Landmarking Case," Preservation Law Reporter (PLR) 16, p. 1053 The building was located in a historic district and considered a contributing property. Local zoning authorities denied the permit, citing an ordinance governing additions and new construction in a historic district. The archbishop brought suit, challenging the ruling under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA) of 1993. Flores argued that the Boerne, Texas, congregation had outgrown the existing structure, rendering the ruling a substantial burden on the free exercise of religion without a compelling state interest.PLR 16, p.1053
Religious Freedom Restoration Act
RFRA had been crafted as a direct response to the Supreme Court's decision in Employment Division v. Smith,. when the Court had upheld, against a First Amendment challenge, an Oregon law criminalizing peyote use, which was used in Native American religious rituals.Mauro, Tony. Illustrated Great Decisions of the Supreme Court. Washington D.C.: CQ Press, 2000. The State of Oregon won on the basis that the drug laws were "non-discriminatory laws of general applicability."Minan, John H. "Historic Preservation and Religious Uses," 1997.
Religious groups became concerned that this case would be cited as precedent for further regulation of common religious practices and lobbied Congress for legislative protection.Mauro, Tony. p.38 RFRA provided a strict scrutiny standard, requiring narrowly tailored regulation serving a compelling government interest in any case substantially burdening the free exercise of religion, regardless of the intent and general applicability of the law.Minan, John H.
The RFRA applies to all laws passed by Congress prior to its enactment and to all future laws that are not explicitly exempted. (42 U.S. Code § 2000bb–3) Congress' power to do so was not challenged. Congress also applied the law to state and local governments, the City of Boerne in this case, relying on the Fourteenth Amendment, particularly Section 5: "The Congress shall have power to enforce, by appropriate legislation, the provisions of this article."
Result
District Court
The City of Boerne was successful at the United States District Court for the Western District of Texas; the district judge certified the question of the constitutionality of RFRA to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, which found the RFRA constitutional.  Boerne filed a certiorari petition to the Supreme Court. The National Trust for Historic Preservation, among other preservation organizations, filed briefs in support of Boerne.
Supreme Court
The Court, in an opinion by Justice Anthony Kennedy, struck down RFRA as it applies to the states as an unconstitutional use of Congress's enforcement powers. The Court held that it holds the sole power to define the substantive rights guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment—a definition to which Congress may not add and from which it may not subtract. Congress could not constitutionally enact RFRA because the law was not designed to have "congruence and proportionality" with the substantive rights that the Court had defined. Although Congress could enact "remedial" or "preventative" legislation to guarantee rights not exactly congruent with those defined by the Court, it could only do so  to more effectively prevent, deter, or correct violations of those rights actually guaranteed by the Court. RFRA was seen disproportionate in its effects compared to its objective. Justice Kennedy wrote:
Moreover, remedial or prophylactic legislation still had to show "congruence and proportionality" between the end it aimed to reach (that is, the violations it aimed to correct), and the means it chose to reach those ends—that is, the penalties or prohibitions it enacted to prevent or correct those violations. Because RFRA was not reasonably remedial or preventative, it was unconstitutional.
Implications
Congruence and proportionality
Boerne is important for several reasons. One is that it introduced a completely new test for deciding whether Congress had exceeded its Section 5 powers: the "congruence and proportionality" test, a test that has proven to have great importance in the context of the Eleventh Amendment. Another reason was that it explicitly declared that the Court alone has the ability to state which rights are protected by the Fourteenth Amendment. Still another was that it had First Amendment consequences in that it spelled the end for any legislative attempts to overturn Employment Division v. Smith.
The "congruence and proportionality" requirement replaced the previous theory advanced in Katzenbach v. Morgan that  the Equal Protection Clause is "a positive grant of legislative power authorizing Congress to exercise its discretion in determining the need for and nature of legislation to secure Fourteenth Amendment guarantees." Before the 1997 Boerne decision, Katzenbach v. Morgan was often interpreted as allowing Congress to go beyond, but not fall short of, the Court's interpretation of the Equal Protection Clause.
But that is not how the majority opinion in Boerne interpreted Katzenbach:
The holding of Boerne said that only the Court could interpret the Constitution, in order to maintain the "traditional separation of powers between Congress and the Judiciary." Also, Boerne relied on arguments for protecting the rights that pertain to state governmentsTo support its argument that Congress lacked plenary power to enforce the provisions of the Fourteenth Amendment, the Court pointed to a proposed enforcement provision which was rejected by the Congress that eventually approved the Fourteenth Amendment: 
"Democrats and conservative Republicans argued that the proposed Amendment would give Congress a power to intrude into traditional areas of state responsibility, a power inconsistent with the federal design central to the Constitution. Typifying these views, Republican Representative Robert Hale of New York labeled the Amendment 'an utter departure from every principle ever dreamed of by the men who framed our Constitution,' and warned that under it 'all State legislation, in its codes of civil and criminal jurisprudence and procedures … may be overridden, may be repealed or abolished, and the law of Congress established instead.'  Senator William Stewart of Nevada likewise stated the Amendment would permit 'Congress to legislate fully upon all subjects affecting life, liberty, and property,' such that 'there would not be much left for the State Legislatures,' and would thereby 'work an entire change in our form of government.'"
521 U.S. at 521 (citations omitted). based on "enumerated powers." The intent of Boerne was to prevent "a considerable congressional intrusion into the States' traditional prerogatives and general authority." The holding of Boerne specifically mentioned the state action doctrine of the Civil Rights Cases as a Court interpretation of the Equal Protection Clause that limits the "remedial or preventive" power of Congress.
Constitutionality of the RFRA
This case has been used to claim that the federal RFRA is unconstitutional. A more precise and accurate phrasing of this claim is that Boerne held the RFRA could not be constitutionally applied to state and local governments. At the federal level, the RFRA remains operative. The constitutionality of one aspect of RFRA as applied to the federal government was confirmed on February 21, 2006, as the Supreme Court ruled against the government in Gonzales v. O Centro Espirita Beneficente Uniao do Vegetal, , which involved the use of an otherwise illegal substance in a religious ceremony, stating that the federal government must show a compelling state interest in restricting religious conduct.
Historic preservation
The Supreme Court's decision in City of Boerne made a significant impact on the states' abilities to enforce laws, including those pertaining to historic preservation. Under RFRA, an otherwise neutral state law—such as zoning, or historic preservation ordinances—needed to be scrutinized if its enforcement involved a religious group or individual. Therefore, by declaring extension of RFRA to apply against state laws unconstitutional, the ability of the states to establish and maintain historic preservation ordinances was made easier.PLR 16, p. 1052.  However, in 2000, Congress enacted the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act, in which it used the Spending Clause to require, for localities that receive federal funding, land use laws to accommodate religious freedom, essentially, as if RFRA had been ruled applicable to state law.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 521
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
References
Further reading
  Pdf.
Response to McAward:  Pdf.
Response to Tsesis:  Pdf.
See also:  Pdf.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:United States Fourteenth Amendment, section five case law
Category:1997 in United States case law
Category:1997 in religion
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Boerne, Texas
Category:Historic preservation in the United States
Category:Roman Catholic Archdiocese of San Antonio
Category:Zoning in the United States
"""

From "City of Chicago v. Morales" ==> """
City of Chicago v. Morales, 527 U.S. 41 (1999), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a law cannot be so vague that a person of ordinary intelligence can not figure out what is innocent activity and what is illegal.
 Background 
Under the Chicago Municipal Code § 8-4-015 (added June 17, 1992), loitering was a crime.
The facts of the case were:
More specifically, "In 1993, Jesus Morales was arrested and found guilty under the ordinance for loitering in a Chicago neighborhood after he ignored police orders to disperse. Ultimately, after Morales challenged his arrest, the Illinois Supreme Court held that the ordinance violated due process of law in that it is impermissibly vague on its face and an arbitrary restriction on personal liberties."See also Audio case files website case brief. Retrieved October 7, 2008.  The United States Supreme Court affirmed the Supreme Court of Illinois' judgment.Morales, 527 U.S. at 51.
Issue and holding
The only issue on certiorari was whether the ordinance was unconstitutionally vague, either on its face or as applied, in violation of "the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution."Chicago v. Morales, Docket: 97-1121, Citation: 527 U.S. 41 (1999), from Oyez website. Retrieved October 7, 2008.
The United States Supreme Court held in this case that a law cannot be so vague that a person of ordinary intelligence cannot figure out what is innocent activity and what is illegal.
Rationale
Justice John Paul Stevens, writing for the plurality, said that the:
Stevens, writing for the majority, further investigated the Due Process issues of the ordinance.  
Firstly, the Court discussed the ordinance's failure to satisfy the fair notice requirement. Loitering under the ordinance's language was an act that could be used arbitrarily to identify community members by the police. Community members would not have proper notice as the "notice" they received would have been retroactively given when the police arrested the individual. The language of the dispersal order needed to be more specific as it needed to have set the required guidelines people followed when dispersing. The Court questioned, "How long must the loiterers remain apart?" Overall, the Court found that ordinance to be so vague that it stops the public from being able to follow it.Secondly, the Court deemed the ordinance to violate the "requirement that a legislature establish minimal guidelines to govern law enforcement." This ordinance gave power, without bounds, to the police to determine who violated the ordinance. Overall, the majority concluded that the ordinance needs more definiteness and clarity. Six justices ultimately sided with Morales, and three with the City of Chicago.  
However, only three justices agreed on all of the rationales and the complete holding, namely Stevens, Souter, and Ginsburg.  O'Connor, Kennedy, and Breyer had concurring opinions.  One particular "sticking point" was whether "It is a criminal law that contains no mens rea requirement ... and infringes on constitutionally protected rights...."Summary, Morales, citing Colautti v. Franklin, 439 U. S. 379, 391, 395.  Only Stevens, joined by Justice Souter and Justice Ginsburg, could agree on that. 
Impact
The ACLU claimed a win in this case.
References
External links
 Law review article
Category:1999 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Chicago Police Department
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Void for vagueness case law
"""

From "City of Cincinnati v. Discovery Network, Inc." ==> """
Cincinnati v. Discovery Network, Inc., 507 U.S. 410 (1993), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a ban by the city of Cincinnati on the distribution of commercial material via news racks violated the First Amendment. ("Cincinnati's categorical ban on the distribution, via newsrack, of 'commercial handbills' cannot be squared with the dictates of the First Amendment.")
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 507
 Coates v. Cincinnati
References
External links
Category:1993 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:History of Cincinnati
"""

From "City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center, Inc." ==> """
City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center, Inc., 473 U.S. 432 (1985), was a U.S. Supreme Court case involving discrimination against the intellectually disabled.
In 1980, Cleburne Living Center, Inc. (CLC) submitted a permit application seeking approval to build a group home for intellectually disabled people. The city of Cleburne, Texas refused to grant CLC a permit on the basis of a municipal zoning ordinance. CLC then sued the City of Cleburne on the theory that the denial of the permit violated the Fourteenth Amendment Equal Protection rights of CLC and their potential residents.
Applying rational basis review, the U.S. Supreme Court struck down the ordinance as applied to CLC. The Court declined to rule that intellectually disabled people were a quasi-suspect or suspect class.
 Background 
In July 1980, Jan Hannah purchased a building at 201 Featherston Street, within the city limits of Cleburne, with the intent of leasing it to CLC so that they could operate it as a group home for intellectually disabled people. The home was intended to house a total of thirteen mentally disabled men and women. CLC staff would supervise the residents at all times. The house itself had four bedrooms and two baths, with another half bath to be added.
The city of Cleburne informed CLC that a special use permit would be required for a group home such as this, and so CLC submitted the permit application. The city's zoning regulations required that a special use permit, renewable annually, was required for the construction of "[hospitals] for the insane or feeble-minded, or alcoholics or drug addicts, or penal or correctional institutions" (436). The city had classified the group home as a "hospital for the feebly minded" (437). The Planning and Zoning Commission denied the request, and CLC's Hannah, Bobbie Northrop, and David Southern moved their request to the City Council.https://www.ancorfoundation.org/sites/default/files/pdf/200509links.pdf 
The city of Cleburne held a public hearing on the meeting, after which they denied the special use permit to CLC on a vote of 3 to 1.
 Case history 
After their special use permit was denied CLC filed suit in Federal District Court against the city, alleging that the zoning ordinance was invalid on its face and as applied because it discriminated against intellectually disabled people in violation of the equal protection rights of CLC and its potential residents. The Federal District Court found that if the potential residents of CLC's group home had not been intellectually disabled the permit would have been granted. However, they upheld the city's ordinance and actions as constitutional. The District Court held that intellectually disabled people were neither a suspect nor a quasi-suspect class and therefore the rational basis test should be applied. The court held that the ordinance was rationally related to the city's legitimate interest in "the legal responsibility of CLC and its residents, . . . the safety and fears of residents in the adjoining neighborhood," and the number of people to be housed in the home.
The Federal Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit reversed the decision of the District Court. The Court of Appeals held that an intellectual disability was a quasi-suspect class and therefore intermediate scrutiny should be applied to the ordinance. Applying the heightened scrutiny standard to the ordinance, the court held it was unconstitutional on its face and as applied. The city appealed the decision to the Supreme Court, which granted certiorari.
 Supreme Court opinion 
Justice White's majority opinion invalidated the ordinance as applied to CLC, holding that the denial of the permit was based on irrational prejudice against intellectually disabled people and hence was invalid under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Unlike most cases where the Court uses rational basis review, the Court did not accept the city's claimed interest.   Some commentators have referred to this investigation into the actual reasons for passing the law as "rational basis with bite".See Pettinga, Gayle Lynn (1987). "Rational Basis with Bite: Intermediate Scrutiny by Any Other Name". Indiana Law Journal 62: 779. ISSN 0019-6665.; Wadhwani, Neelum J. (2006). "Rational Reviews, Irrational Results". Texas Law Review 84: 801, 809–811. ISSN 0040-4411.
The Court declined to grant intellectually disabled people status as a suspect or quasi-suspect class because they are a "large and diversified group" amply protected by state and federal legislatures. Therefore, any legislation that distinguishes between intellectually disabled people and others must be rationally related to a legitimate government interest in order to withstand equal protection review. This is also known as rational basis review and is the lowest level of review under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Justice Marshall, dissenting in part and concurring in the result of invalidating the statute, argued that due to the history of discrimination against intellectually disabled people, the Court should employ a higher standard of scrutiny (see Equal Protection scrutiny) when examining laws that regulated those with mental disabilities.
 Significance 
Although the Supreme Court declined to classify those with mental disabilities as a suspect or quasi-suspect class, the decision is one of the few instances in which the Supreme Court has held government legislation to be unconstitutional when it applied a rational basis level of review.  Another example of the Supreme Court holding that government legislation was unconstitutional when it applied to rational basis level of review was the landmark gay-rights decision in Romer v. Evans.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 473
 Department of Agriculture v. Moreno (1973)
 Romer v. Evans (1996)
References
External links
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States land use case law
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States disability case law
Category:Cleburne, Texas
"""

From "City of Elizabeth v. American Nicholson Pavement Co." ==> """
City of Elizabeth v. American Nicholson Pavement Co., 97 U.S. 126 (1878), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that while the public use of an invention  more than one year prior to the inventor's application for a patent normally causes the inventor to lose his right to a patent, there is an exception to this rule for public uses for experimental purposes..
Facts and procedural history
thumb|right|300px|Nicolson's patented pavement, as shown in his patent
Inventor Samuel Nicholson (alt. spelling Nicolson) had patented a process for Nicolson pavement on August 8, 1854, a system of pavement using wooden blocks.  Although Nicholson had died before the commencement of the lawsuit, George T. Bigelow, representative of the American Nicholson Pavement Company brought the lawsuit on his behalf, alleging that the City of Elizabeth, New Jersey, George W. Tubbs, and the New Jersey Wood-Paving Co. had infringed on his patent.  Nicholson was testing his new process publicly at the time the patent was filed.  The defendants alleged that Nicholson's patent was invalid because the invention lacked novelty, and that he had been publicly using the system for the previous six years prior to the issuance of the patent, thus constituting an abandonment of his right to a patent under the "On-sale bar".  The lower court found for Nicholson,American Nicholson Pavement Co. v. Elizabeth, 1 F. Cas. 708, 1870 U.S. App. LEXIS 1433, 4 Fish. Pat. Cas. 189 (C.C.D.N.J. 1870). and the defendants appealed.
Decision
Justice Bradley first examined the prior art in both the U.S. and England, and determined that nothing therein substantiated the defendants' claim of lack of novelty. Although the elements specified in Nicholson's claims were not new, there was nothing in the prior art to suggest his particular combination of these elements.
As to the question of whether Nicholson abandoned his rights by his public use of the claimed invention, Bradley examined the circumstances surrounding the public use.  Nicholson put down a section of his new pavement on a turnpike in Boston, Massachusetts in 1848 in order to test its durability and the public's response to it.  The turnpike was operated by a private corporation in which Nicholson was a shareholder and officer.
Bradley reasoned that Nicholson had not done anything which would indicate his intent to relinquish his right to patent his invention.  He had no other means of testing the pavement other than by allowing the general public to use it, and had supervised the experiment itself.  He did not sell or license his invention to any other party.  Although the general public may have derived some incidental benefit from Nicholson's public testing of this invention, he did not give any sort of general assent for the invention to be used by any other party, and he applied for a patent as soon as he was able to determine that his system of paving was sound.  Bradley held that this was not the sort of use which created a bar to patentability.
Bradley went on to affirm the lower court's finding that the defendants had infringed Nicholson's patents, and that although the City of Elizabeth did not make any direct profit from the arrangement, the other two defendants had, and their amount of liability was not reduced by Nicholson's later assignment of the patent.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 97
References
External links
Category:1878 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States patent case law
v. American Nicholson Pavement Co.
Category:Legal history of New Jersey
Category:1878 in New Jersey
"""

From "City of Erie v. Pap's A. M." ==> """
Erie v. Pap's A. M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000), was a landmark decision by the Supreme Court of the United States regarding nude dancing as free speech. The court held that an ordinance banning public nudity did not violate the operator of a totally nude entertainment establishment's constitutional right to free speech..
Prior history
On September 28, 1994, the city council of Erie, Pennsylvania, enacted Ordinance 75-1994, a public indecency ordinance that makes it a summary offense to knowingly or intentionally appear in public in a "state of nudity."Ordinance 75-1994, City of Erie, Pennsylvania The respondent, Pap's, a Pennsylvania corporation, operated an establishment in Erie known as "Kandyland" that featured totally nude erotic dancing performed by women. To comply with the ordinance, these dancers would need to wear, at a minimum, pasties and a G-string. On October 14, 1994, two days after the ordinance went into effect, Pap's filed a complaint against the city of Erie, the mayor (Joyce Savacchio), city solicitor (Gregory A. Karle), and members of the city council, seeking declaratory relief and a permanent injunction against the enforcement of the ordinance.
The Court of Common Pleas struck down the ordinance as unconstitutional, but the Commonwealth Court reversed the decision. The Pennsylvania Supreme Court in turn reversed the Commonwealth Court, finding that the ordinance's public nudity section was an unconstitutional violation of Pap's First Amendment rights. Certiorari was granted on appeal from the State Supreme Court.
Case
Mootness
The Court proceeded to the merits despite a possible mootness issue.  While the case was pending, Pap's A.M. went out of business, meaning that no concrete private rights were left to litigate.  Despite going out of business, the Supreme Court still proceeded to decide the case on the merits because 1) the City of Erie was suffering an "ongoing injury" and 2) Pap's was still incorporated and could potentially go back into business.
Rules of law
The Court found the following rules of law to apply:
Being in a state of nudity is not an inherently expressive condition. Totally nude erotic dancing is expressive conduct, although it falls only within the outer ambit of the protection of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Government restrictions on public nudity that ban all public nudity should be evaluated under the framework set forth in United States v. O'Brien for content-neutral restrictions on symbolic speech.
While the doctrinal theories behind incidental burdens and secondary effects are, of course, not identical, there is nothing objectionable about a city passing a general ordinance to ban public nudity, even though such a ban may place incidental burdens on some protected speech, and at the same time recognizing that one specific occurrence of public nudity, nude erotic dancing, is particularly problematic because it produces harmful secondary effects.
For purposes of analysis under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, even if a regulation has an incidental effect on some speakers or messages but not others, the regulation is content neutral if it can be justified without reference to the content of the expression.
Test
After determining that the ordinance was content neutral, the Court then applied the O'Brien test. The first factor of the O'Brien test for evaluating restrictions on symbolic speech is whether the government regulation is within the constitutional power of the government to enact. The second factor of the O'Brien test for evaluating restrictions on symbolic speech is whether the regulation furthers an important or substantial government interest. The third O'Brien factor is that the government interest must be unrelated to the suppression of free expression. The fourth and final O'Brien factor is that the restriction be no greater than is essential to the furtherance of the government interest.
The court found that the ordinance met all four factors of the O'Brien test, and that a "least restrictive means" analysis was not necessary. The Court reversed the decision of the Pennsylvania Supreme Court, and found the ordinance to be constitutional.
Aftermath
The effects of this case reach beyond simple restriction of nudity. The majority opinion noted: 
The government generally has a freer hand in restricting expressive conduct than it has in restricting the written or spoken word.
Concurrence
Justice Scalia, joined by  Justice Thomas, agreed that the Pennsylvania Supreme Court's decision must be reversed, but disagreed with the mode of analysis that should be applied.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 529
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 United States v. O'Brien
 Tinker v. Des Moines
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1994 in United States case law
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:History of Erie, Pennsylvania
Category:Legal history of Pennsylvania
Category:2000 in Pennsylvania
Category:Strip clubs
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "City of Indianapolis v. Edmond" ==> """
City of Indianapolis v. Edmond, 531 U.S. 32 (2000),. was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held, 6–3, that police may not conduct vehicle searches, specifically ones involving drug-sniffing police dogs, at a checkpoint or roadblock without reasonable suspicion. In the case, the Indianapolis Police Department was conducting warrantless searches of vehicles, without individualized suspicion, for the purpose of "general crime control". Previous Supreme Court decisions had given the police power to create roadblocks for the purposes of border security (United States v. Martinez-Fuerte) and removing drunk drivers from the road (Police v. Sitz), but in this decision, the Court limited police power, holding that the search can only occur if it was designed to serve special needs, beyond the normal need for law enforcement.
 Background 
In August 1998, the Indianapolis Police Department set up six roadblocks on roads and highways in and out of the city of Indianapolis in an effort to disrupt unlawful trafficking of illegal narcotics. The location of these roadblocks were chosen weeks in advance based on an area's crime rate and the road's general traffic flow. On written directions from the chief of police, one officer was to approach each stopped vehicle and conduct an "open-view" search of the vehicle, while another walked a narcotics-sniffing dog around the vehicle. If the dog alerted to the presence of narcotics, the vehicle would be searched by the police. A predetermined number of vehicles were stopped at each roadblock, and each stop was to take five minutes or less. Checkpoints were operated during daylight hours, and marked with lighted signs that read, "NARCOTICS CHECKPOINT __ MILE AHEAD, NARCOTICS K-9 IN USE, BE PREPARED TO STOP."City of Indianapolis v. Edmond, 531 U.S. at 35-36. Between August and November, the police stopped 1,161 motorists, and arrested 104, of which 55 were charged with drug-related crimes.
James Edmond and Joell Palmer were both stopped at one of these checkpoints, and filed a class action lawsuit against the city, representing "any and all persons driving vehicles who have been stopped [...] at the drug interdiction roadblocks maintained by the City of Indianapolis."Goldsmith, 38 F. Supp. 2d (S.D. Ind. 1998) at 1020.
 Opinion of the Court 
The opinion was delivered by Justice O'Connor, joined by Justices Stevens, Kennedy, Souter, Ginsburg, and Breyer.
Chief Justice Rehnquist delivered a dissenting opinion, in which Justice Thomas joined, and Justice Scalia joined as to part I.
Justice Thomas also filed a separate dissent.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 531
 United States v. Martinez-Fuerte (1976)
 Michigan Dept. of State Police v. Sitz (1990)
 Illinois v. Lidster (2004)
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:Government of Indianapolis
Category:Federal court cases involving Indiana
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Detection dogs
"""

From "City of Ladue v. Gilleo" ==> """
City of Ladue v. Gilleo, 512 U.S. 43 (1994), was a free speech decision of the Supreme Court of the United States. It was a case challenging the legality of a city ordinance restricting the placement of signs in the yards of residents of Ladue, Missouri.
 Background 
Margaret P. Gilleo was a resident of Ladue, MO. On December 8, 1990, she placed a sign in her front yard expressing her opposition to a war in the Persian Gulf and encouraging viewers to contact Congress regarding this matter. Her sign disappeared, so she erected yet another. After this sign, too, disappeared, Gilleo filed a complaint with the police, who informed her that such signs were prohibited by city ordinance. Ladue had a broad ban on signs, making exceptions for only ten instances, including residential markers, home sale signs, commercial signs in properly-zoned areas, etc. After being refused a variance, Gilleo filed suit in federal court against the city, Mayor Edith Spinks, and the members of the city council. The district court struck down the ordinance as unconstitutional, and this decision was affirmed by the appeals court.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court unanimously affirmed the ruling of the Appeals Court. Justice Stevens, writing for the majority, expressed the Court's suspicion of regulations eliminating an entire form of communication, in this case signs. While Ladue alleged that this regulation was permissible as a restriction on "time, place, and manner" since residents could express themselves via other means, the Court found that there were no means that would be adequate substitutes. Ladue had also argued that its regulation was content neutral, but this did not satisfy the Court, which still found that the regulation prevented too much speech that is protected.
In the opinion,
Although Ladue has a concededly valid interest in minimizing visual clutter, it has almost completely foreclosed an important and distinct medium of expression to political, religious, or personal messages. Prohibitions foreclosing entire media may be completely free of content or viewpoint discrimination, but such measures can suppress too much speech by eliminating a common means of speaking.
Also,
Displaying a sign from one's own residence carries a message quite distinct from placing the same sign someplace else, or conveying the same text or picture by other means, for it provides information about the speaker's identity, an important component of many attempts to persuade.
And
A special respect for individual liberty in the home has long been part of this Nation's culture and law and has a special resonance when the government seeks to constrain a person's ability to speak there.
References
External links
Category:1994 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
"""

From "City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc." ==> """
Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002), was a United States Supreme Court case on the controversial issue of adult bookstore zoning in the city of Los Angeles. Zoning laws dictated that no adult bookstores could be within five hundred feet of a public park, or religious establishment, or within 1000 feet of another adult establishment. However, Alameda Books, Inc. and Highland Books, Inc. were two adult stores that operated under one roof. They sued Los Angeles, stating the ordinance violated the First Amendment. The district court concurred with the stores, stating that the 1977 study stating there was a higher crime rate in areas with adult stores, which the law was based upon, did not support a reasonable belief that multiple-use adult establishments produce the secondary effects the city asserted as content-neutral justifications for its restrictions on adult stores. The Court of Appeals upheld this verdict, and found that even if the ordinance were content neutral, the city failed to present evidence upon which it could reasonably rely to demonstrate that its regulation of multiple-use establishments was designed to serve its substantial interest in reducing crime. However, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the city. This reversed the decision of the lower court. This case was argued on December 4, 2001; certiorari was granted on March 5, 2001. "City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, 00-799, didn't involve the kind of adult material that can be regulated by the government, but rather the extent to which cities can ban "one-stop shopping" sex-related businesses."
Background
In 1977, the city of Los Angeles conducted a study regarding the effects of high concentrations of adult stores. At that time 26 adult bookstores and 21 adult movie theatres flourished in the Hollywood area alone. Downtown L.A. had 23 stores within a 3 block radius. Other businesses began to flee the area and property values plummeted, though Justice Souter noted that the study conducted by the city "found no certain correlation between the location of those establishments and depressed property values".
Passersby were subject to sexually explicit material through advertisements for these businesses.
Drug transactions were also prevalent in these areas, and the narcotics trade gave way to a 16 percent increase in part 1 crime in the Hollywood area, while there was a 5 percent decrease city-wide . Such crimes include, murder, rape, aggravated assault, robbery, burglary, larceny, and vehicle theft. There was also a 45 percent increase in part 2 crimes in Hollywood which includes, other assaults, forgery, counterfeiting, embezzlement, fraud, stolen property, prostitution, narcotics, liquor violations, gambling, and other miscellaneous misdemeanors . Meanwhile, there was a 3 percent decrease citywide. "[The City] concluded that concentrations of adult businesses are associated with higher rates of prostitution, robbery, assaults, and thefts in surrounding communities. Accordingly, the city enacted an ordinance prohibiting the establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership of an adult arcade, bookstore, cabaret, motel, theater, or massage parlor or a place for sexual encounters within 1,000 feet of another such enterprise or within 500 feet of any
religious institution, school, or public park. [Later, the city realized that its method of calculating distances created a loophole permitting the concentration of multiple adult enterprises in a single structure.]" In response, Los Angeles enacted 12.70(C), the zoning law which dealt with the problem.
"The issue is whether, in such a case, the City Council can rely on the fact that the Fourth Circuit examined and upheld a state law almost identical to the Los Angeles ordinance, or whether a study or other evidence is required demonstrating that a combination adult bookstore/arcade standing alone produces harmful secondary effects. An amicus brief, which brought to the Court's attention the broadening scope of adult business zoning so that mainstream businesses are often regulated, was filed in August 2001 on behalf of the American Booksellers Foundation for Free Expression, Feminists for Free Expression, the Freedom to Read Foundation, the International Periodical Distributors Association, the Publishers Marketing Association and the Video Software Dealers Association."
"The two plaintiffs operated their adult businesses from the same location. Both sold adult print media and operated an "adult arcade." In 1995, after a city inspector informed both parties that they were violating the ordinance, they sued, claiming that enforcing the ordinance would violate their First Amendment rights."
Summary Of Plurality Opinion
In a plurality opinion delivered by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, the Court ruled that "the city of Los Angeles may reasonably rely on the 1977 study when enacting the present version of section 12.70(C) to demonstrate that its ban on multiple-use adult establishments serves its interest in reducing crime. Three other Justices joined in this holding. Concurring, Justice Anthony M. Kennedy concluded that Los Angeles may impose its regulation in the exercise of the zoning authority, and that the city is not, at least, to be foreclosed by summary judgment. Justice David H. Souter, with whom Justices John Paul Stevens, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, and Stephen G. Breyer joined, dissented. Justice Souter argued that the 1977 study, while pursuing a policy of dispersing adult establishments, evolved to a policy of breaking-up combined bookstores/video arcades, for which the study's evidence was insufficient.". "The plurality wrote that 'the Los Angeles City Council is in a better position than the Judiciary to gather and evaluate data on local problems.'" "The issue in this case is the district court's grant of summary judgment against the City of Los Angeles on the grounds that the City's Ordinance for the dispersal of adult entertainment businesses violates the First Amendment. We reverse. The district court erred by granting summary judgment on the issue whether the plaintiffs had presented “actual and convincing” evidence “casting doubt” on the City's rationale for its Ordinance."
Concurrence
Justices Scalia, and Kennedy wrote concurring opinions. Scalia stated “I join the plurality opinion because I think it represents a correct application of our jurisprudence concerning regulation of the “secondary effects” of pornographic speech. As I have said elsewhere, however, in a case such as this our First Amendment traditions make “secondary effects” analysis quite unnecessary. The Constitution does not prevent those communities that wish to do so from regulating, or indeed entirely suppressing, the business of pandering sex.”
Kennedy said “Speech can produce tangible consequences. It can change minds. It can prompt actions. These primary effects signify the power and the necessity of free speech. Speech can also cause secondary effects, however, unrelated to the impact of the speech on its audience. A newspaper factory may cause pollution, and a billboard may obstruct a view. These secondary consequences are not always immune from regulation by zoning laws even though they are produced by speech.
Municipal governments know that high concentrations of adult businesses can damage the value and the integrity of a neighborhood. The damage is measurable; it is all too real. The law does not require a city to ignore these consequences if it uses its zoning power in a reasonable way to ameliorate them without suppressing speech. A city’s “interest in attempting to preserve the quality of urban life is one that must be accorded high respect...””
Dissenting opinion
A dissenting opinion was authored by Justice Souter, who stated, “In 1977, the city of Los Angeles studied sections of the city with high and low concentrations of adult business establishments catering to the market for the erotic. The city found no certain correlation between the location of those establishments and depressed property values, but it did find some correlation between areas of higher concentrations of such business and higher crime rates. On that basis, Los Angeles followed the examples of other cities in adopting a zoning ordinance requiring dispersion of adult establishments. I assume that the ordinance was constitutional when adopted, and assume for purposes of this case that the original ordinance remains valid today.
The city subsequently amended its ordinance to forbid clusters of such businesses at one address, as in a mall. The city has, in turn, taken a third step to apply this amendment to prohibit even a single proprietor from doing business in a traditional way that combines an adult bookstore, selling books, magazines, and videos, with an adult arcade, consisting of open viewing booths, where potential purchasers of videos can view them for a fee.” Souter goes on to argue that businesses at one address are not in violation of the original intent of the law. He goes on to say “My concern is not with the assumption behind the amendment itself, that a conglomeration of adult businesses under one roof, as in a minimal or adult department store, will produce undesirable secondary effects comparable to what a cluster of separate adult establishments brings about, ante, at 8. That may or may not be so. The assumption that is clearly unsupported, however, goes to the city’s supposed interest in applying the amendment to the book and video stores in question, and in applying it to break them up.”
Historical significance
This case was significant because it stated limits on freedom of speech. Kennedy drew a line stating that the effects of freedom of speech are not protected by the first amendment, creating an analogy between newspaper factories causing pollution. Such a company certainly has the right to print newspapers; however they must succumb to the environmental laws.
The same is true here; these stores have a right to conduct business; however when a law is passed relating to the secondary effects of their commerce, adult business is subject to obey such a zoning ordinance. "It is questionable whether some types of establishments, especially those that are adult-oriented, enjoy the First Amendment's full protection. Allegedly, a lesser extent of protection applies when city governments, acting within their zoning powers, inhibit the prosperity of these businesses by limiting their choice of location, hours, and modes of operation. City governments are fully entitled to restrict the free use of land if the regulation is justified by "some aspect of the police ..."
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:History of Los Angeles
Category:Sex businesses
Category:United States land use case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "City of Los Angeles v. Lyons" ==> """
City of Los Angeles v. Lyons, 461 U.S. 95 (1983), was a United States Supreme Court decision holding that the plaintiff, Adolph Lyons, lacked standing to challenge the city police department's use of chokeholds.
Background
In 1976, Adolph Lyons was stopped by four white officers of the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) for driving with a broken tail light. The unarmed 24-year-old was ordered to leave his vehicle by officers with guns drawn and to spread his legs and put his hands on top of his head. After being frisked, Lyons put his hands down. That prompted one officer to grab his hands and slam them against his head.
"Although Lyons offered no resistance or threat whatsoever, the officers, without provocation or justification, seized Lyons and applied a 'chokehold'... rendering him unconsciousness and causing damage to his larynx."Los Angeles v. Lyons, 461 U.S. 95, 97-98, (1983) He woke up lying face down in the road with soiled underwear and blood and dirt in his mouth. The officers gave him a traffic citation and sent him on his way.
City of L.A. officers often used the chokehold in many situations where they are not threatened by use of deadly force. The officers were directed and encouraged to use the chokehold by the City even though numerous people had been injured by its use. Lyons was fearful of any other interactions with the police for fear of being choked again. Lyons claimed this interfered with his First, Fourth, Eighth, and Fourteenth Amendment rights.Los Angeles v. Lyons, 461 U.S. 95, 98, (1983) "Injunctive relief was sought against the use of the control holds 'except in situations where the proposed victim of said control reasonably appears to be threatening the immediate use of deadly force.' Count VI sought declaratory relief against the City, i. e., a judgment that use of the chokeholds absent the threat of immediate use of deadly force is a per se violation of various constitutional rights."
Lyons introduced evidence from 1975 to 1983 that 16 people, including 12 African-Americans, had been killed by the LAPD using chokeholds.
Decision
In an opinion authored by Justice White, the Court held 5-4 that Lyons had failed to allege a sufficiently-plausible threat of future injury to have standing to seek an injunction. Lyons, however, had standing for his damages action since it was retrospective and the injury, being subjected to the chokehold, was concrete and particular. The decision helped to establish the principle that a plaintiff must meet a standing requirement for each form of relief sought.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Marshall's dissent argued that the majority's test would immunize from review any widespread policy that deprives constitutional rights when individuals cannot show with certainty that they would be subject to a repeat violation. He also argued that the Court's traditional rule did not distinguish different forms of relief for standing purposes.
Commentary
Based on Michelle Alexander's book The New Jim Crow Lyons' case is related to what is believed to be biased action towards certain races, in this case African-Americans. She asserts that it is hard for people of color like Lyons to prevail in the judicial process, like during the Jim Crow era. According to Alexander, one of the causes of such issues is the presence of implicit bias in the criminal justice system, including the courts and police officers. In support of Alexander's argument, Georgetown Law Professor Charles Lawrence noted, "The purposeful intent requirement found in Supreme Court equal protection doctrine, and in the court's interpretation of antidiscrimination laws disserved the value of equal citizenship expressed in those laws because many forms of racial bias are unconscious." As specified above, since Lyons' case involves legal system, unconscious bias may produce negative outcomes for African-Americans.The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness, Michelle Alexander, The New Press, New York 2010, The New Jim Crow, p. 128-129
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 461
References
External links
 Ronald T. Gerwatowski, Standing and Injunctions: The Demise of Public Law Litigation and Other Effects of Lyons, Boston College Law Review, vol 25 p 765 (1984), http://lawdigitalcommons.bc.edu/bclr/vol25/iss4/3
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States standing case law
Category:1982 in United States case law
Category:History of Los Angeles
Category:Chokeholds
Category:Los Angeles Police Department
"""

From "City of Los Angeles v. Patel" ==> """
Los Angeles v. Patel, 576 U.S. 409 (2015), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a Los Angeles law, Municipal Code § 41.49, requiring hotel operators to retain records about guests for a ninety-day period is facially unconstitutional under the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution because it does not allow for pre-compliance review.City of Los Angeles v. Patel: SCOTUSblog, SCOTUSblog.com, n.d. (last viewed July 13, 2015); , slip op. (2015) (hereinafter cited as Patel).
 Background 
Los Angeles, in its city code,Los Angeles, Cal. Municipal Code § 41.49 (hereinafter cited as LAMC). required hotels to keep certain specified information about their customers, including the name and address, vehicle information, dates of the stay, room number, and how the customer paid the bill, among other information.Patel, at *5-6; City of Los Angeles v. Patel article, The Oyez Project at IIT Chicago-Kent College of Law (last visited June 24, 2015) (hereinafter cited as Oyez Project). The hotel had to keep the information for 90-days, and if a police officer requested the information, the hotel had to make it available or face criminal penalties.LAMC § 41.49(3)(a). In 2003, Naranjibhai and Ramilaben Patel and other hotel operators sued the city in the federal district court, alleging that the ordinance violated the Fourth Amendment.Patel, at *7; Oyez Project.
Lower courts
U.S. District Court
The case was first heard in the U.S. District Court by Judge Dale S. Fischer.Patel v. City of Los Angeles, 2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 78914 (C.D. Cal., Sept. 5, 2008). The city argued that the hotel industry was "closely regulated," which would allow administrative inspections without a search warrant.2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 78914, at *5; Oyez Project. Judge Fischer found that the industry was not closely regulated, noting that the city had provided no information to show that it was closely regulated.2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 78914, at *6. She concluded, however, that the hotel owners had no reasonable expectation of privacy and that the ordinance was therefore constitutional.2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 78914, at *7-8; Oyez Project.
Circuit court of appeals
Patel appealed to the Ninth Circuit court, where it was heard by a three judge panel consisting of judges Harry Pregerson, Richard R. Clifton, and Carlos Bea. The court, in a 2-1 decision, affirmed the decision of the district court on the same grounds.686 F.3d at 1090; Oyez Project.
En banc rehearing
The Patels then requested that the case be reheard en banc, before a larger panel of judges in the Ninth Circuit. The en banc court found that the owners did, in fact, have a possessory interest in the registry and an expectation of privacy.738 F.3d at 1061. The fact that this was hotel property and there was a reasonable expectation of privacy placed the documents under the warrant requirement of the Fourth Amendment.738 F.3d at 1062; Oyez Project. The court reversed on a 7-4 vote.738 F.3d at 1059.
After the ruling, the City of Los Angeles filed a petition for certiorari to the Supreme Court, which the Court granted on October 20, 2014.City of Los Angeles v. Patel, 135 S. Ct. 400 (2014).
Supreme Court
Arguments
Brief and arguments of Los Angeles
The city's brief was prepared by E. Joshua Rosenkranz, Robert M. Loeb, and Rachel W. Apter, of Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe; by Orin Kerr; and by Mike Feuer, James P. Clark, Thomas H. Peters, Gregory P. Orland of the City Attorney's Office.Pet'r Br. at *7, City of Los Angeles v. Patel, 2014 U.S. S. Ct. Briefs LEXIS 4409 (2015). Rosenkranz argued that the ordinance had been in effect and used for 150 years and only required showing the police a single book.City of Los Angeles v. Patel argument, The Oyez Project at IIT Chicago-Kent College of Law (last visited June 27, 2015) (hereinafter cited as Argument). Further, that the use of the register serves as a deterrent to crime.Argument.
Brief and arguments of Patel
Patel's brief was prepared by Thomas C. Goldstein, Kevin K. Russell, and Tejinder Singh, of Goldstein & Russell; and by the Supreme Court Litigation Clinic, Harvard Law School.Resp't Br. at *7, City of Los Angeles v. Patel, 2015 U.S. S. Ct. Briefs LEXIS 213 (2015).
Amicus briefs
Amicus curiae briefs in support of Los Angeles were filed by the United States,Br. of United States, City of Los Angeles v. Patel, 2014 U.S. S. Ct. Briefs LEXIS 4584 (2015). the County of Los Angeles, by California, Drug Free America Foundation, California State Sheriffs' Association, and the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research.Br. of Manhattan Inst. for Pol'y Research, City of Los Angeles v. Patel, 2014 U.S. S. Ct. Briefs LEXIS 4589 (2015). Briefs in support of Patel were filed by the Asian American Hotel Owners Association,Br. of Asian Am. Hotel Owners Ass'n, City of Los Angeles v. Patel, 2015 U.S. S. Ct. Briefs LEXIS 2005 (2015). the Electronic Frontier Foundation,Br. of Elec. Frontier Found., City of Los Angeles v. Patel, 2015 U.S. S. Ct. Briefs LEXIS 486 (2015). the U.S. Chamber of Commerce,Br. of U.S. Chamber of Commerce, City of Los Angeles v. Patel, 2015 U.S. S. Ct. Briefs LEXIS 1997 (2015). the Rutherford Institute,Br. of the Rutherford Inst., City of Los Angeles v. Patel, 2015 U.S. S. Ct. Briefs LEXIS 349 (2015). Gun Owners of America, the Cato Institute,Br. of Cato Inst., City of Los Angeles v. Patel, 2015 U.S. S. Ct. Briefs LEXIS 488 (2015). Professors Adam Lamparello & Charles E. MacLean,Br. of Lamparello, City of Los Angeles v. Patel, 2015 U.S. S. Ct. Briefs LEXIS 494 (2015). Institute for Justice,Br. of Inst. for Justice, City of Los Angeles v. Patel, 2015 U.S. S. Ct. Briefs LEXIS 345 (2015). Google,Br. of Google, Inc., City of Los Angeles v. Patel, 2015 U.S. S. Ct. Briefs LEXIS 485 (2015). and the Electronic Privacy Information Center.Br. of Elec. Privacy Info. Ctr., City of Los Angeles v. Patel, 2015 U.S. S. Ct. Briefs LEXIS 492 (2015). A brief in support of neither party was filed by Love146.Br. of Love146, City of Los Angeles v. Patel, 2014 U.S. S. Ct. Briefs LEXIS 4632 (2015).
 Opinion of the Court 
Associate Justice Sonia Sotomayor authored the 5–4 majority opinion, joined by Justices Kennedy, Ginsburg, Breyer, and Kagan. The majority opinion held that "facial challenges under the Fourth Amendment are not categorically barred or especially disfavored," citing cases such as Sibron v. New York and Chandler v. Miller.
Justice Antonin Scalia, joined by Roberts and Thomas, wrote a dissent to argue that such a warrantless search is permitted in this case because it satisfies the conditions of a regulatory scheme for a closely regulated business. Justice Samuel Alito, joined by Thomas, filed a second dissent, listing five other scenarios where the law could be applied constitutionally.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 576
 Notes
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:Hotels in Los Angeles
"""

From "City of New Orleans v. Dukes" ==> """
City of New Orleans v. Dukes, 427 U.S. 297 (1976), was a 1976 United States Supreme Court decision.
Background
The original case involved a 1972 New Orleans ordinance banning all pushcart food vendors in the French Quarter except those who had continuously operated there for eight or more years. Two vendors had done so for twenty years or more and qualified under the grandfather clause. Appellee Dukes had operated a pushcart for only two years and challenged the ordinance, winning in the lower courts.
The decision
The City of New Orleans ordinance, authorized under state 'home rule' law, authorized under the Tenth Amendment State Police powers to protect the health, safety, welfare, and morals of its citizens - vs- Dukes' Fourteenth Amendment right of equal protection of the law:
The question for the court was whether the city of New Orleans' ordinance violated the equal protection clause of the 14th Amendment?
Per Curiam: No. Case was Reversed.
When local economic regulation is challenged solely as violating the Equal Protection Clause, this Court consistently defers to legislative determinations as to the desirability of particular statutory discriminations. Unless a classification trammels fundamental personal rights or is drawn upon inherently suspect distinctions such as race, religion, or alienage . . . any classifications other than these must only be rationally related to a legitimate state interest. . .States are accorded a wide latitude in the regulation of their local economies. . .
In short, the judiciary may not sit as a super legislature to judge the wisdom or desirability of legislative policy determinations made in areas that neither affect fundamental rights nor proceed along suspect lines.
[New Orleans] Classification rationally furthers the purpose which [the] city had identified as its objective in enacting the provision, that is, as a means 'to preserve the appearance and custom valued by the Quarter's residents and attractive to tourists.'
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:1972 in United States case law
"""

From "City of Philadelphia v. New Jersey" ==> """
City of Philadelphia v. New Jersey, 437 U.S. 617 (1978), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that states could not discriminate against another state's articles of commerce.
Background
On account of its location wedged between New York City and Philadelphia (the two largest cities on the East Coast of the United States), New Jersey has long been a heavily industrialized state, frequently containing factories and other facilities for businesses centered in or servicing the major cities nearby; as well as in the state. Among the facilities developed in New Jersey was waste processing, including both toxic waste and regular municipal-waste landfills. Municipalities and businesses outside New Jersey made such extensive use of the state's waste-processing facilities that in 1973, the New Jersey Legislature passed a Waste Control Act (N.J.S.A. § 13 et seq.) prohibiting the importation of most "solid or liquid waste which originated or was collected outside the territorial limits of the State."
Subsequent to the passage of the Act, the City of Philadelphia, whose municipal waste was delivered in part to landfills and other waste-processing facilities in New Jersey, filed suit against the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection in the Chancery Division of the New Jersey Superior Court, seeking an injunction against enforcement of the Waste Control Act on the grounds that it was unconstitutional. The New Jersey Supreme Court, however, found that the law advanced vital health and environmental objectives with no economic discrimination against, and with little burden upon, interstate commerce. It therefore found it permissible under the Commerce Clause of the Constitution. The plaintiffs appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States.
 Opinion of the Court 
On appeal, the U.S. Supreme Court found the New Jersey Waste Control Act unconstitutional because it violated the Dormant Commerce Clause and reversed the New Jersey Supreme Court's decision. In writing for the majority, Justice Stewart concluded that
whatever New Jersey's ultimate purpose, it may not be accomplished by discriminating against articles of commerce coming from outside the State unless there is some reason, apart from their origin, to treat them differently.
Furthermore, the court held that legitimate local interests which had incidental interstate effects were within the state's general police powers, but "where simple economic protectionism is effected by state legislation, a virtually per se rule of invalidity has been erected"..
 Dissent 
Justice Rehnquist, joined by Justice Burger, maintained that the law was constitutional, on the basis of the validity of quarantine laws. Rehnquist reasoned that the toxic trash New Jersey handled from out-of-state was no different from  diseased meat and germ-infected rags that were legally prohibited in quarantine laws.
The physical fact of life that New Jersey must somehow dispose of its own noxious items does not mean that it must serve as a depository for those of every other state.
Because states can rightfully burden interstate commerce in the name of health and safety, Rehnquist found no hindrance to this law in the Commerce Clause.
 See also 
 Chemical Waste Management, Inc. v. Hunt
 Environmental dumping
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1978 in New Jersey
Category:1978 in Pennsylvania
Category:1978 in the environment
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:History of Philadelphia
Category:Legal history of New Jersey
Category:Waste management in the United States
Category:Environment of New Jersey
Category:United States waste law
"""

From "City of Quincy v. Jackson" ==> """
Quincy v. Jackson, 113 U.S. 332 (1885), was a writ of error brought to reverse a judgment by the court below by Jackson, a relator, who recovered a judgment against the City of Quincy, Illinois, for the sum of $9,546.24, with costs of suit..
Background
There were no funds in the city's treasury out of which the judgment could be paid, and its corporate authorities refused to satisfy it, in the only way in which it can be paid, by a levy of taxes for that specific purpose. The judgment in the present action, which was commenced by a petition for mandamus, requires the City Council of Quincy to levy and collect a special tax sufficient to discharge the amount thereof with interest from the date of its rendition and also the costs of this and the former action. We have only to inquire whether the corporate authorities of the city have the power under the laws of Illinois to levy and collect such a tax.
It was conceded that the revenue of the city for its fiscal year ending March 31, 1885, to accrue from the taxes it could levy under the act of 1881, after meeting its necessary current expenses and other demands prior to that of the relator Jackson, will be insufficient to pay his judgment interest, and costs.
On behalf of the city, it was contended that when these bonds were issued, the act of 1863 prohibited any annual levy of taxes "to pay the debts and meet the general expenses of the city" in excess of fifty cents on each one hundred dollars of the assessed value of its real and personal property. To this it may be replied, as was done in Quincy v. Cooke in reference to similar language in the original charter of the city, that the act of 1863 related to debts and expenses incurred for ordinary municipal purposes, and not to indebtedness arising from railroad subscriptions, the authority to make which is not implied from any general grant of municipal power, but must be expressly conferred by statute. When the legislature in 1869 legalized and confirmed what the city council had previously done touching the subscription to the stock of the Mississippi and Missouri River Air Line Railroad Company, and thereby authorized bonds in payment thereof to be issued, it could not have been contemplated that indebtedness thus created would be met by such taxation as was permitted for ordinary municipal purposes. In giving authority to incur obligations for such extraordinary indebtedness, the legislature did not restrict its corporate authorities to the limit of taxation provided for ordinary debts and expenses. In Loan Association v. Topeka, 20 Wall. 660, the Court, after observing that the validity of a contract, which can only be fulfilled by a resort to taxation, depends on the power to levy the tax for that purpose, said:
It is therefore to be inferred that, when the legislature of the state authorizes a county or city to contract a debt by bond, it intends to authorize it to levy such taxes as are necessary to pay the debt, unless there is in the act itself, or in some general statute, a limitation upon the power of taxation which repels such an inference.
Decision
So, in United States v. New Orleans, 98 U. S. 381, 98 U. S. 393:
When authority to borrow money or incur an obligation, in order to execute a public work, is conferred upon a municipal corporation, the power to levy a tax for its payment, or the discharge of the obligation, accompanies it, and this too without any special mention that such power is granted. This arises from the fact that such corporations seldom possess—so seldom, indeed, as to be exceptional—any means to discharge their pecuniary obligations except by taxation.
The same question arose in Ralls County v. United States, 105 U. S. 735, where it was said:
It must be considered as settled in this Court that when authority is granted by the legislative branch of the government to a municipality, or a subdivision of a state, to contract an extraordinary debt by the issue of negotiable securities, the power to levy taxes sufficient to meet at maturity the obligations to be incurred is conclusively implied, unless the law which confers the authority, or some general law in force at the time, clearly manifests a contrary legislative intention.
Again:
If what the law requires to be done can only be done through taxation, then taxation is authorized to the extent that may be needed, unless it is otherwise expressly declared. The power to tax in such cases is not an implied power, but a duty growing out of the power to contract. The one power is as much express as the other.
See also Parkersburg v. Brown, 106 U. S. 501. The doctrine announced in these cases is sustained by United States v. County of Macon, 99 U. S. 582, upon which the plaintiff in error relies; for, in that case, the very act, conferring upon the county authority to make a subscription to the stock of a railroad corporation, made special provision for a tax to meet the subscription, and thus negatived the inference that the legislature intended to permit any taxation beyond that allowed by that special act and the general laws of the state.
These decisions covered the present case, for, in the first place, neither the act of 1869, from which the city derived authority to issue negotiable bonds in payment of its subscription, nor any general law of the state, forbids, expressly or by necessary implication, taxation to the extent necessary to meet the obligations thus incurred, and, in the second place, the limitation imposed by the city's charter upon its power of taxation had reference to its ordinary municipal debts and expenses.
In reference to the act of 1881, it is only necessary to say that, if it refers to indebtedness for railroad subscriptions, the limit imposed by it cannot be made to apply to indebtedness created prior to its passage, accompanied, as the latter was, with power in the city at the time it was created, to impose taxation sufficient to discharge it.
The judgment was affirmed.
See also
 Ackley School District v. Hall: Supreme Court case on defaulted municipal bonds from Iowa
 Findlay v. McAllister: Supreme Court case on defaulted county bonds from Missouri
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Quincy, Illinois
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Government bonds issued by the United States
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:United States securities case law
"""

From "City of Rancho Palos Verdes v. Abrams" ==> """
City of Rancho Palos Verdes v. Abrams, 544 U.S. 113 (2005), is a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that the Telecommunications Act (TCA) precluded damages under 42 U.S.C. § 1983. because it provided a comprehensive remedial scheme. Rancho Palos Verdes v. Abrams is a part of the Sea Clammers Doctrine line of cases.See .
 Background 
Mark Abrams owned property in a residential neighborhood in Rancho Palos Verdes, California. His property was located at a high elevation, near the peak of the Rancho Palos Verdes Peninsula, which was ideal for radio transmissions. In 1989, Abrams obtained a permit to construct a 52.5 foot antenna on his property for amateur radio ("ham radio") use. In 1998, Abrams sought permission to construct a second antenna tower, but in the course of investigating the application the city learned Abrams was using his antennas for commercial purposes.  This was in violation of a city ordinance requiring a conditional use permit for commercial antenna use. In July 1999, Abrams sought the requisite conditional use permit, but his neighbors provided strong opposition.  
In August 2000, Abrams filled action against Rancho Palos Verdes in the District Court for the Central District of California, alleging that the denial of the conditional use permit violated the limitations placed on the city's zoning authority by the Telecommunications Act. Abrams sought injunctive relief under the Telecommunications Act and money damages and attorney's fees under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 and 42 U.S.C. § 1988..
The district court ordered the city to grant Abram's application for a conditional use permit, but refused the request for money damages and attorney's fees. The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed on the latter point, and remanded for determination of money damages and attorney's fees.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Scalia writing for the Court reversed the Ninth Circuit's decision. Scalia held that the provision of an express, private means of redress in the Telecommunications Act is an indication that Congress intended to preclude more expansive remedies under 42 U.S.C. § 1983. The existence of a more restrictive private remedy for statutory violations is the dividing line between cases where an action would lie under § 1983 and those in which it would not..
 See also 
List of United States Supreme Court cases
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 546
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Second Enforcement Act of 1871 case law
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:Palos Verdes Peninsula
"""

From "City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co." ==> """
City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469 (1989), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that the minority set-aside program of  Richmond, Virginia, which gave preference to minority business enterprises (MBE) in the awarding of municipal contracts, was unconstitutional under the Equal Protection Clause. The Court found that the city failed to identify both the need for remedial action and that other non-discriminatory remedies would be insufficient.
Croson involved a minority set-aside program in the awarding of municipal contracts. Richmond, with a black population of just over 50 percent, had set a 30 percent goal in the awarding of city construction contracts, based on its findings that local, state, and national patterns of discrimination had resulted in all but complete lack of access for minority-owned businesses. The evidence that was introduced included: a statistical study indicating that, although the city's population was 50% black, only 0.67% of its prime construction contracts had been awarded to minority businesses in recent years; figures establishing that a variety of local contractors' associations had virtually no MBE members; the city's counsel's conclusion that the Plan was constitutional under Fullilove v. Klutznick, 448 U.S. 448 ; and the statements of Plan proponents indicating that there had been widespread racial discrimination in the local, state, and national construction industries. Pursuant to the Plan, the city adopted rules requiring individualized consideration of each bid or request for a waiver of the 30% set-aside, and providing that a waiver could be granted only upon proof that sufficient qualified MBE's were unavailable or unwilling to participate The Supreme Court stated:
We, therefore, hold that the city has failed to demonstrate a compelling interest in apportioning public contracting opportunities on the basis of race. To accept Richmond's claim that past societal discrimination alone can serve as the basis for rigid racial preferences would be to open the door to competing claims for "remedial relief" for every disadvantaged group. The dream of a Nation of equal citizens in a society where race is irrelevant to personal opportunity and achievement would be lost in a mosaic of shifting preferences based on inherently unmeasurable claims of past wrongs. [Citing Regents of the University of California v. Bakke]. Courts would be asked to evaluate the extent of the prejudice and consequent harm suffered by various minority groups. Those whose societal injury is thought to exceed some arbitrary level of tolerability then would be entitled to preferential classification. We think such a result would be contrary to both the letter and the spirit of a constitutional provision whose central command is equality.488 U.S. at 505–06.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 488
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States affirmative action case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:1989 in United States case law
Category:Government procurement in the United States
Category:History of Richmond, Virginia
Category:Legal history of Virginia
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "City of Richmond v. United States" ==> """
City of Richmond v. United States, 422 U.S. 358 (1975), was a case that upheld Richmond, Virginia's annexation of land from surrounding counties.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 422
Shaw v. Reno
Miller v. Johnson
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Virginia
Category:History of Richmond, Virginia
"""

From "City of Sherrill v. Oneida Indian Nation of New York" ==> """
City of Sherrill v. Oneida Indian Nation of New York, 544 U.S. 197 (2005), was a Supreme Court of the United States case in which the Court held that repurchase of traditional tribal lands 200 years later did not restore tribal sovereignty to that land. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote the majority opinion.City of Sherrill v. Oneida Indian Nation, 
Background
Historical tribal background
The Oneida Indian Nation (OIN) originally possessed approximately  in what is now known as Central New York.Oneida Indian Nation v County of Oneida,   The OIN entered three treaties with the United States: Treaty of Fort Stanwix of 1784; The Treaty of Fort Harmar of 1789; and the Treaty of Canandaigua of 1794.  These treaties were codified into federal law in the Non-intercourse Act of 1790.  The Act also prohibited transacting any sale of Indian Territory without US Congressional consent and ratification.
In 1788, New York State and the OIN entered into a treaty where the tribe ceded approximately , reserving only  to the OIN.  The OIN and the state entered into another land transaction where the OIN ceded some of their 300,000-acre reservation to the state.  The treaty was known as the Treaty of Fort Schuyler.  Over the next 200 years, the state continued to purchase OIN land without seeking US Congressional consent and ratification. By 1920, the OIN reservation was only .  These transactions forced part of the OIN to move to western lands, e.g. the Oneida Nation of Wisconsin; and the Stockbridge–Munsee and the Brothertown Indians, who also moved from land they owned in New York to Wisconsin.
In 1997 and 1998, the OIN purchased land on the open market that had been part of their aboriginal reservation lands. The city of Sherrill sought to impose property taxes on the land.  The OIN claimed that because the land fell within its aboriginal lands, the OIN could exert its tribal sovereignty of the same; rendering the property tax exempt.  The county of Madison filed a similar suit, Oneida Indian Nation of NY v Madison County.401 F. Supp. 2d 219 [NDNY 2005]
Prior history
While Sherrill sought relief through eviction proceedings in state court, the OIN sought injunctive relief in federal court.  The  U.S. District Court for the Northern District of New York enjoined the city of Sherrill and Madison County from taxing the tribal property. Both the city of Sherrill and Madison County appealed the decision to the U.S. 2nd Circuit Court of Appeals. The Circuit Court affirmed, holding that the lands at issue fell within the federal definition of Indian Territory and not subject to state or local taxes. The defendants appealed and the Supreme Court granted certiorari.Oneida Indian Nation, et al. v. City of Sherrill, et al.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Ginsburg delivered the opinion of the Court, reversing and remanding.
The Second Circuit found that the land qualified as Indian Territory, which meant it was exempt from state and local taxation.  Justice Ginsburg's decision never overturned that finding.  Instead, Justice Ginsburg held that the OIN purchase of the land did not revive its tribal sovereignty over the land because almost 200 years lapsed where the land was not under OIN control. During this 200-year period, the lands came under state, county, and local jurisdiction. This meant the lands were taxable for property taxes.  The municipalities, the counties, and the state relied on that land's taxable revenue for 200 years. Justice Ginsburg also noted that during this 200-year span, the OIN did not attempt to regain title (ownership) over the land until recently; and even then only a small portion of its original 6,000,000-acre reservation. Because of this, the Court opined that 200 years was too long to be out of OIN ownership.  Therefore, OIN could not reassert its tribal immunity over those lands as an automatic mechanism.
In further support of the decision to overturn, Ginsburg noted that to affirm the lower courts' holdings would cause too much upheaval for the city, the county, and the state who exerted jurisdiction over the land for 200 years without notice that it was not validly done.  Affirming the injunctive relief the OIN sought did not consider the loss of tax revenue to the city. Additionally, Ginsburg opined that because the lands were non-contiguous with existing reservation lands, affirming the injunctive relief would create a "checkerboard" of jurisdictional conflict between the OIN, the state, the city of Sherrill, and Madison County.
These justifications provided by Justice Ginsburg were meant to help those not familiar with the case history to rationalize her decision. The Doctrine of Discovery was cited in the opinion's first footnote as follows:
"Under the “doctrine of discovery,” County of Oneida v. Oneida Indian Nation of N. Y., 470 U. S. 226, 234 (1985) (Oneida II), “fee title to the lands occupied by Indians when the colonists arrived became vested in the sovereign—first the discovering European nation and later the original States and the United States,” Oneida Indian Nation of N. Y. v. County of Oneida, 414 U. S. 661, 667 (1974) (Oneida I)."
Justice Ginsburg concluded that the proper way for the Oneida Nation to reassert its immunity over those re-acquired lands was to place the land in US trust under the Department of the Interior, as authorized by the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934. Justice Ginsburg reasoned that the mechanisms behind the IRA would address issues of jurisdiction, tax revenue loss, and other pertinent issues.  Shortly after the Court published this decision, in April 2005, the OIN applied to the US Interior Department to place  into trust.
Concurring opinion
Justice Souter issued a concurring opinion stating that the amount of time involved from the original transactions to the time of the lawsuit acted as a bar to the tribe from restoring sovereignty to the land in question.
Dissent
Justice Stevens dissented, noting that the majority opinion did not overrule the Second Circuit's determination that the subject land was Indian Territory.  Justice Stevens opined that because the land is within the boundaries of its historical reservation, it was "Indian Country".  Therefore, the city had no jurisdiction to tax that property.
 Critical responses 
Indigenous sovereigntists and scholars have criticized Ginsburg's decision, pointing to her citation of the doctrine of discovery, emphasis on the time that had passed before the Oneida Indian Nation sought judicial relief, and argument that exercising their sovereign rights by not paying taxes to the City of Sherrill would be too "disruptive."  Michael Leroy Oberg, a professor at SUNY Geneseo, described the decision as "cowardly and cynical." Students at the University of Alberta Faculty of Law suggested that Ginsburg's decision "provided the Doctrine of Discovery a dangerous injection of life."  Villanova University professor Dana Lloyd argues that Ginsburg treats colonialism as a single event, located in an ancient past, rather than a structure, and points out the contradiction in requiring Indigenous nations to seek recognition of injustices done to them by colonizing nations. Steven Newcomb, a member of the Shawnee and Lenape nations, author, documentary producer, and co-founder of the Indigenous Law Institute, reads in Ginsburg's memoir a rhetorical commitment to human dignity that the Sherrill decision did not uphold.
In 2023, when the Vatican formally repudiated the doctrine of discovery, Ginsburg's Sherrill decision was widely cited as the most recent example of the legal concept being cited.
Subsequent history
Sherrill held only that the local governments could tax OIN-owned property that was part of the original reservation but reacquired on the open market, not that the local governments could collect. In 2010, in Oneida Indian Nation of New York v Madison County, NY, the Second Circuit held that tribal sovereign immunity barred a tax foreclosure suit against the tribe for unpaid taxes.605 F.3d 149. As urged by concurring judges José A. Cabranes and Peter W. Hall, the U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari.Madison County v. Oneida Indian Nation of New York, 131 S. Ct. 459 (2010).  Following a tribal declaration and ordinance waiving sovereign immunity, the Court vacated and remanded.Madison County v. Oneida Indian Nation of New York, 131 S. Ct. 704 (mem).
See also
Oneida Indian Nation of New York State v. Oneida County (1974)
Oneida County v. Oneida Indian Nation of New York State (1985)
Cayuga Indian Nation of N.Y. v. Pataki (2d Cir. 2005)
Oneida Indian Nation of New York v. Madison County, N.Y., 605 F.3d 149 (2d Cir. 2010)
References
Further reading
 Sarah Krakoff (2005). "'City of Sherrill v. Oneida Indian Nation of New York': A Regretful Postscript to the Taxation Chapter, in 'Cohen's Handbook of Federal Indian Law,'" Tulsa Law Review 41: 5.
 George C. Shattuck (1991). The Oneida Land Claims:  A Legal History.
 Patrick W. Wandres  (2006). "Indian Land Claims, Sherrill and the Impending Legacy of the Doctrine of Laches," American Indian Law Review'' 31:131.
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:Aboriginal title case law in the United States
Category:United States tribal sovereign immunity case law
Category:Oneida
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Native American history of New York (state)
"""

From "City of St. Louis v. Myers" ==> """
St. Louis v. Myers, 113 U.S. 566 (1885), was a motion to dismiss for want of a federal question to give jurisdiction regarding Acts that admitted Missouri into the Union while leaving the rights of riparian owners on the Mississippi River to be settled according to the principles of state law and relinquishing to the City of St. Louis the rights of the United States in wharves and thoroughfares, which did not authorize the city to impair the rights of other riparian proprietors by extending streets into the river.St. Louis v. Myers, 113 U.S. 566 (1885) Justia.com
Chief Justice Waite delivered the opinion of the Court.
The court was satisfied that no case has been made for its jurisdiction, and the motion to dismiss was granted.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1880s in the environment
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:History of St. Louis
Category:United States federal question jurisdiction case law
"""

From "City of Walla Walla v. Walla Walla Water Co." ==> """
City of Walla Walla v. Walla Walla Water Company, 172 U.S. 1 (1898), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Walla Walla Water Company filed a bill to stop the City of Walla Walla from erecting waterworks, acquiring property to erect waterworks, or using city money to build waterworks..
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:1898 in United States case law
Category:Walla Walla, Washington
Category:Public utilities of the United States
"""

From "Civil Rights Cases" ==> """
The Civil Rights Cases, 109 U.S. 3 (1883), were a group of five landmark cases, including US v. Stanley,  in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments did not empower Congress to outlaw racial discrimination by private individuals. The holding that the Thirteenth Amendment did not empower the federal government to punish racist acts done by private citizens would be overturned by the Supreme Court in the 1968 case Jones v. Alfred H. Mayer Co. The Fourteenth Amendment not applying to private entities, however, is still valid precedent to this day. Although the Fourteenth Amendment-related decision has never been overturned, in the 1964 case of Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States, the Supreme Court held that Congress could prohibit racial discrimination by private actors under the Commerce Clause, though that and other loose interpretations of the Clause to expand federal power have been subject to criticism.
During Reconstruction, Congress had passed the Civil Rights Act of 1875, which entitled everyone to access accommodation, public transport, and theaters regardless of race or color. In his majority opinion in the Civil Rights Cases, Associate Justice Joseph P. Bradley struck down the Civil Rights Act of 1875, holding that the Thirteenth Amendment "merely abolishes slavery" and that the Fourteenth Amendment did not give Congress the power to outlaw private acts of racial discrimination. Associate Justice John Marshall Harlan was the lone dissenter in the case, writing that the "substance and spirit of the recent amendments of the constitution have been sacrificed by a subtle and ingenious verbal criticism." The decision ushered in the widespread segregation of blacks in housing, employment, and public life that confined them to second-class citizenship throughout much of the United States until the passage of civil rights legislation in the 1960s.
Background
Black American plaintiffs, in five cases from lower courts,United States v. Stanley, United States v. Ryan, United States v. Nichols, United States v. Singleton, and Robinson v. Memphis & Charleston Railroad, . sued theaters, hotels, and transit companies that refused to admit them, or had excluded them from "white only" facilities. The Civil Rights Act of 1875 had been passed by Congress and entitled everyone to access accommodation, public transport, and theaters regardless of race or color."all persons within the jurisdiction of the United States shall be entitled to the full and equal enjoyment of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, and privileges of inns, public conveyances on land or water, theaters, and other places of public amusement; subject only to the conditions and limitations established by law, and applicable alike to citizens of every race and color, regardless of any previous condition of servitude". This followed the American Civil War (1860–1865), President Abraham Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation (1 January 1863) to end slavery, and the Fourteenth Amendment to the US Constitution (9 July 1868), which reads, "No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws." To implement the principles in the Fourteenth Amendment, Congress had specified that people could not be discriminated against on grounds of race or color in access to services offered to the general public. The business owners contended that the Civil Rights Act of 1875 was itself unconstitutional, and an Act of Congress should not be able to interfere with their private rights of property.
At the supreme court level, the five originally independent cases – United States v. Stanley, United States v. Ryan, United States v. Nichols, United States v. Singleton, and Robinson et ux. v. Memphis & Charleston R.R. Co. – were consolidated for issuing a single judgment.
Judgment
The Supreme Court, in an 8–1 decision by Justice Joseph P. Bradley, held that the language of the 14th Amendment, which prohibited denial of equal protection by a state, did not give Congress power to regulate these private acts, because it was the result of conduct by private individuals, not state law or action, that black people were suffering. Section five empowers Congress only to enforce the prohibition on state action. Legislation by Congress on subjects which are within the domain of the state were, apparently, not authorized by the Fourteenth Amendment. Private acts of racial discrimination were simply private wrongs that the national government was powerless to correct.
Bradley said the following, holding the Constitution did "not authorize Congress to create a code of municipal law for the regulation of private rights," as distinct from "state" laws. In effect, only state bodies were sufficiently "public" so as to be regulated.
thumb|right|Joseph P. Bradley authored the opinion of the court.
... individual invasion of individual rights is not the subject-matter of the [Fourteenth] Amendment. It has a deeper and broader scope. It nullifies and makes void all state legislation, and state action of every kind, which impairs the privileges and immunities of citizens of the United States, or which injures them in life, liberty or property without due process of law, or which denies to any of them the equal protection of the laws. ...
It does not invest congress with power to legislate upon subjects which are within the domain of state legislation; but to provide modes of relief against state legislation, or state action, of the kind referred to. It does not authorize congress to create a code of municipal law for the regulation of private rights; but to provide modes of redress against the operation of state laws, and the action of state officers, executive or judicial, when these are subversive of the fundamental rights specified in the amendment. Positive rights and privileges are undoubtedly secured by the fourteenth amendment; but they are secured by way of prohibition against state laws and state proceedings affecting those rights and privileges, and by power given to congress to legislate for the purpose of carrying such prohibition into effect; and such legislation must necessarily be predicated upon such supposed state laws or state proceedings, and be directed to the correction of their operation and effect. A quite full discussion of this aspect of the amendment may be found in U. S. v. Cruikshank, 92 U. S. 542; Virginia v. Rives, 100 U. S. 313, and Ex parte Virginia, Id. 339.
... it would be running the slavery argument into the ground to make it apply to every act of discrimination which a person may see fit to make as to guests he will entertain, or as to the people he will take into his coach or cab or car; or admit to his concert or theater, or deal with in other matters of intercourse or business. Innkeepers and public carriers, by the laws of all the states, so far as we are aware, are bound, to the extent of their facilities, to furnish proper accommodation to all unobjectionable persons who in good faith apply for them. If the laws themselves make any unjust discrimination, amenable to the prohibitions of the fourteenth amendment, congress has full power to afford a remedy under that amendment and in accordance with it.
When a man has emerged from slavery, and by the aid of beneficent legislation has shaken off the inseparable concomitants of that state, there must be some stage in the progress of his elevation when he takes the rank of a mere citizen, and ceases to be the special favorite of the laws, and when his rights as a citizen, or a man, are to be protected in the ordinary modes by which other men's rights are protected. There were thousands of free colored people in this country before the abolition of slavery, enjoying all the essential rights of life, liberty, and property the same as white citizens; yet no one, at that time, thought that it was any invasion of their personal status as freemen because they were not admitted to all the privileges enjoyed by white citizens, or because they were subjected to discriminations in the enjoyment of accommodations in inns, public conveyances, and places of amusement. Mere discriminations on account of race or color were not regarded as badges of slavery ...
Justice Harlan dissented against the Court's narrow interpretation of the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments for all five of the cases. He argued Congress was attempting to overcome the refusal of the states to protect the rights denied to African Americans that white citizens took as their birthright. Private railroads (Olcott v. Supervisors). were by law public highways, and it was the function of the government to make and maintain highways for the conveyance of the public; that innkeepers have long been held to be "a sort of public servants" (Rex v. Ivens 1835 7 Car. & P. 213)John E. H. Sherry (1993) The Laws of Innkeepers, Cornell University Press  who had no right to deny to anyone "conducting himself in a proper manner" admission to his inn; and that public amusements are maintained under a license coming from the State. He also found that the lack of protection from the 1875 Civil Rights Act would result in the violation of the Privileges or Immunities Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, largely on the same grounds. Harlan J would have held the Civil Rights Act of 1875 valid, because people were left "practically at the mercy of corporations and individuals wielding power under public authority". His judgment went as follows.
thumb|right|John Marshall Harlan, became known as the "Great Dissenter" for his fiery dissent in Civil Rights Cases and other early civil rights cases.
The opinion in these cases proceeds, as it seems to me, upon grounds entirely too narrow and artificial. The substance and spirit of the recent amendments of the constitution have been sacrificed by a subtle and ingenious verbal criticism. 'It is not the words of the law but the internal sense of it that makes the law. The letter of the law is the body; the sense and reason of the law is the soul.' Constitutional provisions, adopted in the interest of liberty, and for the purpose of securing, through national legislation, if need be, rights inhering in a state of freedom, and belonging to American citizenship, have been so construed as to defeat the ends the people desired to accomplish, which they attempted to accomplish, and which they supposed they had accomplished by changes in their fundamental law. By this I do not mean that the determination of these cases should have been materially controlled by considerations of mere expediency or policy. I mean only, in this form, to express an earnest conviction that the court has departed from the familiar rule requiring, in the interpretation of constitutional provisions, that full effect be given to the intent with which they were adopted.
The purpose of the first section of the act of congress of March 1, 1875, was to prevent race discrimination. It does not assume to define the general conditions and limitations under which inns, public conveyances, and places of public amusement may be conducted, but only declares that such conditions and limitations, whatever they may be, shall not be applied, by way of discrimination, on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude. The second section provides a penalty against any one denying, or aiding or inciting the denial, to any citizen that equality of right given by the first section, except for reasons by law applicable to citizens of every race or color, and regardless of any previous condition of servitude....
The court adjudges that congress is without power, under either the thirteenth or fourteenth amendment, to establish such regulations, and that the first and second sections of the statute are, in all their parts, unconstitutional and void.
[...]
I do not contend that the thirteenth amendment invests congress with authority, by legislation, to regulate the entire body of the civil rights which citizens enjoy, or may enjoy, in the several states. But I do hold that since slavery, as the court has repeatedly declared, was the moving or principal cause of the adoption of that amendment, and since that institution rested wholly upon the inferiority, as a race, of those held in bondage, their freedom necessarily involved immunity from, and protection against, all discrimination against them, because of their race, in respect of such civil rights as belong to freemen of other races. Congress, therefore, under its express power to enforce that amendment, by appropriate legislation, may enact laws to protect that people against the deprivation, on account of their race, of any civil rights enjoyed by other freemen in the same state; and such legislation may be of a direct and primary character, operating upon states, their officers and agents, and also upon, at least, such individuals and corporations as exercise public functions and wield power and authority under the state.
[...]
Such being the relations these corporations hold to the public, it would seem that the right of a colored person to use an improved public highway, upon the terms accorded to freemen of other races, is as fundamental in the state of freedom, established in this country, as are any of the rights which my brethren concede to be so far fundamental as to be deemed the essence of civil freedom. 'Personal liberty consists,' says Blackstone, 'in the power of locomotion, of changing situation, or removing one's person to whatever place one's own inclination may direct, without restraint, unless by due course of law.' But of what value is this right of locomotion, if it may be clogged by such burdens as congress intended by the act of 1875 to remove? They are burdens which lay at the very foundation of the institution of slavery as it once existed. They are not to be sustained, except upon the assumption that there is still, in this land of universal liberty, a class which may yet be discriminated against, even in respect of rights of a character so essential and so supreme, that, deprived of their enjoyment, in common with others, a freeman is not only branded as one inferior and infected, but, in the competitions of life, is robbed of some of the most necessary means of existence; and all this solely because they belong to a particular race which the nation has liberated. The thirteenth amendment alone obliterated the race line, so far as all rights fundamental in a state of freedom are concerned.
[...]
Said Mr. Justice Coleridge, in Rex v. Ivens, 7 Car. & P. 213, (32 E. C. L. 495:)
'An indictment lies against an innkeeper who refuses to receive a guest, he having at the time room in his house; and either the price of the guest's entertainment being tendered to him, or such circumstances occurring as will dispense with that tender. This law is founded in good sense. The innkeeper is not to select his guests. He has no right to say to one, you shall come to my inn, and to another you shall not, as every one coming and conducting himself in a proper manner has a right to be received; and for this purpose innkeepers are a sort of public servants, they having in return a kind of privilege of entertaining travelers and supplying them with that they want.
These authorities are sufficient to show a keeper of an inn is in the exercise of a quasi public employment. The law gives him special privileges, and he is charged with certain duties and responsibilities to the public. The public nature of his employment forbids him from discriminating against any person asking admission as a guest on account of the race or color of that person.
[...]
I also submit whether it can be said—in view of the doctrines of this court as announced in Munn v. Illinois, U.S. 123, and reaffirmed in Peik v. Chicago & N. W. Ry. Co. 94 U.S. 178—that the management of places of public amusement is a purely private matter, with which government has no rightful concern. In the Munn Case the question was whether the state of Illinois could fix, by law, the maximum of charges for the storage of grain in certain warehouses in that state—the private property of individual citizens. After quoting a remark attributed to Lord Chief Justice HALE, to the effect that when private property is 'affected with a public interest it ceases to be juris privati only,' the court says:
'Property does become clothed with a public interest when used in a manner to make it of public consequence and affect the community at large. When, therefore, one devotes his property to a use in which the public has an interest, he in effect grants to the public an interest in that use, and must submit to be controlled by the public for the common good to the extent of the interest he has thus created. He may withdraw his grant by discontinuing the use, but, so long as he maintains the use, he must submit to the control.'
The doctrines of Munn v. Illinois have never been modified by this court, and I am justified, upon the authority of that case, in saying that places of public amusement, conducted under the authority of the law, are clothed with a public interest, because used in a manner to make them of public consequence and to affect the community at large. The law may therefore regulate, to some extent, the mode in which they shall be conducted, and consequently the public have rights in respect of such places which may be vindicated by the law. It is consequently not a matter purely of private concern.
[...]
The colored citizens of other states, within the jurisdiction of that state, could claim, under the constitution, every privilege and immunity which that state secures to her white citizens. Otherwise, it would be in the power of any state, by discriminating class legislation against its own citizens of a particular race or color, to withhold from citizens of other states, belonging to that proscribed race, when within her limits, privileges and immunities of the character regarded by all courts as fundamental in citizenship; and that, too, when the constitutional guaranty is that the citizens of each state shall be entitled to 'all privileges and immunities of citizens of the several states.' No state may, by discrimination against a portion of its own citizens of a particular race, in respect of privileges and immunities fundamental in citizenship, impair the constitutional right of citizens of other states, of whatever race, to enjoy in that state all such privileges and immunities as are there accorded to her most favored citizens. A colored citizen of Ohio or Indiana, being in the jurisdiction of Tennessee, is entitled to enjoy any privilege or immunity, fundamental in citizenship, which is given to citizens of the white race in the latter state. It is not to be supposed that any one will controvert this proposition.
But what was secured to colored citizens of the United States as between them and their respective states—by the grant to them of state citizenship? With what rights, privileges, or immunities did this grant from the nation invest them? There is one, if there be no others—exemption from race discrimination in respect of any civil right belonging to citizens of the white race in the same state. That, surely, is their constitutional privilege when within the jurisdiction of other states. And such must be their constitutional right, in their own state, unless the recent amendments be 'splendid baubles,' thrown out to delude those who deserved fair and generous treatment at the hands of the nation. Citizenship in this country necessarily imports equality of civil rights among citizens of every race in the same state. It is fundamental in American citizenship that, in respect of such rights, there shall be no discrimination by the state, or its officers, or by individuals, or corporations exercising public functions or authority, against any citizen because of his race or previous condition of servitude. In U.S. v. Cruikshank, 92 U. S. 555, it was said that 'the equality of rights of citizens is a principle of republicanism.' And in Ex parte Virginia, 100 U. S. 344, the emphatic language of this court is that 'one great purpose of these amendments was to raise the colored race from that condition of inferiority and servitude in which most of them had previously stood, into perfect equality of civil rights with all other persons within the jurisdiction of the states.' So, in Strauder v. West Virginia, Id. 306, the court, alluding to the fourteenth amendment, said: 'This is one of a series of constitutional provisions having a common purpose, namely, securing to a race recently emancipated, a race that through many generations had been held in slavery, all the civil rights that the superior race enjoy.' Again, in Neal v. Delaware, 103 U. S. 386, it was ruled that this amendment was designed, primarily, 'to secure to the colored race, thereby invested with the rights, privileges, and responsibilities of citizenship, the enjoyment of all the civil rights that, under the law, are enjoyed by white persons.'
[...]
This court has always given a broad and liberal construction to the constitution, so as to enable congress, by legislation, to enforce rights secured by that instrument. The legislation congress may enact, in execution of its power to enforce the provisions of this amendment, is that which is appropriate to protect the right granted. Under given circumstances, that which the court characterizes as corrective legislation might be sufficient. Under other circumstances primary direct legislation may be required. But it is for congress, not the judiciary, to say which is best adapted to the end to be attained. In U.S. v. Fisher, 2 Cranch, 358, this court said that 'congress must possess the choice of means, and must be empowered to use any means which are in fact conducive to the exercise of a power granted by the constitution.' 'The sound construction of the constitution,' said Chief Justice MARSHALL, 'must allow to the national legislature that discretion, with respect to the means by which the powers it confers are to be carried into execution, which will enable that body to perform the high duties assigned to it in the manner most beneficial to the people. Let the end be legitimate,—let it be within the scope of the constitution,—and all means which are appropriate, which are plainly adapted to that end, which are not prohibited, but consistent with the letter and spirit of the constitution, are constitutional.' McCulloch v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. 423.
Must these rules of construction be now abandoned? Are the powers of the national legislature to be restrained in proportion as the rights and privileges, derived from the nation, are more valuable? Are constitutional provisions, enacted to secure the dearest rights of freemen and citizens, to be subjected to that rule of construction, applicable to private instruments, which requires that the words to be interpreted must be taken most strongly against those who employ them? Or shall it be remembered that 'a constitution of government, founded by the people for themselves and their posterity, and for objects of the most momentous nature,—for perpetual union, for the establishment of justice, for the general welfare, and for a perpetuation of the blessings of liberty,—necessarily requires that every interpretation of its powers should have a constant reference to these objects? No interpretation of the words in which those powers are granted can be a sound one which narrows down their ordinary import so as to defeat those objects.' 1 Story, Const. § 422.
[...]
In every material sense applicable to the practical enforcement of the fourteenth amendment, railroad corporations, keepers of inns, and managers of places of public amusement are agents of the state, because amenable, in respect of their public duties and functions, to public regulation. It seems to me that, within the principle settled in Ex parte Virginia, a denial by these instrumentalities of the state to the citizen, because of his race, of that equality of civil rights secured to him by law, is a denial by the state within the meaning of the fourteenth amendment. If it be not, then that race is left, in respect of the civil rights under discussion, practically at the mercy of corporations and individuals wielding power under public authority....
[...]
What I affirm is that no state, nor the officers of any state, nor any corporation or individual wielding power under state authority for the public benefit or the public convenience, can, consistently either with the freedom established by the fundamental law, or with that equality of civil rights which now belongs to every citizen, discriminate against freemen or citizens, in their civil rights, because of their race, or because they once labored under disabilities imposed upon them as a race. The rights which congress, by the act of 1875, endeavored to secure and protect are legal, not social, rights. The right, for instance, of a colored citizen to use the accommodations of a public highway upon the same terms as are permitted to white citizens is no more a social right than his right, under the law, to use the public streets of a city, or a town, or a turnpike road, or a public market, or a post-office, or his right to sit in a public building with others, of whatever race, for the purpose of hearing the political questions of the day discussed. Scarcely a day passes without our seeing in this court-room citizens of the white and black races sitting side by side watching the progress of our business. It would never occur to any one that the presence of a colored citizen in a court-house or court-room was an invasion of the social rights of white persons who may frequent such places. And yet such a suggestion would be quite as sound in law—I say it with all respect—as is the suggestion that the claim of a colored citizen to use, upon the same terms as is permitted to white citizens, the accommodations of public highways, or public inns, or places of public amusement, established under the license of the law, is an invasion of the social rights of the white race.
[...]
The one underlying purpose of congressional legislation has been to enable the black race to take the rank of mere citizens. The difficulty has been to compel a recognition of their legal right to take that rank, and to secure the enjoyment of privileges belonging, under the law, to them as a component part of the people for whose welfare and happiness government is ordained. At every step in this direction the nation has been confronted with class tyranny, which a contemporary English historian says is, of all tyrannies, the most intolerable, 'for it is ubiquitous in its operation, and weighs, perhaps, most heavily on those whose obscurity or distance would withdraw them from the notice of a single despot.' To-day it is the colored race which is denied, by corporations and individuals wielding public authority, rights fundamental in their freedom and citizenship. At some future time it may be some other race that will fall under the ban. If the constitutional amendments be enforced, according to the intent with which, as I conceive, they were adopted, there cannot be, in this republic, any class of human beings in practical subjection to another class, with power in the latter to dole out to the former just such privileges as they may choose to grant. The supreme law of the land has decreed that no authority shall be exercised in this country upon the basis of discrimination, in respect of civil rights, against freemen and citizens because of their race, color, or previous condition of servitude. To that decree—for the due enforcement of which, by appropriate legislation, congress has been invested with express power—every one must bow, whatever may have been, or whatever now are, his individual views as to the wisdom or policy, either of the recent changes in the fundamental law, or of the legislation which has been enacted to give them effect.
For the reasons stated I feel constrained to withhold my assent to the opinion of the court.
Significance
The decision met with public protest across the country, and led to regular "indignation meetings" held in numerous cities.Alexander Tsesis, The Thirteenth Amendment and American Freedom: A Legal History; New York University Press, 2004; p. 74;  State officials in the South took advantage of the eclipsed role of Congress in the prohibition of racial discrimination and proceeded to embody individual practices of racial segregation into laws that legalized the treatment of blacks as second-class citizens for another seventy years. The court's decision thus ultimately led to the enactment of state laws, such as Jim Crow Laws, which codified what had previously been individual adherence to the practice of racial segregation. Several northern and western states however did not follow suit and began instead enacting their own bans on discrimination in public places.
Harlan correctly predicted the decision's long-term consequences: it put an end to the attempts by Radical Republicans to ensure the civil rights of blacks and ushered in the widespread segregation of blacks in housing, employment and public life that confined them to second-class citizenship throughout much of the United States until the passage of civil rights legislation in the 1960s in the wake of the Civil Rights Movement.
Furthermore, 
In the wake of the Supreme Court ruling, the federal government adopted as policy that allegations of continuing slavery were matters whose prosecution should be left to local authorities only – a de facto acceptance that white southerners could do as they wished with the black people in their midst.Slavery by Another Name: The Re-Enslavement of Black Americans from the Civil War to World War II, Douglas A. Blackmon, Anchor Books 2009, p. 93.
The decision that the Reconstruction-era Civil Rights Acts were unconstitutional has not been overturned; on the contrary, the Supreme Court reaffirmed this limited reading of the Fourteenth Amendment in United States v. Morrison, , in which it held that Congress did not have the authority to enact parts of the Violence Against Women Act.
The Court has, however, upheld more recent civil rights laws based on other powers of Congress. Title II of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 generally revived the ban on discrimination in public accommodations that was in the Civil Rights Act of 1875, but under the Commerce Clause of Article I instead of the 14th Amendment; the Court held Title II to be constitutional in Heart of Atlanta Motel v. United States, .
See also
US labor law
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 109
United States v. Cruikshank
Plessy v. Ferguson
Constantine v Imperial Hotels Ltd [1944] KB 693
Notes
References
, Third Part, Chapter VI, "The Supreme Court Decision."
External links
 "Supreme Court Landmark Case The Civil Rights Cases" from C-SPAN's Landmark Cases: Historic Supreme Court Decisions
Category:1883 in United States case law
Category:Reconstruction Era legislation
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States federal civil rights legislation
Category:United States Fourteenth Amendment, section five case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
"""

From "Clapper v. Amnesty International USA" ==> """
Clapper v. Amnesty International USA, 568 U.S. 398 (2013), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that Amnesty International USA and others lacked standing to challenge  (also known as Section 702) of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act as amended by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 Amendments Act of 2008.
Background
Clapper was a challenge to the FISA Amendments Act of 2008, which empowers the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court to authorize surveillance without a showing of probable cause that the target of the surveillance is an agent of a foreign power. The government must demonstrate only that the surveillance targets “persons reasonably believed to be located outside the United States” and seeks “foreign intelligence information.” The plaintiffs alleged that they sustained greater inconvenience and higher costs because of the need to conduct secure communications with parties overseas whom the US government had probably targeted for surveillance. The challenge was brought against James Clapper, Director of National Intelligence.
Decision
The Court dismissed the case by following the US government's argument that "the claims of the challenges that they were likely to be targets of surveillance were based too much on speculation and on a predicted chain of events that might never occur, so they could not satisfy the constitutional requirement for being allowed to sue." "Respondents cannot manufacture standing merely by inflicting harm on themselves based on their fears of hypothetical future harm that is not certainly impending," Justice Samuel Alito wrote in the majority opinion.
Justice Breyer, in dissent, said that the case should have proceeded to trial. Of the spying, he wrote: “Indeed it is as likely to take place as are most future events that commonsense inference and ordinary knowledge of human nature tell us will happen.”
Reactions
According to Jameel Jaffer, deputy legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), which argued the case on behalf of the plaintiffs before the Supreme Court, the challenged amendments made in 2008 to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act essentially allow the National Security Agency (NSA) "to engage in dragnet surveillance of Americans’ international communications," even of those "who might not be suspected at all of having done anything wrong" and so "it's a very broad surveillance statute" and "arguably broader than any surveillance statute that Congress has sanctioned in the past." According to him, the Supreme Court, by requiring the plaintiffs to show that they have been monitored under the law, has essentially created a barrier to judicial review by preventing anyone from ever challenging that kind of statute in court as indeed, nobody can show that they have been monitored under the law since the government does not disclose its targets.
After the decision in favor of the government, several legal experts stated, "Clapper also hints at a rocky reception for the challenge to the NDAA in Hedges."
Aftermath
Before the process, Solicitor General Donald B. Verrilli Jr. had denied that ruling in the US government's favor would immunize the surveillance program from constitutional challenges. “That contention is misplaced,” Verrilli wrote in a brief. “Others may be able to establish standing even if respondents cannot. As respondents recognize, the government must provide advance notice of its intent to use information obtained or derived from” the surveillance authorized by the 2008 law “against a person in judicial or administrative proceedings and that person may challenge the underlying surveillance.” Specifically, Verrilli unequivocally assured the Supreme Court in its brief, that criminal defendants would receive notice of FAA surveillance and an opportunity to challenge the statute:
If the government intends to use or disclose any information obtained or derived from its acquisition of a person's communications under [the FAA] in judicial or administrative proceedings against that person, it must provide advance notice of its intent to the tribunal and the person, whether or not the person was targeted for surveillance under [the FAA].
The USCC then took Verrilli's assurance and ruled in accordance with the FAA §1881a according to which criminal defendants who are prosecuted using evidence obtained or derived from FAA surveillance are entitled to notice:See 50 U.S.C. §§ 1806(c), 188le(a)
If the Government intends to use or disclose information obtained or derived from a §1881a acquisition in judicial or administrative proceedings, it must provide advance notice of its intent, and the affected person may challenge the lawfulness of the acquisition.Clapper v. Amnesty Int'l USA, No. 11-1025, slip op. at 22, 568 U.S._ (Feb. 26, 2013) (citing 50 U.S.C. §§ 1806(c), 1806(e), 1881e(a))
The opposite of what Verrilli told the Supreme Court has happened in actual criminal prosecutions. Federal prosecutors, apparently unaware of his representations, have refused to make the promised disclosures. In a prosecution in Federal District Court in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, against two brothers accused of plotting to bomb targets in New York, the government has said that it plans to use information gathered under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978, which authorizes individual warrants. However, prosecutors have refused to say whether the government obtained those individual warrants based on information derived from the 2008 law, which allows programmatic surveillance. Prosecutors in Chicago have taken the same approach in a prosecution of teenager accused of plotting to blow up a bar.
While both the original Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act and the FISA Amendments Act require the government to notify defendants when evidence being used against them is derived from surveillance authorized by the corresponding law, there is a crucial difference between both laws with respect to warrants. A traditional FISA court order pursuant to the original Act requires the government to go to a FISA judge and show probable cause that the target is an agent of a foreign power. The expanded surveillance program authorized in 2008 allows the FAA, however, targets non-Americans persons “reasonably believed” to be located outside the United States, and it does not require that the government to obtain individual warrants before it intercepts communications. Moreover, the purpose of the collection is “foreign intelligence,” a broad category that may include everything from information on terrorism to nuclear proliferation to European journalist writing on human rights abuses or an African businessman talking about global financial risk. In essence, the law authorized the government to wiretap Americans’ e-mails and phone calls without an individual court order and on domestic soil if the surveillance is “targeted” at a foreigner abroad. Judge John O'Sullivan explained it this way in the Florida case:
Before passage of the FAA in 2008, FISA generally foreclosed the government from engaging in "electronic surveillance" without first obtaining an individualized and particularized order from the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court ("FISC"). To obtain an order from the FISC, the government had to satisfy certain requirements including that a "significant purpose" of the surveillance was to obtain "foreign intelligence information. 50 U.S.C. § 1805(a)(2)(B).  When FISA was amended in 2008, the FAA provided legislative authority for the warrantless surveillance of U.S. citizens' and residents' communications. Although the FAA left FISA intact regarding communications known to be purely domestic, the FAA expanded FISA by allowing the mass acquisition of U.S. citizens' and residents' international communications without individualized judicial oversight or supervision. See Clapper v. Amnesty Intl USA, 133 S. Ct. 1138, 1143-44 (2013). Under the FAA, the Attorney General and Director of National Intelligence ("DNI") may "authorize jointly, for a period of up to one year... the targeting of persons reasonably believed to be located outside the United States to acquire foreign intelligence information." 50 U.S.C. § 1881(a).
Verrilli had told the Supreme Court justices that somebody would have legal standing to trigger review of the program because prosecutors would notify people facing evidence derived from surveillance under the 2008 FISA Amendments law. However, it turned out that Verrilli's assurances clashed with the actual practices of national security prosecutors, who had not been alerting such defendants that evidence in their cases had stemmed from wiretapping their conversations without a warrant. For Verrilli, that led to the question of whether any persuasive legal basis exists for failing to clearly notify defendants that they faced evidence linked to the 2008 warrantless surveillance law, which prevented them from knowing that they had an opportunity to argue that it derived from an unconstitutional search. After internal deliberations in which Verrilli argued that there was no legal basis to conceal from defendants that evidence derived from legally-untested surveillance, which prevented them from knowing that they had an opportunity to challenge it, the US Justice Department concluded “that withholding disclosure from defendants could not be justified legally.” As a consequence, the Justice Department, as of October 2013, was setting up a potential Supreme Court test of whether it is constitutional by notifying criminal defendants for the first time that evidence against them had been derived from eavesdropping that had been authorized under the FISA Amendments Act of 2008. The first defendant who received notice that he had been monitored under the FISA Amendments Act of 2008 (FAA) was Jamshid Muhtorov on October 25, 2013. According to the New York Times, the move is expected to set up a Supreme Court test of whether eavesdropping from a warrantless wiretap is constitutional.
The American Civil Liberties Union praised Verrilli for providing criminal defendants who are prosecuted using evidence obtained or derived from FAA surveillance and are entitled to notice that this evidence was acquired under the FISA Amendments Act with such statutorily-required notice that is required under the FISA Amendments Act. That gives defendants the opportunity to move to suppress FAA-derived evidence and to right to challenge the warrantless wiretapping law and trial courts the opportunity to adjudicate the FAA's constitutionality. Despite its praise, the ACLU urged Verrilli "should now submit a letter-brief alerting the [Supreme] Court to the significant factual error in the government's submissions. His letter should explain what the NSD's [National Security Division of the U.S. Justice Department] notice policy was when Clapper was before the courts; on what basis the NSD came to the conclusion that the policy was justified; how it came to pass that the government misrepresented the NSD's policy; and what the NSD's notice policy is now."
See also
 Litigation over global surveillance
 ACLU v. Clapper
 Amnesty v. Blair
 Laird v. Tatum
 COINTELPRO
 PRISM (surveillance program)
References
Further reading
External links
 Coverage on SCOTUSblog
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Amnesty International
Category:Mass surveillance litigation
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:United States standing case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Clark v. Arizona" ==> """
Clark v. Arizona, 548 U.S. 735 (2006), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld the constitutionality of the insanity defense used by Arizona.
The Court affirmed the murder conviction of a man with paranoid schizophrenia for killing a police officer.
The man had argued that his inability to understand the nature of his acts at the time that they were committed should be a sufficient basis for showing that he lacked the requisite mental state required as an element of the charged crime.
The Court upheld Arizona's restriction of admissible mental health evidence only to the issue of insanity and not to show that the defendant did not possess the required mental intent level necessary to satisfy an element of the crime. Evidence is admissible only to show that the defendant was insane at the time of the crime's commission.
In this case, the defendant knew right from wrong and so he could not qualify under Arizona's insanity defense.
 Background 
The constitutionality of an insanity defense was questioned as well as whether a defendant has a Fourteenth Amendment due process right, unrelated to the insanity plea, to present the correct evidence on the mental state to counter the prosecution's evidence of criminal intent.
In the case, Eric Clark shot and killed a police officer at a traffic stop because he believed his town in Arizona had been taken over by aliens. Clark, was diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia and used the insanity defense to try to use his mental disorder as an excuse for the crime that he had committed.
The court did not believe that Clark's insanity defense was a justifiable defense, and he was sentenced to 25 years in prison. Throughout the court case, Clark presented an elaborate testimony describing his odd behavior a year prior to the incident. Among many other things, Clark believed that "aliens", some being government employees, were trying to hurt and kill him and that the only way to stop them was through death.
A psychiatrist testified that Clark has paranoid schizophrenia in which a patient has delusions that a person is against the patient and/or family. The psychiatrist said that at the time of the shooting, Clark was incapable of deciding right from wrong and so was insane.
Before being tried again, he was committed to a mental institution for two years, and his belief in aliens was still present afterward, but he believed that they were no longer out to get him but had another mission.
 Decision 
In a 5–4 decision, in favor of Arizona, the US Supreme Court decided that the Arizona court could limit the amount of evidence used to plea a person's sanity for a defendant's insanity defense.The Supreme Court, 2005 Term — Leading Cases, 120 Harv. L. Rev. 223 (2006). Justice Souter believed that having a defendant prove his insanity in order to justify they were unable to clearly think while committing the crime would disprove his claim for insanity because they were able to think clearly to prove they were insane. The court cited the Arizona Supreme Court's decision in State v. Mott, which refused to allow a psychiatric testimony to invalidate a criminal's intent and to uphold that Arizona does not allow evidence of a mental illness to neutralize the mens rea of a crime. Mens Rea is an element of criminal responsibility regarding whether or not there was intention or knowledge of wrongdoing while a crime was being committed. The court also determined that due process does not require a State to use both areas of the M'Naughten insanity test. Rather, a State may adopt an insanity test that focuses solely on moral incapacity.
 Dissenting opinions 
Judges Ginsburg, Kennedy, and Stevens disagreed with the majority ruling of the court. Justice Breyer partially concurred and agreed with the Court's "basic categorization" of evidence related to insanity. Further, he acknowledged that a State may provide consideration of mental-disease "solely in conjunction with the insanity defense." However, he dissented from the majority's opinion and would change the case so that Arizona courts could determine whether state law is consistent.
In dissent, Justice Kennedy stated that it was not necessary for him to address Clark's due process challenge to Arizona's insanity test. Instead, he disagreed with the majority for limiting Clark's claim to evidentiary support on his insanity. He also believed the Mott Rule, which does not allow evidence for insanity to prove someone is not guilty, to be unjust in the case as it is an exclusion of evidence, despite its credibility.
 Controversy 
There was no controversy that Clark had schizophrenia when he shot Officer Moritz. There was no controversy either that Clark actually believed that there were aliens who were out to get him, as he hung fishing line in his room as "booby traps" as well as wind chimes on the doors and windows to warn him of intruders. Lastly, Clark kept a bird in his car to warn him of different changes in air temperature, which he believed could lead to possible intruders.
There is some controversy on the reasons for Clark's actions on the night of the crime. For example, he was playing music in his car at high volume. The state believed that the music was meant to lure the officer to his vehicle with a nuisance offense, as Clark had mentioned to a friend that he wanted to shoot a cop. The defense expert, Dr. Morentz, dismissed that theory and believed Clark was playing music loudly to "drown out" the voices in his head, a tactic common among people with paranoid schizophrenia.
The state and the defense began again to agree after he was sent to jail. Clark called the prison guards aliens and refused to eat out of fear of being poisoned by aliens.
 Application of insanity laws 
Depending on the state, the insanity law places the burden of proof on the prosecution, which must prove that the defendant is not insane, or on the defense, which must prove that the defendant is insane. After the application of the insanity defense began, Jones v. United States permitted people acquitted due to insanity to be held in a mental hospital for a longer time to the one that they would be in prison, depending on the circumstances. The courts also require for the subject in question to be able to withstand a trial or otherwise to be hospitalized until they are able to go to trial. Another way that a case regarding mental illness is handled is the verdict being "guilty but mentally ill." Then, the person is given a sentence but is offered psychiatric treatment while incarcerated or is taken to a mental hospital until the person is believed to be capable enough to be taken to a prison to serve the remainder of the sentence.
 History 
The insanity defense has existed since the 12th century and is one of the most controversial but one of the least used criminal defense strategies. It claims that a criminal defendant should not be found guilty because of the defendant's insanity. A person who is insane is said to lack the understanding of the crime or the difference between right and wrong. Initially, the defense could be used only to pardon a criminal's sentence. The concept that one's insanity could avoid the sentence began in the 19th century in Isaac Ray's The Medical Jurisprudence of Insanity and the English M'Naughton Case.
In 1843, Daniel M'Naughton was diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia and thought that he was being persecuted, causing him to shoot and kill Edward Drummond. He was found not guilty on the grounds that he was insane at the time of his act. The public were outraged by the decision.
The rule states that every person is assumed to be sane and that to establish a ground of insanity, it must be proved that at the time of committing a crime, the criminal was acting due to a "defect of reason" or mental illness, causing a lack of understanding the nature of the act. The rule includes as a test of distinguishing whether or not a defendant can determine the difference between right and wrong.
One of the best known applications of the insanity defense was for John W. Hinckley, a man who attempted to assassinate Ronald Reagan in 1982. He was ultimately acquitted of his charges under the insanity defense. The outrage after the court decision caused four states to eliminate the insanity defense: Montana, Utah, Idaho, and Kansas.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:2006 in United States case law
"""

From "Clark v. Community for Creative Non-Violence" ==> """
Clark v. Community for Creative Non-Violence, 468 U.S. 288 (1982), is a United States Supreme Court case with the National Park Service's regulation which specifically prohibited sleeping in Lafayette Park and the National Mall at issue..  The Community for Creative Non-Violence (CCNV) group had planned to hold a demonstration on the National Mall and Lafayette Park where they would erect tent cities to raise awareness of the situation of the homeless. The group obtained the correct permits for a seven-day demonstration starting on the first day of winter. The Park Service however denied the request that participants be able to sleep in the tents. The CCNV challenged this regulation on the basis that it violated their First Amendment right.
 Background 
The Community for Creative Non-Violence is a group based in Washington D.C. with a mission "to ensure that the rights of the homeless and poor are not infringed upon and that every person has access to life's basic essentials -- food, shelter, clothing and medical care". Since 1978 the group served a Thanksgiving meal for the homeless in Washington D.C. By November 26, 1981 the group had changed locations of the gathering and ended up in Lafayette Park near the White House. The event gained media attention as the poor were eating a warm meal with 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue in the background. In addition to the feast a few members set up ten tents in the form of a village. The group proclaimed “Welcome to Reaganville / Population growing daily / Reaganomics at work.” The name references the depression-era “Hoovervilles” that were camps of the homeless. The group stated they would try and continue the protest into the winter. The Park Police stated that the Thanksgiving dinner had a legal permit but that overnight sleeping would not be tolerated. The next day, November, 26th, police removed the homeless from the area. CCNV obtained pro bono legal representation from the Institute for Public Representation, a clinic of Georgetown University Law Center.  On November 30 the CCNV obtained a one-week renewable permit.U.S. Dept. of the Interior Public Gathering Permit No. 81-966 This permit stated that:
(i)n connection with permitted demonstrations or special events, temporary structures ... shall be permitted 
The permit however did not explicitly state sleeping may occur.
On December 17, 1981 the CCNV appealed to the District Court for summary judgment for their complaint and for entry of a permanent injunction. The United States Government motioned to have the case dismissed which was subsequently denied. On December 23 the District Court for the District of Columbia ruled in favor of CCNV and stated: 
Plaintiffs are entitled to sleep in the nine (9) tents which plaintiffs have placed in Lafayette Park pursuant to a valid permit issued by defendants. Plaintiffs are not entitled to engage in "camping activities," such as the preparation or service of food in Lafayette Park. Community for Creative Non-Violence v. Watt, Civ. No. 81-2844 (D.D.C. Dec. 23, 1981), Jt.App. at 313-14. 
The District Court stayed the judgment and injunction pending the Government's appeal to the Court of Appeals. The United States Government subsequently filed for appeal. The Appeals Court examined the National Park Service's Administrative Policy Statement that stated:
Camping is prohibited in all park areas except those specially designated as official campsites (36 C.F.R. 50.27). The National Park Service does permit the use of symbolic campsites reasonably related to First Amendment activities. However, camping primarily for living accommodation must be confined to designated campsites 
The Appeals Court felt that the appellees were clearly engaged in political protest and therefore a “symbolic campsites” and that there was no evidence suggesting that the handful of tents in Lafayette Park was intended "primarily for living accommodation."
The Opinion of the Court concluded with:
For the foregoing reasons, we find it clear from the Record before us and from the National Park Service's Administrative Policy Statement that these protesters may lawfully sleep in their symbolic campsite. That conclusion necessarily follows from the National Park Service's interpretation of its own regulations. On this basis, the order of the District Court is Affirmed. 
As a result of the court's decision, CCNV successfully staged its demonstration, including sleeping, for approximately seven weeks during the winter of that year. Sometime later the National Park Service revised its camping regulations for the National Capital Region. The new regulations stated:
when it reasonably appears, in light of all the circumstances, that the participants, in conducting these activities, are in fact using the area as a living accommodation regardless of the intent of the participants or the nature of any other activities in which they may also be engaging.
CCNV planned to hold another demonstration the following winter and was to include 60 tents total with 20 tents in a quadrant of Lafayette Park and 40 tents on the National Mall. The CCNV filed on September 7, 1982 for a permit. The National Park Service granted a permit "to set up two symbolic campsites, one on the Mall with a maximum of one hundred participants and forty tents, and one in Lafayette Park with approximately fifty participants and twenty tents". The permit granted the ability to have a twenty-four-hour presence at the locations but did not allow the participants to sleep. The CCNV then sought a court order invalidating the permit's limitation on sleeping as an unconstitutional restriction on their freedom of expression. They argued that part of the core message the demonstrators wished to convey was that homeless people have no permanent place to sleep. The District Court for the District of Columbia ruled in favor of the National Park Service. The Court ruled that:(1) CCNV's demonstration falls within the scope of the amended anti-camping regulations; (2) sleeping, within the context of CCNV's demonstration, falls outside the scope of the first amendment; and (3) even assuming first amendment scrutiny is required, the new anti-camping regulations are constitutional as applied to CCNV's proposed sleeping activities. The group appealed to the District of Columbia Circuit Court of Appeals where their case was heard. The Appeals Court re-examined the three reasons the District Court did not grant the CCNV injunction. They agreed with the notion that the National Park Service's regulation fit the CCNV's demonstration. Concerning the claim that "CCNV's demonstration, falls outside the scope of the first amendment" the court wrote in the opinion:
Indeed, we cannot understand how the government can deny the indicia of political expression that permeate CCNV's pointed use of the simple act of sleeping. The protestors choose to sleep, purposely across from the White House and Capitol grounds, in sparsely appointed tents which the Park Service has already designated as undeniably "symbolic." Their permit application states that this conduct is intended to send the same message as this court recognized was sent in CCNV's 1981-82 demonstration: that the problems of the homeless will not simply disappear into the night.In concern with the Lower Courts third assertion that the new anti-camping regulations are constitutional the Appeals Court wrote and summarized their ruling:
In sum, the Park Service has failed to demonstrate that the government's interests will be furthered by keeping these putative protestors from the sleeping activity which is the sole point in dispute. We reverse, therefore, because the indiscriminate line the government seeks to draw against sleeping cannot pass first amendment muster. Accordingly, we grant CCNV the injunctive relief it seeks, enjoining the Park Service from prohibiting sleep at CCNV's demonstration.
The ruling was subsequently challenged and taken to the Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court issued its decision on June 29, 1984 and in a 7-2 majority vote in favor of the National Park Service, it held that the regulations did not violate the First Amendment. The Court stressed that expression is subject to reasonable time, place, and manner restrictions, also that the means of the protest went against the government's interest in maintaining the condition of the national parks. The Court felt that the protest was not being threatened altogether and that it could take place in a park where sleeping was permitted. In essence because the demonstrators could find alternative ways of voicing their message their First Amendment right was safe. The regulation in question is also considered to be content neutral meaning the regulation did not have a bias against a particular message.
Supreme Court Holding, Clark v. C.C.N.V.(a) Assuming that overnight sleeping in connection with the demonstration is expressive conduct protected to some extent by the First Amendment, the regulation forbidding sleeping meets the requirements for a reasonable time, place, or manner restriction of expression, whether oral, written, or symbolized by conduct. The regulation is neutral with regard to the message presented, and leaves open ample alternative methods of communicating the intended message concerning the plight of the homeless. Moreover, the regulation narrowly focuses on the Government's substantial interest in maintaining the parks in the heart of the Capital in an attractive and intact condition, readily available to the millions of people who wish to see and enjoy them by their presence. To permit camping would be totally inimical to these purposes. The validity of the regulation need not be judged solely by reference to the demonstration at hand, and none of its provisions are unrelated to the ends that it was designed to serve.
(b) Similarly, the challenged regulation is also sustainable as meeting the standards for a valid regulation of expressive conduct. Aside from its impact on speech, a rule against camping or overnight sleeping in public parks is not beyond the constitutional power of the Government to enforce. And as noted above, there is a substantial Government interest, unrelated to suppression of expression, in conserving park property that is served by the proscription of sleeping. 
 Majority opinion 
thumb|right|150px|Justice Byron White authored the majority opinion for Clark v. C.C.N.V.
Justice Byron White wrote the majority opinion. He addressed the important topic of neutrality of the regulation by stating 
The requirement that the regulation be content-neutral is clearly satisfied. The courts below accepted that view, and it is not disputed here that the prohibition on camping, and on sleeping specifically, is content-neutral and is not being applied because of disagreement with the message presented. Neither was the regulation faulted, nor could it be, on the ground that without overnight sleeping the plight of the homeless could not be communicated in other ways. The regulation otherwise left the demonstration intact, with its symbolic city, signs, and the presence of those who were willing to take their turns in a day-and-night vigil. Respondents do not suggest that there was, or is, any barrier to delivering to the media, or to the public by other means, the intended message concerning the plight of the homeless. He noted that symbolic expression is subject to reasonable time, place, and manner restrictions.[2] Justice White also makes mention of how important the O'Brien Test was in deciding this case. The O’Brien Test being a tool of the court established in United States v. O'Brien,. that determines whether governmental regulation involving symbolic speech can be justified. The restrictions of time, place, and manner can be allowed if they are (a) narrowly tailored (b) serve a substantial governmental interest and (c) there are alternative channels to communicate the information.
Contrary to the conclusion of the Court of Appeals, the foregoing analysis demonstrates that the Park Service regulation is sustainable under the four-factor standard of United States v. O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367 (1968), for validating a regulation of expressive conduct, which, in the last analysis is little, if any, different from the standard applied to time, place, or manner restrictions. 
Justice White also makes clear that in the view of the majority the act of sleeping holds little value in being considered an act of expression. 
In the first place, we seriously doubt that the First Amendment requires the Park Service to permit a demonstration in Lafayette Park and the Mall involving a 24-hour vigil and the erection of tents to accommodate 150 people. Furthermore, although we have assumed for present purposes that the sleeping banned in this case would have an expressive element, it is evident that its major value to this demonstration would be facilitative.
 Concurrence 
Chief Justice Warren E. Burger delivered a short concurring opinion that he begins by discussing the language of the case "could hardly be plainer in informing the public that camping in Lafayette Park was prohibited."Clark, 468 U.S. at 300 (Burger, C.J., concurring).  He states that purported demonstration was conduct, "the actions here claimed as speech entitled to the protections of the First Amendment simply are not speech; rather, they constitute conduct."  Chief Justice Burger expressed that the demonstrators actions "interferes with the rights of others to use Lafayette Park"Clark, 468 U.S. at 301.  and could take their message somewhere else. He also called the entire hearings "frivolous proceedings" that "delay the causes of litigants who have legitimate, nonfrivolous claims."
 Dissenting opinion 
Justice Thurgood Marshall delivered a dissenting opinion in which he stated his opinion but also criticized the way in which the majority handled the case. Justice Marshall also felt that the majority was "either unwilling or unable to take seriously the First Amendment claims advanced by respondents".Clark, 468 U.S. at 301 (Marshall, J., dissenting). He took issue with the way in which the majority "misapplies the test for ascertaining whether a restraint on speech qualifies as a reasonable time, place, and manner regulation".
Justice Marshall wrote a detailed case for saying that the sleeping aspect of the demonstration, while overlooked by the majority, was a central part for the homeless cause.
It is true that we all go to sleep as part of our daily regimen and that, for the most part, sleep represents a physical necessity and not a vehicle for expression. But these characteristics need not prevent an activity that is normally devoid of expressive purpose from being used as a novel mode of communication. Sitting or standing in a library is a common-place activity necessary to facilitate ends usually having nothing to do with making a statement. Moreover, sitting or standing is not conduct that an observer would normally construe as expressive conduct. However, for Negroes to stand or sit in a "whites only" library in Louisiana in 1965 was powerfully expressive; in that particular context, those acts became "monuments of protest" against segregation.Clark, 468 U.S. at 306.
Justice Marshall agreed with the O'Brien Test being applicable in this case but found fault in how it was explored. He explains that in terms of government interest "the issue is whether any substantial Government interest is served by banning sleep that is part of a political demonstration".Clark, 468 U.S. at 309. Justice Marshall's dissent holds a stark contrast to the majority and concurring opinions. Much of his statement makes it clear he believed the demonstrators' request to have the right to sleep was a genuine freedom of expression concern.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1984 in United States case law
"""

From "Clark v. Martinez" ==> """
Clark v. Martinez, 543 U.S. 371 (2005), was a United States Supreme Court case ending the pointless detention of people who had been denied refugee status. They were kept in prison awaiting deportation even though they could not in fact be deported due to a political stalemate with Cuba..  An alien can be found inadmissible on the grounds of poor health, criminal history, substance trafficking, prostitution/human trafficking, money laundering, terrorist activity, etc.. The deportation process requires a ruling from an immigration judge for violating immigration laws. The case resolved conflicting rulings made by the 9th and 11th circuits on whether Zadvydas v. Davis (2001). was applicable to inadmissible immigrants, Sergio Martinez and Daniel Benitez. The cases of Martinez and Benitez were later consolidated by the Supreme Court.
Zadvydas v. Davis stated that the government can detain admissible and admitted aliens only long enough beyond the 90-day removal period if necessary for deportation. If deportation is unforeseeable then the immigrant must be released. Zadvydas v. Davis fails to define if immigrants inadmissible to the U.S. have these same protections.
The Supreme Court decision (7-2) found that Zadvydas v. Davis was in fact applicable to inadmissible immigrants. In the case of Martinez and Benitez where deportation to Cuba is implausible, further detention is unnecessary. The court however did not grant constitutional protection from indefinite detention to inadmissible immigrants.
History
Cubans Sergio Suarez Martinez and Daniel Benitez gained access to the US in June 1980 via the Mariel Boatlift. By the time they had applied for legal permanent residence through the Cuban Refugee Adjustment Act; which allows Cubans who have been living in the US for a year to apply. Both men, however, had racked up significant criminal charges thus they could not qualify for the adjustment from refugee to legal permanent resident. 
"When Martinez sought adjustment in 1991, he had been convicted of assault with a deadly weapon in Rhode Island and burglary in California, Pet. for Cert. in No. 03-878, at 7; when Benitez sought adjustment in 1985, he had been convicted of grand theft in Florida, 337 F. 3d, at 1290. Both men were convicted of additional felonies after their adjustment applications were denied: Martinez of petty theft with a prior conviction (1996), assault with a deadly weapon (1998), and attempted oral copulation by force (1999), see Pet. for Cert. in No. 03-878, at 7-8; Benitez of two counts of armed robbery, armed burglary of a conveyance, armed burglary of a structure, aggravated battery, carrying a concealed firearm, unlawful possession of a firearm while engaged in a criminal offense, and unlawful possession, sale, or delivery of a firearm with an altered serial number (1993), see 337 F. 3d, at 1290-1291."
Both Martinez and Benitez had their parole revoked and faced deportation by Immigration and Naturalization Services (INS). While being detained by INS, Martinez and Benitez, each filed a petition for the writ of habeas corpus to challenge their indefinite detention.
On October 30, 2002, Martinez was granted petition by the United States District Court for the District of Oregon under Martinez v. Smith and was to be released at the digression of INS. Whereas Benitez was denied petition by the United States District Court for the Northern District of Florida under Benitez v. Wallis on July 11, 2002. These contracting interpretations of Zadvydas v. Davis led to the cases being consolidated by the United States Supreme Court.
Mariel Boatlift 1980
The Mariel Boatlift, was a series of boatlifts that took place from April 15 to October 31, 1980. The boatlift was responsible for the transport of 125,000 Cubans from the port of Mariel to southern Florida.  Within this time frame Fidel Castro allowed any Cuban who wanted to leave and had a permit to do so through the Port of Mariel. The United States Coast Guard began to see numerous personal vessels flood out of Key West and Miami, Florida. The first flood out of the U.S. were 20–40 ft pleasure boats belonging to Cuban American's who had relatives in Cuba.  By the 21st, a second flood of Cuban Americans attempting to rent or buy boats came. Not long after their departure for Mariel the Coast Guard began to receive distress calls and several search and rescue mission were required.
Of the 125,000 refugees 2,300 had previous criminal charges in Cuba, under U.S. law 2,746 were considered criminals. Many of the 2,746 criminals that applied for US residency under the 1984 Cuban Refugee Adjustment Act   were declared unfit due to the alien's disciplinary record and criminal record.
Controversy
Much of the controversy came from the ambiguous wording in Zadvydas v. Davis. Zadvydas v. Davis ruled that admissible aliens/ aliens who had already been granted US residency facing deportation may not be detained longer than the 90-day removal period. The use of "may" and "admissible" in the passage below led to confusion for the lower courts.
Justice Anthony Kennedy in dissent in Zadvydas had objected that
The majority's unanchored interpretation ignores another indication that the Attorney General's detention discretion was not limited to this truncated period. Section 1231(a)(6). permits continued detention not only of removable aliens but also of inadmissible aliens, for instance those stopped at the border before entry. Congress provides for detention of both categories within the same statutory grant of authority. Accepting the majority's interpretation, then, there are two possibilities, neither of which is sustainable. On the one hand, it may be that the majority's rule applies to both categories of aliens, in which case we are asked to assume that Congress intended to restrict the discretion it could confer upon the Attorney General so that all inadmissible aliens must be allowed into our community within six months. On the other hand, the majority's logic might be that inadmissible and removable aliens can be treated differently. Yet it is not a plausible construction of § 1231(a)(6) to imply a time limit as to one class but not to another. The text does not admit of this possibility. As a result, it is difficult to see why "[a]liens who have not yet gained initial admission to this country would present a very different question.
Kennedy's objection—that Zadvydas might be read to overturn prior cases and Constitutionally forbid the indefinite detention of aliens seeking "initial admission to this country"—was the question presented in Clark v. Martinez.
Clark v. Martinez also poses the controversial question of where aliens physically are while their status is being determined.
One of the government's tactics has been to deny release to people who are "paroled" into the United States, meaning that they are physically allowed into the country while their status is being determined. Technically, they are not considered to be "in" the country 
Aftermath
Martinez was held by INS until after the decision in 2005. Benitez was paroled and released to family sponsors, two days after his case was heard by the Supreme Court, October 15, 2004.
Daniel Benitez died March 29, 2005, just months after his case was decided in January, 2005. Sergio Suarez Martinez can be found as a registered sex offender, otherwise his whereabouts are unknown.
Implementation
With the decision of Clark v. Martinez, Mariel Cubans who have been under long term detention are to be released from custody. 
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:Deportation from the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Class v. United States" ==> """
Class v. United States, 583 U.S. ___ (2018), is a Supreme court decision related to the ability to challenge the constitutionality of a federal law if the defendant has already pleaded guilty.
Background
A federal grand jury indicted petitioner, Rodney Class, for possessing firearms in his locked jeep, which was parked on the grounds of the United States Capitol in Washington, D. C. See 40 U.S.C. § 5104(e)(1) (“An individual . . . may not carry . . . on the Grounds or in any of the Capitol Buildings a firearm”).. Appearing pro se, Class asked the District Court to dismiss the indictment. He alleged that the statute, § 5104(e), violates the Second Amendment and the Due Process Clause. After the District Court dismissed both claims, Class pleaded guilty to “Possession of a Firearm on U. S. Capitol Grounds, in violation of 40 U.S.C. § 5104(e).” App. 30. A written plea agreement set forth the terms of Class’ guilty plea, including several categories of rights that he agreed to waive. The agreement said nothing about the right to challenge on direct appeal the constitutionality of the statute of conviction. After conducting a hearing pursuant to Rule 11(b) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, the District Court accepted Class’ guilty plea and sentenced him. Soon thereafter, Class sought to raise his constitutional claims on direct appeal. The Court of Appeals held that Class could not do so because, by pleading guilty, he had waived his constitutional claims. 
Opinion of the Court
A guilty plea, by itself, does not bar a federal criminal defendant from challenging the constitutionality of his statute of conviction on direct appeal..
See also
2017 term opinions of the Supreme Court of the United States
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2018 in United States case law
"""

From "Clawson v. United States" ==> """
Clawson v. United States, 113 U.S. 143 (1885), was a case regarding a Utah territorial statute which authorized an appeal by a defendant in a criminal action from a final judgment of conviction, which provides that an appeal shall stay execution upon filing with the clerk a certificate of a judge that in his opinion there is probable cause for the appeal, and further provides that after conviction, a defendant who has appealed may be admitted to bail as of right when the judgment is for the payment of a fine only, and as matter of discretion in other cases, does not confer upon a defendant convicted and sentenced to pay a fine and be imprisoned the right, after appeal and filing of certificate of probable cause, to be admitted to bail except within the discretion of the court..
Background
The appellant, Rudger Clawson, having been found guilty by a jury in the District Court for the Third Judicial District of Utah, of the crimes of polygamy and unlawful cohabitation, charged in separate counts of the same indictment, was sentenced, on the conviction for polygamy, to pay a fine of $0 and to be imprisoned for the term of three years and six months, and, on the conviction for unlawful cohabitation, to pay a fine of $0 and be imprisoned six months. From the whole of the judgment an appeal was taken to the supreme court of the territory, and the judge before whom the trial was had given a certificate that in his opinion there was probable cause thereof. The appeal was perfected and the certificate was filed in the proper office.
The defendant thereupon applied to the court in which he was sentenced to be let to bail pending his appeal. The application was denied, the order reciting that
The accused then sued out an original writ of habeas corpus from the supreme court of the territory. In his petition therefor, he stated that he was then imprisoned and in the actual custody of the United States marshal for the territory at the penitentiary in the County of Salt Lake. He also averred that upon the denial of bail by the court in which he was tried, "he was remanded to the custody of said United States marshal, who from thenceforth has imprisoned and still imprisons him" under said order of commitment, which "is the sole and only cause and authority" for his "detention and imprisonment," that "his said imprisonment is illegal" in that "he has been and is able and now offers to give bail pending his appeal in such sum as the court may reasonably determine," and that "as a matter of right and in the sound exercise of a legal discretion, the petitioner is entitled to bail pending the hearing and determination of said appeal."
Decision
The supreme court of the territory overruled the application for bail, and remanded the petitioner to the custody of the marshal. From that order the present appeal was prosecuted.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
Notes
External links
114 U.S. 477, 5 S.Ct. 949, The RJ&L Religious Liberty Archive, The Religious Institutions Group (full case text)
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:United States law and polygamy in Mormonism
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:1885 in Christianity
Category:Criminal cases in the Waite Court
Category:19th-century Mormonism
Category:Christianity and law in the 19th century
"""

From "Clay v. Sun Insurance Office, Ltd." ==> """
Clay v. Sun Insurance Office, Ltd., 363 U.S. 207 (1960) and 377 U.S. 179 (1964), was a conflict of laws case that was twice heard by the Supreme Court of the United States, with an initial decision remanding the case for further proceedings in 1960, and a final resolution in 1964.
Clay v. Sun Ins. Office, Ltd. :: 
Facts
Plaintiff, while living in Illinois, bought an insurance policy from a company headquartered in the United Kingdom. The policy included a clause requiring that insured's seeking to sue on an insurance claim must do so within twelve months. The plaintiff later moved to Florida, which has five year statute of limitations for lawsuits brought on contracts. The plaintiff suffered a loss in Florida, and sued in Florida to recover under the policy. The District Court applied Florida law and allowed recovery.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit reversed, citing Home Insurance Co. v. Dick.281 U.S. 397 (1930).
1960 Supreme Court decision
The case was appealed to the United States Supreme Court, which first considered it in 1960, noting that the circuit court of appeals could not "make a competent guess" about how the Florida courts would construe an insurance statute. The court observed that the Florida legislature had passed a statute allowing the federal courts to certify questions of state law to the Florida Supreme Court, but that the Florida courts had not yet made a rule establishing procedures under the statute. After this decision, various states began to adopt statutes or rules allowing for the certification of questions of state law to state courts.Wendy L. Watson, McKinzie Craig, and Daniel Orion Davis, Federal Court Certification of State Law Questions The Supreme Court remanded Clay to the Fifth Circuit for reconsideration in an opinion drawing dissents from Justices Black and Douglass. After further litigation before the Court of Appeals, the case was again appealed to the Supreme Court in 1964, this time obtaining a final resolution.
1964 Supreme Court decision
On appeal in 1964, the Supreme Court considered whether the contacts between the defendant insurance company and the forum state of Florida were sufficient to avoid a violation of Fourteenth Amendment due process or of the Full Faith and Credit Clause. Justice Douglas, writing for the unanimous court, found that Home Insurance Co. v. Dick was distinguishable based on the absence of contacts between the claimant in that case and the state in which the lawsuit was brought. However, because insurance contracts are transitory, insurers must expect policy holders to move to other states, and for the policies to be subject to the laws of those states. The insurer in Clay's case did business throughout the United States, and had no particular affinity for the laws of Illinois, while Clay had ample contacts with Florida sufficient to satisfy Fourteenth Amendment due process or Full Faith and Credit.
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1960 in United States case law
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:Conflict of laws case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Clay v. United States" ==> """
Clay v. United States, 403 U.S. 698 (1971), was Muhammad Ali'sThe petitioner changed his name to "Muhammad Ali" for religious reasons. "Cassius Clay" was his birth name and that was the name under which he was called for induction and later prosecuted. appeal of his conviction in 1967 for refusing to report for induction into the United States military forces during the Vietnam War. His local draft board had rejected his application for conscientious objector classification. In a unanimous 8–0 ruling (Thurgood Marshall recused himself due to his previous involvement in the case as a U.S. Department of Justice official), the United States Supreme Court reversed the conviction that had been upheld by the Fifth Circuit.
The Supreme Court found the government had failed to properly specify why Ali's application had been denied, thereby requiring the conviction to be overturned: "the court said the record shows that [Ali's] beliefs are founded on tenets of the Muslim religion as he understands them.".
Background
In 1964, Ali failed the U.S. Armed Forces qualifying test because his writing and spelling skills were sub-standard. With the escalation of the Vietnam War, the test standards were lowered in November 1965 and Ali was reclassified as 1-A in February 1966, which meant he was now eligible for the draft and induction into the U.S. Army. When notified of this status, he declared that he would refuse to serve in the U.S. Army and publicly considered himself a conscientious objector. Ali stated that "War is against the teachings of the Holy Qur'an. I'm not trying to dodge the draft. We are not supposed to take part in no wars unless declared by Allah or The Messenger." He also said "We are not to be the aggressor but we will defend ourselves if attacked." Ali also famously said in 1966: "I ain't got no quarrel with them Viet Cong." and "Why should they ask me to put on a uniform and go ten thousand miles from home and drop bombs and bullets on brown people in Vietnam while so-called Negro people in Louisville are treated like dogs and denied simple human rights?"
Ali appealed his local (Louisville, Kentucky) draft board's rejection of his application for conscientious objector classification. The Justice Department, in response to the State Appeal Board's referral for an advisory recommendation, concluded, contrary to a hearing officer's recommendation, that Ali's claim should be denied, and that Ali did not meet any of the three basic tests for conscientious objector status. The Appeal Board then denied Ali's claim, but without stating its reasons.
In early 1967, Ali changed his legal residence to Houston, Texas, where his appeal to be reclassified as a Muslim minister was denied 4–0 on February 20. He appeared for his scheduled induction into the U.S. Armed Forces in Houston on April 28. As expected, he refused three times to step forward at the call of his name. An officer warned him he was committing a felony punishable by five years in prison and a fine of $10,000. Once more, Ali refused to budge when his name was called. As a result, on that same day, the New York State Athletic Commission suspended his boxing license and the World Boxing Association stripped him of his title. Other boxing commissions followed suit. He was indicted by a federal grand jury on May 8 and convicted in Houston on June 20 of the criminal offence of violating the Selective Service laws by refusing to be drafted. The trial jury was composed of six men and six women, all of whom were white. The Court of Appeals affirmed the conviction and denied an appeal on May 6, 1968.
In the U.S. Supreme Court, the government conceded the invalidity of two of the grounds for denial of Ali's claim given in its letter to the appeal board, but argued that there was factual support for the third ground.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court decision was handed down on June 28, 1971. The Supreme Court held that, since the appeal board gave no reason for the denial of a conscientious objector exemption to petitioner, and it was impossible to determine on which of the three grounds offered in the Justice Department's letter that board relied, Ali's conviction must be reversed. The Eugene Register-Guard, reporting on the Court's record, cited "...the boxer's beliefs 'are surely no less religiously based' than those in previous cases." The Court incorporated Welsh v. United  States, in which the Court had ruled that "moral and ethical objection to war was as valid as religious objection, thus broadening the qualifications."
Bob Woodward and Scott Armstrong provide an account of the development of the decision in their 1979 book The Brethren. According to that account, Justice Marshall had recused himself because he had been U.S. Solicitor General when the case began, and the remaining eight justices initially voted 5 to 3 to uphold Ali's conviction. However, Justice John Marshall Harlan II, assigned to write the majority opinion, became convinced that Ali's claim to be a conscientious objector was sincere after reading background material on Black Muslim doctrine provided by one of his law clerks. Justice Harlan concluded that the claim by the Justice Department had been a misrepresentation. Harlan changed his vote, tying the vote at 4 to 4. A deadlock would have resulted in Ali being jailed for draft evasion and, since no opinions are published for deadlocked decisions, he would have never known why he had lost. A compromise was proposed by Justice Potter Stewart, in which Ali's conviction would be reversed, citing a technical error by the Justice Department. This gradually won unanimous assent from the eight voting justices, all of whom, with Justice Marshall's recusal, were white.
See also
Muhammad Ali's Greatest Fight, a 2013 television film about the Supreme Court's deliberations on this case
References
External links
Category:Muhammad Ali
Category:American conscientious objectors
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:History of Louisville, Kentucky
Category:United States military case law
"""

From "Clearfield Trust Co. v. United States" ==> """
Clearfield Trust Co. v. United States, 318 U.S. 363 (1943), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that federal negotiable instruments were governed by federal law, and thus the federal court had the authority to fashion a common law rule.
Facts & procedural history
On April 28, 1936, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia mailed a check for $24.20, drawn on the Treasurer of the United States, to Clair Barner. The check was Barner's paycheck from the Works Progress Administration (WPA). Barner never received the check, which was stolen by an unknown party. The thief forged Barner's signature and cashed the check at the J.C. Penney department store in Clearfield, Pennsylvania, where the thief assumed the identity of Mr. Barner. J.C. Penney then turned the check over to Clearfield Trust Co. as its collection agent. Clearfield Trust Co. collected the check from the Federal Reserve Bank, knowing nothing about the forgery.
On May 10, 1936, Barner informed his supervisors at the WPA that he had not received his paycheck.  His complaint made its way up the chain of command, and on November 30, 1936, Barner signed an affidavit alleging that the endorsement of his name on the check was forged. Neither J.C. Penney Co. nor Clearfield Trust Co. had any notice of the forgery until January 12, 1937, when the U.S. government sent its first notice about it. The United States sent its initial request for reimbursement on August 31, 1937, and filed suit against Clearfield Trust Co. in the United States District Court for the Western District of Pennsylvania on November 16, 1939. The government based its cause of action on the express guaranty of prior endorsements by Clearfield Trust Co.
The District Court determined that the dispute should be governed by the state law of Pennsylvania.  It then dismissed the government's complaint on grounds of laches, holding that because the United States unreasonably delayed in notifying Clearfield Trust Co. of the forgery, it was barred from recovery.  The United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit reversed the dismissal.
Decision
Justice Douglas, writing for a unanimous United States Supreme Court, first distinguished the case from Erie Railroad Co. v. Tompkins, holding that because the U.S. government was exercising a constitutionally-permitted function in disbursing its own funds and paying its debts, the commercial paper it issues should be governed by federal law rather than state law. Thus, the Erie doctrine rule -- that a United States District Court must apply the law of the state in which it is sitting -- did not apply. In the absence of an applicable Act of Congress, a federal court had the right to fashion a governing common law rule by its own standards.
While the Court's decision explicitly retained the option of applying state law in fashioning a federal common law rule, the Court chose instead to fashion its own rule based on prior decisions. Justice Douglas identified a major federal interest in permitting the Court to fashion its own rule: uniformity in dealing with the vast amount of negotiable instruments and commercial paper issued by the federal government. Douglas reasoned that if each transaction were subject to the application of a multiplicity of different state laws, confusion and uncertainty in the administration of federal programs would be the result.
Justice Douglas chose to follow the rule set forth in United States v. National Exchange Bank of Providence, , in which the U.S. Supreme Court held that the U.S. government, “as drawee of commercial paper stands in no different light than any other drawee” and could recover on a check as a drawee from a person who had cashed a pension check with a forged endorsement, despite the government's protracted delay in giving notice of the forgery. The National Exchange Bank case held the government to conventional business terms, but said nothing about whether lack of prompt notice was a defense for nonpayment of a check. The Court held that the Pennsylvania state law -- requiring prompt notice from the drawee -- presumed injury to the defendant by the mere fact of delay. In this case, not only did Clearfield Trust Co. fail to demonstrate that it had suffered a loss because of the delay in notice, it could still recover the amount of the check from J.C. Penney, because none of its employees detected the fraud. The court chastised both companies for their "neglect and error" in accepting the forged check, and suggested that they should only be permitted to shift the loss to the drawee only when he can demonstrate that the delay in notice caused him damage.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 318
External links
Category:1943 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:Federal common law case law
Category:Negotiable instrument law
Category:JCPenney
Category:Conflict of laws case law
"""

From "Clerke v. Harwood" ==> """
Clerke v. Harwood, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 342 (1797), was a United States Supreme Court case that followed the court's decision in Ware v. Hylton, concerning debts owed to British subjects. In the Ware case, the Supreme Court had reversed a decision by the Maryland Court of Appeals, the state's highest court, and restored the decision of a Maryland trial court.
In the Clerke case, the Supreme Court considered what should happen to cases presenting a similar question, once the holding of their appeals-court decision had been reversed. Should they be sent back to the Maryland Court of Appeals, or directly back to the trial court? The Supreme Court also considered who should pay the court costs incurred before the Maryland Court of Appeals—the winner before that court, whose victory had since been reversed, or the ultimate winner of the entire case?
In a short per curiam opinion, the U.S. Supreme Court held that the case should be sent directly back to the Maryland trial court, with the ultimate losing party paying all court costs, even before the Maryland Court of Appeals, where it had won a temporary victory.Reports of decisions in the Supreme Court of the United States: with notes, and a digest, Volume 1 (Little, Brown, and Co., 1870) pg. 291 https://books.google.com/books?id=NEQPAAAAYAAJ
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 3
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Ellsworth Court
Category:1797 in United States case law
"""

From "Cleveland Board of Education v. LaFleur" ==> """
Cleveland Board of Education v. LaFleur, 414 U.S. 632 (1974), found that overly restrictive maternity leave regulations in public schools violate the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment and the Fourteenth Amendment.. 
Facts
The plaintiffs claimed that an employer's requirement to take maternity leave from public schools violated the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Judgment
On January 21, 1974, the Court delivered its ruling. The majority opinion  was delivered by Justice Stewart.
The Supreme Court ruled that the mandatory maternity leave rules were unconstitutional under the Due Process Clauses in the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. Essentially, the rules were found to be too arbitrary (fixed dates chosen for no apparent reason) and irrebuttable (having no relation to individual medical conditions and with no way to make exceptions for good reason). In the Court's opinion, Justice Stewart went on to explain:
Significance
This decision was a major step in protecting the rights of teachers, especially female teachers, from unfair prejudicial rules which would keep them from the profession of teaching. This decision also plays a critical role in the professionalization of teaching by protecting all teachers from arbitrary, political regulations which serve no pedagogical function. The case of LaFleur can also be seen as a building block for current family leave laws, e.g. Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993, which help to ensure that all people can keep their professions without giving up the ability, and the means, to have a family.
Teaching was one of the first careers outside of the home which was open to American women. As a result, in the late 19th century and the 20th century, women dominated the field of teaching.  In 1919, 86% of teachers were women. However, traditional attitudes in American society still held that a women's primary role should be that of housewife. This bias was shared by the male administrators and politicians, who generally ran the schools, and thus married women were discouraged from, and overlooked for, teaching positions. This was justified by the belief that men and single women needed the jobs more. Only after the World War II labor shortages were married women widely hired as teachers. 
After the war, many married women remained employed as teachers; however, traditional prejudices against them endured. The attitude changed focus into discrimination against pregnant women. In 1948, a National Education Association survey showed 43% of schools as having no maternity leave, and the rest having compulsory maternity leave. The compulsory maternity leave rules were grounded in the belief that women were incapable of making their own decisions about work, health care, and their professional competency. Most of these compulsory maternity leave rules required teachers to take leave 4-6 months before childbirth until well after the child was born, leaving visibly pregnant women basically unable to work. Virtually all maternity leave was unpaid. The stated rationale behind these compulsory maternity leave laws were: that pregnant women could not meet the physical or mental demands of the job, that pregnancy interrupted the continuity of instruction for students, and that pregnant women might get hurt on the job. In this case the court found that this reasoning was faulty, as women do not lose all sense and ability simply because they are visibly pregnant.
See also
US labor law
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 414
Cleveland Board of Education v. Loudermill (1985) - Another case involving the school district
References
External links
Category:1974 in United States case law
Category:United States public employment case law
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Education in Cleveland
Category:Parental leave in the United States
Category:History of Cleveland
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
Category:History of women in Ohio
"""

From "Cleveland Board of Education v. Loudermill" ==> """
Cleveland Board of Education v. Loudermill, 470 U.S. 532 (1985), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that:
certain public-sector employees can  have a property interest in their employment, per Constitutional Due Process. See Board of Regents v. Roth
this property right entails a right to "some kind of hearing" before being terminated—a  right to oral or written notice of charges against them, an explanation of the employer's evidence, and an opportunity to present their sides of the story.
thus, the pretermination hearing should be an initial check against mistaken decisions—not a full evidentiary hearing, but essentially a determination of whether there are reasonable grounds to believe that the charges against the employee are true and support the proposed action.
in this case, because the respondents alleged that they had no chance to respond, the District Court erred in dismissing for failure to state a claim.
As a result of the case, public sector employers are required to provide a Loudermill hearing and/or a Loudermill letter before terminating an employee.
 Background 
Facts
This case consolidated two Sixth Circuit cases in which Ohio employees, both "classified civil servants" under Ohio law and therefore could be terminated only for cause and with entitlement to posttermination administrative review,Ohio Rev. Code Ann. § 124.11 (1984) were terminated without being afforded a pretermination hearing to respond to the charges:
In the first, a security guard (James Loudermill) employed by the Cleveland Board of Education was dismissed for failing to disclose a prior felony conviction for grand larceny on his job application.
In the second, a school bus mechanic (Richard Donnelly) for the Parma Board of Education was discharged because he failed an eye examination.
Loudermill's early appeals
Loudermill filed an appeal with the Cleveland Civil Service Commission, which, after hearings before a referee and the Commission, upheld the dismissal some nine months after the appeal had been filed.  Although the Commission's decision was subject to review in the state courts, Loudermill instead filed suit in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Ohio.
Loudermill alleged that Sec. 124.34, the Ohio statute providing for administrative review, was unconstitutional on its face because it provided no opportunity for a discharged employee to respond to charges against him prior to removal, thus depriving him of liberty and property without due process. It was also alleged that the statute was unconstitutional as applied because discharged employees were not given sufficiently prompt postremoval hearings.
The District Court dismissed the suit for failure to state a claim on which relief could be granted, holding that because the very statute that created the property right in continued employment also specified the procedures for discharge, and because those procedures were followed, Loudermill was, by definition, afforded all the process due; that the post-termination hearings also adequately protected Loudermill's property interest; and that in light of the Commission's crowded docket the delay in processing his appeal was constitutionally acceptable.
Donnelly's early appeals
Richard Donnelly appealed to the Civil Service Commission, which ordered him reinstated a year later without backpay.  The District Court, relying on Loudermill's case, dismissed Donnelly's constitutional challenge for failure to state a claim.
Sixth Circuit
On a consolidated appeal, a divided panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit reversed in part and remanded.
The Court held that both respondents had been deprived of due process and that the compelling private interest in retaining employment, combined with the value of presenting evidence prior to dismissal, outweighed the added administrative burden of a pretermination hearing.
But with regard to the alleged deprivation of liberty and Loudermill's 9-month wait for an administrative decision, the court affirmed the judgment of the District Court, finding no constitutional violation.
 Opinion of the Court 
On certiorari, the United States Supreme Court affirmed and remanded. The majority opinion was written by Justice White, joined by Burger, Blackmun, Powell, Stevens, and O'Connor.
Holding
The Court held that all the process that is due is provided by a pretermination opportunity to respond, coupled with post-termination administrative procedures as provided by the Ohio statute. Since respondents alleged that they had no chance to respond, the District Court erred in dismissing their complaints for failure to state a claim.
Reasoning
In Part II, the Court found that tenured public employees (as characterized in the Ohio statute) "plainly" had a property interest in continued employment. Furthermore, the scope of this property interest was not determined by the procedures provided for its deprivation: The Due Process Clause provides that the substantive rights of life, liberty, and property cannot be deprived except pursuant to constitutionally adequate procedures; since the categories of substance and procedure are distinct, "property" cannot be defined by the procedures provided for its deprivation.
The Due Process Clause of the United States Constitution provides that certain substantive rights such as life, liberty, and property, cannot be deprived except pursuant to constitutionally adequate procedures. The categories of substance and procedure are distinct. Were the rule otherwise, the Clause would be reduced to a mere tautology. "Property" cannot be defined by the procedures provided for its deprivation any more than can life or liberty. The right to due process is conferred, not by legislative grace, but by constitutional guarantee. While the legislature may elect not to confer a property interest in public employment, it may not constitutionally authorize the deprivation of such an interest, once conferred, without appropriate procedural safeguards.
In Part III, the Court—reiterating that the essential requirements of due process are notice and an opportunity to respond—found that employees who have such a constitutionally protected property interest in their employment are entitled to "some kind of hearing" before being terminated. The need for some form of pretermination hearing is evident from a balancing of the competing interests at stake: the private interest in retaining employment, the governmental interests in expeditious removal of unsatisfactory employees and the avoidance of administrative burdens, and the risk of an erroneous termination.
In Part IV, the Court determined the scope of the required pretermination hearing: it need not definitively resolve the propriety of the discharge, but should be an initial check against mistaken decisions—essentially a determination of whether there are reasonable grounds to believe that the charges against the employee are true and support the proposed action. This arises from the essential requirements of due process, notice and an opportunity to respond. Thus, the employees were entitled to a pretermination opportunity to respond but not to a full evidentiary hearing. The employees were entitled to oral or written notice of charges against them, an explanation of the employer's evidence, and an opportunity to present their sides of the story. Because the respondents alleged that they had no chance to respond, the District Court erred in dismissing for failure to state a claim. The Due Process Clause of the United States Constitution provided that certain substantive rights, such as life, liberty, and property, could not be deprived except pursuant to constitutionally adequate procedures. The Court held that all the process that was due was provided by a pretermination opportunity to respond, coupled with post-termination administrative proceedings as provided by Ohio statute. As respondents alleged that they had no chance to respond, the district court erred in dismissing for failure to state a claim.
In Part V, the court found that a 9-month delay in Loudermill's posttermination hearing did not constitute a separate due process violation. The Due Process Clause requires provision of a hearing "at a meaningful time," and here the delay stemmed in part from the thoroughness of the procedures.
Concurrence
Justice Marshall concurred in Part II and in the judgment, stating that before a decision is made to terminate an employee's wages, the employee should be entitled to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses and to present witnesses on his own behalf whenever there are substantial disputes in testimonial evidence.
Justice Brennan concurred in part and dissented in part, expressing the view that the record was insufficiently developed to permit an informed judgment on the issue of administrative delay and that the security guard's case should be remanded for further evidentiary proceedings.
Dissent
Justice Rehnquist dissented, expressing the view that the Fourteenth Amendment does not support the conclusion that the state's effort to confer a limited form of tenure upon the employees resulted in the creation of a "property right" in their employment.
See also
Arnett v. Kennedy (1974) - Property interest in employment held by Federal employees
Cleveland Board of Education v. LaFleur (1974) - Another case involving the school district
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 470
References
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States civil due process case law
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:Education in Cleveland
Category:United States public employment case law
Category:History of Cleveland
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1984 in education
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
"""

From "Cleveland Terminal and Valley R. Co. v. Cleveland S. S. Co." ==> """
Cleveland Terminal and Valley Railway Co. v. Cleveland Steamship Co., 208 U.S. 316 (1908), is a decision by the United States Supreme Court which held that damages caused to a bridge pier, bridge protective pilings, and docks by a vessel on navigable waters was not a cause for action under United States maritime law. The ruling was legislatively overturned in 1948.
Background
thumb|left|The Moore wedged between the riverside docks and the east pier of the viaduct.
The Cuyahoga River in the U.S. state of Ohio began to flood about January 21, 1904, after two days of continuous rain and a sudden spring thaw melted the area's snowpack and river ice. The  unpowered ore barge William E. Reis was moored to some timber pilings located near Columbus Street in Cleveland, Ohio. The heavily laden Reis broke free and began floating downriver. She crashed into the  steamboat John W. Moore and the  steamboat James B. Eads, doing heavy damage to them and tearing both loose from their moorings. All three vessels continued to float stern-first down the swift, flood-swollen Cuyahoga, the unladen Eads and Moore proceeding downstream faster. The Cleveland, Terminal and Valley Railway (CT&V) owned a swing bridge over the Cuyahoga, located near the intersection of Riverbed and Sycamore Streets. The operators managed to open the swing in the hope that the vessels would pass by. The stern of the Eads struck the east pier of the Superior Viaduct (a bridge carrying Superior Avenue across the river), and her bow swung into the center of the river—striking the center pier of the CT&V swing bridge. The Moore, following the Eads, struck a dock co-owned by the CT&V and the Detroit & Cleveland Navigation Company and then jammed stern first into the space between the eastern pier of the Superior Viaduct and the bank of the river. The bow of the Moore then was forced by the floodwaters against the shore, crushing the dock.  The Reis became wedged between the other two vessels.
The three vessels partially dammed the river. The river’s now constrained and redirected current undermined the ships and carved  away a large portion of the riverbed, doing considerable damage to the piers of the CT&V swing bridge and the Superior Viaduct.
The owners of the vessels damaged by the Reis sued in rem to recover their costs. The Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, which owned a controlling interest in the CT&V, also sued to recover the cost of repairing the swing bridge pier and pilings and the dock. The United States District Court for the Northern District of Ohio, Eastern Division, sitting as a court of admiralty, found that the ship's owners had failed to properly staff the vessel during the flood, and that the lone shipkeeper aboard the Reis had failed to properly maintain the vessel's moorings during the flood. But United States maritime law, the district court said, did not permit the CT&V from recovering its costs. The dock, pier, and pilings were neither "an instrument of or an aid to navigation", it held, and thus no action was available to the railroad under maritime law.
The railroad appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, which upheld the district court.
The railway appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
Ruling
Chief Justice Melville Fuller delivered the opinion of the unanimous court.
In , aff'd. , the Supreme Court had held that a case for damages under maritime law could proceed only if "the substance and consummation" of the wrong had taken place on navigable waters. In each case, the fact that a fire began aboard a ship and spread to land did not bring the tort under admiralty law. In , the Supreme Court held that there was no cause under maritime law in the case where a ship's jib struck a building on land. However, in , the Supreme Court had held that damage to a maritime navigation beacon permanently attached to the sea floor was properly brought under admiralty law. The Blackheath appeared to overrule the previous cases.
The Court held that The Blackheath had properly distinguished a purely maritime aid to navigation (like a beacon) attached to the bed beneath navigable waters from other structures.  "[T]he bridges, shore docks, protection piling, piers, etc., pertained to the land. They were structures connected with the shore and immediately concerned commerce upon land. None of these structures were aids to navigation in the maritime sense, but extensions of the shore, and aids to commerce on land as such," Fuller wrote.
The judgement of the district court was affirmed.
Subsequent developments
The "aids to navigation" rule outlined in Cleveland Terminal and Valley Railway was widely incorporated into American admiralty jurisprudence over the next 40 years. In , the Supreme Court dismissed per curiam a case where a vessel had struck a railroad bridge over the Mississippi River. The high court similarly dismissed per curiam a cause for action in  (a vessel struck a pipe lying on the riverbed). In , the Supreme Court permitted a cause for damages to go forward because it was not filed as a maritime action. Cleveland Terminal and Valley Railway was explicitly upheld by the Court in . There, the court held that a navigational beacon still under construction qualified as an "aid to navigation", and its incomplete nature (nor the temporary construction structures supporting that construction) did not remove it from admiralty jurisdiction.
The definition of "aid to navigation" began to become cloudy, however, after  In that case, a ship struck and damaged a levee that had been constructed on a riverbed. The levee was designed to aid navigation by gathering silt (which otherwise would spread into the ship channel), and was not connected to the shore. Nevertheless, the Supreme Court said, "We think the principle of those cases [Blackheath, Raithmoor] does not go so far. The dike constitutes an extension of the shore, and must be regarded as land." The court held no case could proceed under maritime law. The Supreme Court further muddied the waters with its ruling in  Various ships had damaged pilings driven into a riverbed and used for mooring. At trial, the parties agreed that the pilings were not an aid to navigation. Yet, the Supreme Court without explanation reversed this finding and permitted the cause for damages to go forward under admiralty law.
The Supreme Court's ruling in Cleveland Terminal and Valley Railway Co. v. Cleveland Steamship Co. stood until 1948.  That year, Congress enacted the Extension of Admiralty Jurisdiction Act, which extended tort claims under U.S. maritime law to include cases caused by a vessel on navigable waters, whether or not the action occurred or was consummated on land.
References
Bibliography
External links
Category:1908 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States admiralty case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Cleveland v. United States (1946)" ==> """
Cleveland v. United States, 329 U.S. 14 (1946), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that notwithstanding the fact that polygamy is a person's religious belief, the Mann Act prohibits the transportation of women across state lines to participate in polygamy.Cleveland v. United States, .
Background
Individuals were members of a fundamentalist Mormon sect that practiced polygamy.  The individuals were indicted for transporting women across state lines to enter into plural marriages.  Following a bench trial, all of the individuals were convicted for violations of the Mann Act.   They then appealed their convictions to the U.S. Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals, which affirmed the convictions.  The U.S. Supreme Court then granted certiorari to hear the case.
Opinion of the court
Affirmed.  Justice William O. Douglas delivered the opinion of the court.
The Court held that transporting a woman or girl across state lines for the purpose of making her a plural wife in a polygamous marriage is a violation of the Mann ActMann Act, 36 Stat. 825, 18 U.S.C. § 398 because it is for "an immoral purpose."   In explaining its reasoning, the court opined that although the Mann Act was primarily intended to target commercialized white sex slave trade, the phrase "for any other immoral purpose" makes plain that the Act is not so narrowly limited.   In noting the historical unlawfulness of polygamy in the United States, the Court found polygamy to be an immoral act of the type contemplated by the Mann Act's prohibitions.
Finally, the Court found that there is no viable defense to the Mann Act by virtue of the religious beliefs that motivate the practice of polygamy.
Concurring opinion
Justice Wiley Blount Rutledge delivered a concurring opinion.  Justice Rutledge agreed with the majority's decision insofar as the majority opinion followed the precedent set in Caminetti v. United States.. However, Rutledge diverged from the majority view in expressing his opinion that the Caminetti case was wrongly decided, as it improperly expanded the application of the Mann Act beyond the legislators' intent.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Frank Murphy delivered a dissenting opinion, stating that polygamy is not of the same genus as "prostitution and debauchery" as contemplated by the Mann Act.
See also
 Cleveland v. United States, 
References
External links
Category:1946 in religion
Category:1946 in United States case law
Category:20th-century Mormonism
Category:Abrogated United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:United States law and polygamy in Mormonism
Category:Mann Act
Category:Sex case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
"""

From "Cleveland v. United States (2000)" ==> """
Cleveland v. United States, 531 U.S. 12 (2000), was a United States Supreme Court case that concerned the definition of "property" under the federal mail fraud statute. In a unanimous decision, the Court held that "property" for the purposes of federal law did not include state video poker licences because such transactions were not a vested right or expectation.
Background
The federal mail fraud statute proscribes the use of the mails in furtherance of "any scheme or artifice to defraud" as illegal activity. Part of the statute indicates that such schemes relating to "obtaining money or property" by false pretenses is covered. Carl W. Cleveland was prosecuted under the statute. The state alleged Cleveland had deceived another company relating to video poker license renewals. Before trial, he unsuccessfully attempted to get the charges dismissed. A jury later found him guilty and he was sentenced to over 100 months in prison.  Cleveland appealed.
The Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the conviction and sentence, holding that "property" did in fact include video poker licenses in the "hands of the state". After a series of appellate courts split on this issue, the Supreme Court granted certiorari.
Opinion of the Court
Justice  Ginsburg delivered the unanimous decision of the Supreme Court which reversed the Fifth Circuit and vacated Cleveland's sentence. The basis for the decision was two-fold: first, the Court had held in a previous case that the federal mail fraud statute is "limited in scope to the protection of property rights". This meant that, taken in context of the purpose of the law, there was no intangible right for honest services in terms of the video poker licenses; therefore, there was no "property" interest. Moreover, the Court additionally found that the state interest in keeping the licenses process honest and proper would not be enough to link an economic interest to the "rights" idea contained in the federal statute.
See also
 Cleveland v. United States (1946)
Notes
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:Mail and wire fraud case law
Category:Video poker
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Clinton v. City of New York" ==> """
Clinton v. City of New York, 524 U.S. 417 (1998),Clinton v. City of New York, . was a landmark decision by the Supreme Court of the United States in which the Court held, 6–3, that the line-item veto, as granted in the Line Item Veto Act of 1996, violated the Presentment Clause of the United States Constitution because it impermissibly gave the President of the United States the power to unilaterally amend or repeal parts of statutes that had been duly passed by the United States Congress. Justice John Paul Stevens wrote for the six-justice majority that the line-item veto gave the President power over legislation unintended by the Constitution, and was therefore an overstep in their duties.
Background of the case
The Line Item Veto Act allowed the president to "cancel", that is to void or legally nullify, certain provisions of appropriations bills, and disallowed the use of funds from canceled provisions for offsetting deficit spending in other areas.
Political circumstances
The 1994 midterm elections signaled an upheaval in American politics known as the Republican Revolution, with the Republican Party taking control of both houses of the U.S. Congress from Democrats. Key to that revolution was the Republicans' Contract with America, which included a list of actions they promised to take if they gained control of Congress. Among this list was the Line Item Veto Act itself, one of two provisions designed to ensure congressional fiscal conservatism. The Act was the only provision of the "Contract with America" that President Clinton supported.
Initial litigation
At its passage, the Act was politically controversial, with many Democrats breaking with Clinton to oppose it. Of the opposition, six members of Congress, including Republican Mark Hatfield, sued to prevent use of the line-item veto. They were granted summary judgment by the U.S. District Court, but the Supreme Court held that the Congressmen lacked standing because they could not show any particularized harm, and dismissed their suit in Raines v. Byrd, 521 U.S. 811 (1997). Within the next two months, Clinton began using the line-item veto, prompting several entities to file suit in a second attempt to have the Act declared unconstitutional.
In the second case, which was consolidated from two cases by the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia, the City of New York and several organizations related to health care alleged injury from President Clinton's cancellation of certain provisions of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 that eliminated certain liabilities, and Snake River Potato Growers, Inc. alleged injury from the President's cancellation of certain provisions of the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 that gave tax benefits to aid farmer's cooperatives in purchasing potato processing facilities.
The District Court ruled for the plaintiffs, holding that the Line Item Veto Act was unconstitutional. Because the Act established an expedited appeal process for challenges, the case was directly appealed from the District Court to the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court's decision
In a majority opinion written by Justice John Paul Stevens, the Court ruled that because the Act allowed the President to unilaterally amend or repeal parts of duly enacted statutes by using line-item cancellations, it violated the Presentment Clause of the Constitution,U.S. Const. art. I, § 7, cl. 2 which outlines a specific practice for enacting a statute. The Court construed the silence of the Constitution on the subject of such unilateral Presidential action as equivalent to "an express prohibition", agreeing with historical material that supported the conclusion that statutes may only be enacted "in accord with a single, finely wrought and exhaustively considered, procedure", and that a bill must be approved or rejected by the President in its entirety.
Kennedy's concurrence
Justice Anthony M. Kennedy, in an opinion concurring in the opinion and judgment of the Court, objected to the dissent's argument that the Act did not violate principles of the separation of powers and threaten individual liberty, stating that the "undeniable effects" of the Act were to "enhance the President's power to reward one group and punish another, to help one set of taxpayers and hurt another, to favor one State and ignore another". Kennedy's concurrence implicitly viewed the statute as a violation of the nondelegation doctrine.
Breyer's dissent
In a dissenting opinion, Justice Stephen Breyer contended that the objective of the Act was constitutionally proper and was consistent with powers that the President has held in the past, stating that the Act "does not violate any specific textual constitutional command, nor does it violate any implicit Separation of Powers principle". He extensively refers to many different cases which support the delegation of power by the Congress, and primarily suggests that the Act is an efficient means by which a constitutionally legitimate end may be achieved.
Scalia's partial concurrence and partial dissent
In an alternative opinion, Justice Antonin Scalia objected to the Court's consideration of the case with respect to the Taxpayer Relief Act, finding no party in the case with standing to challenge it. However, he did find a party with standing to challenge the President's cancellation in the Balanced Budget Act, and concluded that it did not violate the Constitution, because the Congress has the power to delegate the discretionary authority to decline to spend appropriated sums of money, which he asserted was equivalent to cancellation.
Critical response
Michael B. Rappaport argued that the original meaning of the Constitution does not apply to certain parts of the nondelegation doctrine, relying on his interpretation of the Executive Power Vesting Clause. Under this view, "laws that authorize the withdrawal of money from the treasury and which have traditionally taken the form of authorizing a certain amount to be spent for particular programs ... are not subject to the nondelegation doctrine".Rappaport at 265. He further criticized the majority opinion for failing to satisfactorily justify its application of a stricter standard to the delegation of cancellation authority than it had used in the past for other executive delegations. In Rappaport's opinion, "the Court’s approach to cancellation authority has no basis in text, structure and purpose, or precedent".Rappaport at 290.
J.Stephen Kennedy wrote that the majority of the Supreme Court was sufficiently concerned with the constitutional challenges to the line item veto presented to declare the act wholly unconstitutional, instead of relying on other traditional and less sweeping ways of correcting acts of Congress. In his view, "the Court’s decision sent a clear message of finality for any future use of the line item veto".Kennedy at 371. Kennedy also noted that while the majority relied on a strict interpretation or literal textual reading of the Presentment Clause contained in Article I of the United States Constitution, Justice Scalia, in his dissent, "stray[ed] somewhat from his usual strict constructionist approach ... by stressing that the President's act of cancellation would only occur after satisfaction of the Presentment Clause".Kennedy at 372.
Steven F. Huefner wrote that "Although the Presentment Clause analysis of the Line Item Veto Act has superficial appeal, it ultimately does not withstand scrutiny",, at 339. arguing that the Court should have relied on the nondelegation doctrine in order to invalidate the Act, as it provided a superior basis for such a decision. Huefner named two main implications of the Court's refusal to use the nondelegation doctrine. First, it suggests that the Court seems unready or unwilling to alter the existing interpretation of the nondelegation doctrine.Huefner at 340. Second, the Court has shown that it is willing to rely upon alternative rationales to achieve the same result "as would a more robust nondelegation doctrine rationale". This approach is significant because in theory, such a rationale could endanger previously accepted delegations to the executive.
Roy E. Brownell II criticized the Clinton administration for its exercise of the Line Item Veto Act, charging that it should have restricted its cancellation powers only to statutory provisions that remain in the realm of national security. He argued that had the Clinton administration limited its use of the Line Item Veto Act in this fashion, it would have ensured that when the constitutionality of the Act was inevitably challenged, the challenge would have been based on terms most favorable to the Executive. Brownell suggested that a test case brought forth on the grounds of national security would have likely acknowledged the existence of "National Security Rescission", "a narrow statutory construction limiting the area of presidential cancellation power to within the field of national security. Such a result ... would have assured that the President maintained cancellation authority over a sixth of the federal budget."Brownell at 1280.
Steven G. Calabresi argued that although the Court had denied this, the instant decision was really a "Nondelegation doctrine case masquerading as a bicameralism and presentment case"., at 85. He also suggested that this decision was "the blockbuster separation of powers case of the Rehnquist years".Calabresi at 86.
Subsequent developments
Though the Supreme Court struck down the Line Item Veto Act in 1998, President George W. Bush asked Congress to enact legislation that would return the line item veto power to the Executive. First announcing his intent to seek such legislation in his January 31, 2006 State of the Union address, President Bush sent a legislative proposal Legislative Line Item Veto Act of 2006 to Congress on March 6, 2006, urging its prompt passage. Senator Bill Frist, Senator John McCain, and Republican Whip Senator Mitch McConnell jointly introduced this proposal.
On that same day, Joshua Bolten, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, gave a press conference on the president's line-item veto proposal. Bolten explained that the proposed Act would give the President the ability to single out "wasteful" spending and to put such spending on hold. While the spending line-item is on hold, the President can send legislation to Congress to rescind the particular line-item. The proposal would then be considered in both houses within ten days on an up or down basis, and could be passed by a simple majority. Additionally, such proposals could not be filibustered.
When asked how this proposed legislation was different from the 1996 Line Item Veto Act that was found unconstitutional by the United States Supreme Court, Bolten said that whereas the former act granted unilateral authority to the Executive to disallow specific spending line items, the new proposal would seek Congressional approval of such line-item vetoes. Thus, in order for the President to successfully rescind previously enacted spending, a simple majority of Congress is required to agree to specific legislation to that effect.
Though the newer line-item veto proposal was much weaker than the 1996 version, it nevertheless failed to find strong support in Congress. Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia called it "an offensive slap at Congress", asserting that the legislation would enable the president to intimidate individual members of Congress by targeting the projects of his political opponents. He also complained that the line-item veto as proposed would take away Congress' constitutional "power of the purse" and give it to the executive branch.
On June 8, 2006, Viet D. Dinh, Professor of Law at Georgetown University Law Center, and Nathan Sales, John M. Olin Fellow at Georgetown University Law Center testified by written statement before the House Committee on the Budget on the constitutional issues in connection with the proposed legislation. Dinh and Sales argued that the Legislative Line Item Veto Act of 2006 satisfies the Constitution's Bicameralism and Presentment Clause, and therefore avoids the constitutional issues raised in the 1996 Act struck down by the Supreme Court. They also stated that the proposed Act is consistent with the basic principle that grants Congress broad discretion to establish procedures to govern its internal operations.
The proposed Act was approved by the House Budget Committee on June 14, 2006 by a vote of 24–9. It was approved in the full House on June 22. A similar bill was submitted in the Senate, but failed to win approval. The Legislative Line Item Veto Act has therefore not become law.
See also
 Line-item veto
INS v. Chadha (1983)
 Signing statement
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 524
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
Notes
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States separation of powers case law
Category:Bicameralism and Presentment case law
Category:History of New York City
Category:Legal history of New York (state)
Category:Veto
Category:1998 in United States case law
Category:1998 politics in New York (state)
Category:United States nondelegation doctrine case law
Category:City of New York litigation
"""

From "Clinton v. Jones" ==> """
Clinton v. Jones, 520 U.S. 681 (1997), was a landmark United States Supreme Court case establishing that a sitting President of the United States has no immunity from civil law litigation, in federal court, for acts done before taking office and unrelated to the office..  In particular, there is no temporary immunity and thus no delay of federal cases until the President leaves office.
Background of the case
On May 6, 1994, former Arkansas state employee Paula Jones filed a sexual harassment suit against U.S. President Bill Clinton and former Arkansas State Police Officer Danny Ferguson. She claimed that on May 8, 1991, Clinton, then Governor of Arkansas, propositioned her. David Brock had written, in the January 1994 issue of The American Spectator, that an Arkansas state employee named "Paula" had offered to be Clinton's mistress. According to the story, Ferguson had escorted Jones to Clinton's hotel room, stood guard, and overheard Jones say that she would not mind being Clinton's mistress.
The suit, Jones v. Clinton, was filed in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Arkansas. Jones, represented by Attorneys Joseph Cammarata and Gilbert K. Davis, sought civil damages from the President, whose request to file a motion to dismiss the case on the grounds of presidential immunity was approved on July 21, 1994. On December 28, 1994, Judge Susan Webber Wright ruled that a sitting President could not be sued and deferred the case until the conclusion of his term, essentially granting him temporary immunity (although she allowed the pre-trial discovery phase of the case to proceed without delay in order to start the trial as soon as Clinton left office).
Both parties appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit, which ruled in favor of Jones, finding that "the President, like all other government officials, is subject to the same laws that apply to all other members of our society."
Clinton then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, filing a petition for writ of certiorari.
Supreme Court's decision
In a unanimous decision, the Supreme Court affirmed the decision of the Court of Appeals. In the majority opinion by Justice John Paul Stevens, the Court ruled that separation of powers does not mandate that federal courts delay all private civil lawsuits against the President until the end of his term of office.
The court ruled that they did not need to decide "whether a claim comparable to petitioner's assertion of immunity might succeed in a state tribunal" (a state court), but noted that "If this case were being heard in a state forum, instead of advancing a separation-of-powers argument, petitioner would presumably rely on federalism and comity concerns". The court also found that "our decision rejecting the immunity claim and allowing the case to proceed does not require us to confront the question whether a court may compel the attendance of the President at any specific time or place." In his concurring opinion, Breyer argued that presidential immunity would apply only if the President could show that a private civil lawsuit would somehow interfere with the President's constitutionally assigned duties.
Aftermath
On April 1, 1998, U.S. District Court Judge Susan Webber Wright granted summary judgment to Clinton in Jones v. Clinton.  A witness in Jones v. Clinton, Monica Lewinsky, denied having engaged in a sexual relationship with Clinton.  A Lewinsky friend, Linda Tripp, had recorded conversations where Lewinsky discussed her affair with Clinton.  Tripp then turned the tapes over to Kenneth Starr, an independent counsel investigating Clinton's misconduct in office.  The revelations from these tapes became known as the Lewinsky scandal.
In the Court's opinion in Clinton v. Jones, Stevens had written, "...it appears to us highly unlikely to occupy any substantial amount of petitioner's time."  The Supreme Court's ruling in Clinton v. Jones led to the District Court's hearing of Jones v. Clinton, which led to the Lewinsky scandal, when Clinton was asked under oath about other workplace relationships, which led to charges of perjury and obstruction of justice and the impeachment of Bill Clinton.
On April 12, 1999, Wright found Clinton in contempt of court for "intentionally false" testimony in Jones v. Clinton, fined him $90,000, and referred the case to the Arkansas Supreme Court's Committee on Professional Conduct, as Clinton still possessed a law license in Arkansas.Clinton found in civil contempt for Jones testimony - April 12, 1999
The Arkansas Supreme Court suspended Clinton's Arkansas law license in April 2000.  On January 19, 2001, Clinton agreed to a five-year suspension and a $25,000 fine in order to avoid disbarment and to end the investigation of Independent Counsel Robert Ray (Starr's successor).  On October 1, 2001, Clinton's U.S. Supreme Court law license was suspended, with 40 days to contest his disbarment.  On November 9, 2001, the last day for Clinton to contest the disbarment, he opted to resign from the Supreme Court Bar, surrendering his license, rather than facing penalties related to disbarment.
In the end, Independent Counsel Ray said:
The Independent Counsel’s judgment that sufficient evidence existed to prosecute President Clinton was confirmed by President Clinton’s admissions and by evidence showing that he engaged in conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice.
More specifically, the Independent Counsel concluded that President Clinton testified falsely on three counts under oath in Clinton v. Jones.  However, Ray chose to decline criminal prosecution in favor of what the Principles of Federal Prosecution call "alternative sanctions".  This included being impeached:
As a consequence of his conduct in the Jones v. Clinton civil suit and before the federal grand jury, President Clinton incurred significant administrative sanctions.  The Independent Counsel considered seven non-criminal alternative sanctions that were imposed in making his decision to decline prosecution: (1) President Clinton’s admission of providing false testimony that was knowingly misleading, evasive, and prejudicial to the administration of justice before the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Arkansas; (2) his acknowledgement that his conduct violated the Rules of Professional Conduct of the Arkansas Supreme Court; (3) the five-year suspension of his license to practice law and $25,000 fine imposed on him by the Circuit Court of Pulaski County, Arkansas; (4) the civil contempt penalty of more than $90,000 imposed on President Clinton by the federal court for violating its orders; (5) the payment of more than $850,000 in settlement to Paula Jones; (6) the express finding by the federal court that President Clinton had engaged in contemptuous conduct; and (7) the substantial public condemnation of President Clinton arising from his impeachment.
These seven sanctions, Ray reasoned, were "sufficient", and therefore he did not pursue further sanctions in a criminal proceeding.IV. Analysis of Potential Violations of Federal Criminal Law  of Final Report of the Independent Counsel In Re: Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan Association Regarding Monica Lewinsky and Others March 6, 2002   
See also
Nixon v. Fitzgerald (1982)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 520
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States executive privilege case law
Category:Clinton administration controversies
Category:1997 in United States case law
Category:Trials of political people
"""

From "Coates v. City of Cincinnati" ==> """
Coates v. City of Cincinnati, 402 U.S. 611 (1971), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a local city ordinance that made it a criminal offense for three or more persons to assemble on a sidewalk and “annoy” any passersby was unconstitutionally vague..  Dennis Coates participated in a protest along with four other unnamed students, all of whom were convicted of violating the city ordinance. Coates appealed to the Ohio Supreme Court, which upheld the conviction. However, this conviction was overturned in the divided United States Supreme Court decision. The Court found that the ordinance was unconstitutionally vague and violated the First Amendment freedom of assembly.
 Background 
In 1956 Cincinnati, Ohio passed an ordinance which provided that:
Dennis Coates, a student, and four other appellants, participated in a demonstration in Cincinnati, Ohio and were convicted of violating said law by conducting themselves in an ‘annoying manner.’ Coates appealed to the Ohio Supreme Court, alleging that the ordinance and his conviction violated the First and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution. Coates argued that the ordinance interfered with the First Amendment protection of the right of the people to peaceably assemble, and that the ordinance as written was so vague that it violated the due process guarantees of the Fourteenth Amendment.Coates, 402 U.S. at 612. Relying on Cameron v. Johnson, a Mississippi anti-picketing case, the Ohio Supreme court found that "annoying" was not unconstitutionally vague and affirmed Coates' conviction.Coates, 402 U.S. at 613.
 Opinion of the U.S. Supreme Court 
By a 5–4 vote, the United States Supreme Court struck down the Cincinnati ordinance, finding that it "is unconstitutionally vague because it subjects the exercise of the right of assembly to an unascertainable standard, and unconstitutionally broad because it authorizes the punishment of constitutionally protected conduct."Coates, 402 U.S. at 614. Justice Stewart delivered the opinion of the court, explaining that as the ordinance specified no standard of conduct at all (annoying conduct being based mainly on personal opinion), "men of common intelligence must necessarily guess at its meaning." Given its breadth, the ordinance would give the city the power to punish conduct which would otherwise be constitutionally protected. Additionally, the ordinance violated the constitutionally protected right of free assembly, a core guarantee which could not be abridged merely because someone might be "annoyed." Additionally, such a ordinance would give the state an unlawful power to punish virtually any act.
 Black's opinion 
Justice Black wrote a separate opinion, neither concurring nor dissenting with the court's opinion. While he agreed with the majority that the court had jurisdiction to hear the case and that a vague law could constitute a due process violation, Black did not find that the ordinance was facially unconstitutional. Black argued that the ordinance could have both constitutional and unconstitutional applications, and that the factual record from the trial was insufficient to determine which had occurred. Therefore, he argued that the case ought to be sent back to the Ohio Supreme Court to elucidate exactly how the state considered Coates’s actions ‘annoying’. 
Laws creating circumstances where individuals are left unclear about whether their actions are permitted are ultimately too vague to be constitutional. Black backed this claim with relation to a previous case, Lanzetta v. New Jersey, where the state attempted to label unlawful occupation by repeated lawbreakers as a “gangster”. This was declared as unconstitutionally vague as a statement under the Supreme Court.
Black wrote that he would have vacated and remanded the case. Coates, 402 U.S. at 616-617 (Black, J.).
 Dissent 
Justice White, along with Justices Burger and Blackmun, dissented, agreeing with Black that the ordinance was not facially unconstitutional. White noted that "as a general rule, when a criminal charge is based on conduct constitutionally subject to proscription and clearly forbidden by a statute, it is no defense that the law would be unconstitutionally vague if applied to other behavior. Such a statute is not vague on its face. It may be vague as applied in some circumstances, but ruling on such a challenge obviously requires knowledge of the conduct with which a defendant is charged" To White, it was not clear what conduct Coates had engaged in, and it might have been conduct within the power of the city to punish. In other words, he believed the ordinance held up under law, but ought to be reviewed on a case-by-case basis.Coates, 402 U.S. at 620 (White, J., dissenting).
 Similar Cases 
In Cleveland v. Anderson, a 2013 Ohio Court of Appeals case, the Cuyahoga County Court of Appeals ruled that “As it is written, the disorderly assembly ordinance could be used to incriminate nearly any group or individual. With little effort, one can imagine many . . . assemblages which, at various times, might annoy some persons in the city of Cleveland… Neither the police nor a citizen can hope to conduct himself in a lawful manner if an ordinance which is designed to regulate conduct does not lay down ascertainable rules and guidelines to govern its enforcement. This ordinance represents an unconstitutional exercise of the police power of the city of Cleveland, and is therefore void." The Court of Appeals questioned the constitutionality of the law because they believed that it enabled any act to be prosecuted on the streets. 
 See also 
 Cincinnati v. Discovery Network, Inc.
Cleveland v. Anderson
 References 
External links
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States freedom of association case law
Category:Freedom of assembly
Category:Void for vagueness case law
Category:History of Cincinnati
Category:1956 in Ohio
"""

From "Cochrane v. Deener" ==> """
Cochrane v. Deener, 94 U.S. 780 (1876), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a process transforming grain meal into purified flour was patentable.. This decision provided significant guidance on the patentability of processes and helped to shape the understanding of what constitutes a patentable invention in the United States.
In this case, the plaintiff, Cochrane, alleged that Deener infringed on his patented process for manufacturing purified flour. Deener argued that the patent was invalid because the process was not a patentable subject matter. The case ultimately reached the Supreme Court, which was tasked with determining whether the process in question was eligible for patent protection.
Justice Bradley, writing for the majority, established the principle that a process could be patentable if it involved a transformation or reduction of an article to a different state or thing. The Court found that Cochrane's process, which involved the application of mechanical and chemical operations to remove impurities from grain meal and produce purified flour, met this requirement.
The Court's decision in Cochrane v. Deener clarified the scope of patentable subject matter, specifically with regard to processes. By establishing that processes involving transformations of matter were eligible for patent protection, the Court significantly expanded the range of innovations that could be patented. This case remains an important precedent in the field of patent law and serves as a foundational example of the patentability of processes.
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1876 in United States case law
"""

From "Coeur Alaska, Inc. v. Southeast Alaska Conservation Council" ==> """
Coeur Alaska, Inc. v. Southeast Alaska Conservation Council, 557 U.S. 261 (2009), is a United States Supreme Court case that was decided in favor of Coeur Alaska's permit to dump mine waste in a lake. The case addressed tailings from the Kensington mine, an underground mine located  in Alaska. The gold mine had not operated since 1928, and Coeur Alaska obtained a permit in 2005 from the United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) to dispose of up to 4.5 million tons of tailings in Lower Slate Lake, which is located in a National Forest.
The suit was filed by three environmental non-governmental organizations and brought before the United States District Court for the District of Alaska who found in favor of Coeur Alaska.  The District Court's decision was overturned by the U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals before being brought before the Supreme Court, who also found in favor of Coeur Alaska.
The ruling was praised by the National Mining Association for the economic benefit it provided.  Environmental groups criticised the decision for the impact it would have on Lower Slate Lake, and the opportunity for its use as a precedent in the future.  In March 2009 proposed legislation, the Clean Water Protection Act, was introduced in Congress to remove mining waste from the definition of "fill material."
 Background 
In 2005 Coeur Alaska Inc., a subsidiary of Coeur d'Alene Mines, successfully applied for a tailings disposal permit from the USACE. The permit allowed Coeur Alaska to dispose of 4.5 million tons of tailings from the Kensington gold mine,  north of Juneau, into Lower Slate Lake.  The mine operated in the early 20th century, but had been inactive since 1928.  The lake is  from the mine, within the Tongass National Forest.
left|thumb|The boundary of the Kensington Mine Lease and the proposed Julian Mine.|alt=A satellite image of the Kensington Mine Lease, and the proposed Julian Mine.The discharge of material into waters of the United States is regulated under the Clean Water Act by either the USACE or the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), depending on what the material is. Discharge of "fill material" falls under the jurisdiction of the USACE; discharge of other pollutants falls under the jurisdiction of the EPA.  In 2005 Coeur was granted a permit to dispose of tailings into Lower Slate Lake by the USACE under section 404 of the Clean Water Act.  The decision was based on the definition of "fill material" which had been revised in 2002 under the administration of George W. Bush. This new definition allowed some contaminants to be included in mine waste and still be classified as fill. The permit allowed Coeur to dump 4.5 million tons of a combination of waste rock and tailings into Lower Slate Lake over a period of ten years, causing the floor elevation of the lake to rise by .
After the USACE issued the permit, the Southeast Alaska Conservation Council, the Sierra Club, and Lynn Canal Conservation Inc. filed suit. The suit claimed that the permit was issued in violation of sections 301(a), 301(e), and 306(e) of the Clean Water Act. The United States District Court for the District of Alaska found that the USACE was correct in its application of section 404 of the act, because the permit was for "fill material", and therefore not covered under or in violation of sections 301(e) and 306(e).
In May 2007 the District Court's 2006 decision was overturned by the U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals. The Circuit Court found in favor of the non-governmental organizations, ruling that discharge of tailings was not permitted under the EPA's New Source Performance Standard.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court found in favor of Coeur Alaska by a vote of 6-3, agreeing that the USACE is indeed the appropriate body to issue a permit to discharge mine waste into Lower Slate Lake. In her dissent, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg stated that currently discharging pollutants into a lake is permitted provided there is enough material to raise the lake's floor elevation, thereby turning it into a waste disposal site.  Ginsburg voiced concern about the potential for pollution regulation to not apply to several industries (mining included) on the basis of this loophole.
 Subsequent developments 
thumb|right|Aerial view of the Comet portal of the Kensington mine.|alt=The Comet portal of the Kensington mine, located atop a large rock pile within a forest.
The decision was praised by the National Mining Association, which stated that it would "provide employment and greater economic certainty for all those involved in the project".  Alaska Governor Sarah Palin also welcomed the ruling, calling it a "green light for responsible resource development". The environmental groups that originally filed suit against Coeur Alaska were unhappy with the decision. Environmental groups stated that the proposed material includes aluminum, lead, and mercury (among other metals), and that discharging into Lower Slate Lake will have a detrimental effect on the lake and surrounding waters.  A representative from Earthjustice warned of the ruling being used as a precedent, allowing other companies to discharge pollutants into other rivers and lakes.   Following the court's decision share prices of Coeur d'Alene Mines rose over 5%.
In March 2009 a bill, the Clean Water Protection Act, was introduced in Congress by Frank Pallone and Dave Reichert.  The Clean Water Protection Act would have changed the definition of "fill material" in the Clean Water Act.  Under the new definition "fill material" would have excluded mine waste.
 See also 
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 557
List of United States Supreme Court cases
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States environmental case law
Category:Environmental impact of mining
Category:2009 in the environment
Category:2009 in United States case law
"""

From "Coffin v. United States" ==> """
Coffin v. United States, 156 U.S. 432 (1895), was an appellate case before the United States Supreme Court in 1895 which established the presumption of innocence of persons accused of crimes.
F. A. Coffin and Percival B. Coffin, plaintiffs in error, and A. S. Reed had been charged with aiding and abetting the former president of the Indianapolis National Bank, Theodore P. Haughey, in misdemeanor bank fraud between January 1, 1891, and July 26, 1893.
It is a complex case with a 50-count indictment. But the most interesting aspect is commentary by the Court regarding presumption of innocence:
In the decision, the Court then goes on to detail the complete legal history of presumed innocence.
See also
 Reasonable doubt
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 156
Further reading
External links
Category:1895 in United States case law
Category:United States criminal burden of proof case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Cohen v. Beneficial Industrial Loan Corp." ==> """
Cohen v. Beneficial Industrial Loan Corp., 337 U.S. 541 (1949), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court in the wake of the decision in Guaranty Trust Co. v. York that signified a high deference to state law in choice of law issues for federal courts sitting in diversity.
 Facts 
Cohen's estate filed a shareholder derivative action in 1943 in federal court via diversity jurisdiction. The estate's complaint asserted that since 1929 the managers and directors of Beneficial Industrial Loan Corp. had abused their positions to enrich themselves personally at the expense of the corporation. In 1945, New Jersey passed a law that required shareholders who held less than 5% of the total shares and less than $50,000 to pay the legal bills of the defendant corporation if the suit was unsuccessful. Because the issue at hand occurred in New Jersey, the corporation wanted Cohen's estate to post a $125,000 bond to ensure they would meet that potential burden. The estate argued that applying the New Jersey law to the case would be unconstitutional because the law was enacted after the estate initially brought suit and because the law was an unconstitutional hindrance.Cohen v. Beneficial Industrial Loan Corp., 337 U.S. 541, 69 S. Ct. 1221, 93 L. Ed. 1528 (1949)
 Opinion of the Court 
The case involved a small shareholder suing a corporation, and a New Jersey statute required the shareholder to post bond for expenses.  The Federal Rules of Civil Procedure did not require such a bond, and the court held that the state law should be followed.  The court reasoned that the state law created a liability for litigation expenses that should be included.Yeazell, S.C.  Civil Procedure, Seventh Edition.  Aspen Publishers, New York, NY: 2008, p. 236
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:Diversity jurisdiction case law
Category:1949 in United States case law
Category:Conflict of laws case law
"""

From "Cohen v. California" ==> """
Cohen v. California, 403 U.S. 15 (1971), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court holding that the First Amendment prevented the conviction of Paul Robert Cohen for the crime of disturbing the peace by wearing a jacket displaying "Fuck the Draft" in the public corridors of a California courthouse.
The Court ultimately found that displaying a mere four-letter word was not sufficient justification for allowing states to restrict free speech and that free speech can be restricted only under severe circumstances beyond offensiveness. The ruling set a precedent used in future cases concerning the power of states to regulate free speech in order to maintain public civility.
Background
Facts of the case
On April 26, 1968, 19-year-old Paul Robert Cohen was arrested for wearing a jacket bearing the words "Fuck the Draft" in a corridor of the Los Angeles Hall of Justice.Cohen v. California, 403 U.S. 15, 16 (1971);  1412 (8th ed. 2009); , Cohen v. California, 403 U.S. 15 (1971), 1  (Paul Finkelman, ed. 2006); , Cohen v. California,   (Richard A. Parker, ed. 2003). Cohen was reportedly at court to testify as a defense witness in an unrelated hearing, and had removed his jacket on entering the courtroom., Cohen v. California at 161; Daniel Farber,  Civilizing Public Discourse: An Essay on Professor Bickel, Justice Harlan, and the Enduring Signicance of Cohen v. California , 1980  283, 286–87 (1980) (hereafter cited as Farber, Discourse).
An officer who had noticed his jacket in the corridor requested that the judge hold Cohen in contempt of court, but the judge did not take any action.Farber, Discourse at 286. The officer then waited until Cohen exited the courtroom and arrested him for disturbing the peace., Cohen v. California at 161; Farber, Discourse at 286.  Cohen claimed that he wore the jacket in an act of protest against the Vietnam War, to inform others of the depth of the feelings.Cohen, 403 U.S. at 16. He was convicted of violating section 415 of the California Penal Code, which prohibited "maliciously and willfully disturb[ing] the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or person [by] tumultuous or offensive conduct", and sentenced to 30 days in jail.Cohen, 403 U.S. at 16;  at 10; , Cohen v. California at 161; Farber, Discourse at 287.
Lower courts
Cohen appealed the conviction to the Appellate Department of the Superior Court, which in a memorandum opinion ruled that "conduct that is merely offensive is insufficient".Ferber, Discourse at 287. The State then requested a rehearing, and the Superior Court then added, in a more lengthy opinion, that according to the California Penal Code, offensive conduct must also be tumultuous. The state then appealed to the California Court of Appeal, which upheld the conviction with the claim that "offensive conduct" means "behavior which has a tendency to provoke others to acts of violence or to in turn disturb the peace".
According to the ruling, Cohen had "carefully chose[n] the forum for his views where his conduct would have an effective shock value" and that he should have known that the words on his jacket could have resulted in violent reactions.Cohen, 403 U.S. at 18; Ferber, Discourse at 287–88. The California Court of Appeal also stated that Cohen used words that were below the "minimum standard of propriety and the accepted norm of public behavior".People v. Cohen, 81 Cal.Rptr. 503, 509 (Cal. App., 1969), rev'd sub nom. Cohen v. California, 403 U.S. 15 (1971) (internal citations omitted). The opinion stated that California could determine what language was not suitable for use in public, an expansion of First Amendment jurisprudence., Cohen v. California at 163; Farber, Discourse at 292. After the California Supreme Court denied review, the U.S. Supreme Court granted a writ of certiorari on June 22, 1970.Cohen, 403 U.S. at 18; , Cohen v. California at 161; Ferber, Discourse at 288.
Supreme Court
Arguments
The case was argued by Melville Nimmer, representing Paul Robert Cohen, and Michael T. Sauer, representing California.Cohen, 403 U.S. at 15;  at 14. Anthony G. Amsterdam filed an amicus curiae brief for the American Civil Liberties Union of Northern California, in support of Cohen.Cohen, 403 U.S. at 15. At the beginning of oral argument, Chief Justice Warren Burger advised Nimmer that it would not be necessary to "dwell on the facts", effectively stating that Nimmer should not state the word on the jacket.Oral argument, Cohen v. California,  (last visited Aug 3, 2019) (hereinafter cited as "Oral argument"); Thomas G. Krattenmaker, Looking Back at Cohen v. California: A 40 Year Retrospective from Inside the Court, 20  654–55 (2012). Seconds later, Nimmer did exactly that, stating that "What this young man did was to walk through a courthouse corridor wearing a jacket on which were inscribed the words, 'Fuck the Draft.'"Oral argument;  153 (2011). Nimmer believed that if he did not say the word, it would concede that there are some places that certain words cannot be uttered and the case would be lost. at 153. Nimmer also distinguished what Cohen did from contempt of court, emphasizing that Cohen did not display the jacket in a courtroom while a court was in session.Oral argument;  at 16–17.
Sauer's argument was that the conviction should stand as is, that the very words were offensive conduct by themselves, even when there was no objection by anyone present.Oral argument; Farber, Discourse at 292–292, and at fn 65, 292. Sauer also argued that the violation consisted of both speech and conduct, and that the conduct was not protected speech.Oral argument;  at 18–19; Krattenmaker, Looking Back at fn 33, 657–58. Sauer noted that the statute read that it was an offense to "disturb the peace of any neighborhood or person" and that since persons were present that could be offended, Cohen's conviction should be upheld.Oral argument. Sauer did concede that the case turned on the display of the "four-letter word" when pressed on it by Justice Potter Stewart.Oral argument;  at 18.
Opinion
thumb|250px|left|alt=John Marshall Harlan II portrait|Justice John Harlan wrote the majority opinion in Cohen.
Justice John Harlan announced the decision of the Court, which reversed the appellate court's ruling in a 5–4 decision.Cohen, 403 U.S. at 26. First, Justice Harlan's opinion confirmed that the issue with which the Court was dealing consisted of "a conviction resting solely upon 'speech', [citation], not upon any separately identifiable conduct".  Because the conviction was based on speech, Justice Harlan stated that the defendant may be criminally punished only if his speech (the words on his jacket) fell within a specific category of speech that is not protected by the First Amendment.Cohen, 403 U.S. at 18Farber, Discourse at 290. The justice then outlined why the word "fuck" did not fall into one of those categories.Cohen, 403 U.S. at 19–20; Farber, Discourse at 292.  As Justice Harlan said in the decision, "...while the particular four-letter word being litigated here is perhaps more distasteful than most others of its genre, it is nevertheless often true that one man's vulgarity is another's lyric".Cohen, 403 U.S. at 25.
 Blackmun's dissent 
In a dissenting opinion, Justice Harry Blackmun, joined by Burger and Black, suggested that Cohen's wearing of the jacket in the courthouse was not speech but conduct (an "absurd and immature antic") and therefore not protected by the First Amendment.
The second paragraph of Blackmun's dissent noted that the Supreme Court of California interpreted section 415 in In re Bushman, 1 Cal.3d 767, 463 P.2d 727 (Cal, 1970), which was decided after the Court of Appeal of California's decision in Cohen v. California and the Supreme Court of California's denial of review. The appeal court's ruling was cited in Bushman. Blackmun wrote that the case "ought to be remanded to the California Court of Appeal for reconsideration in the light of the subsequently rendered decision by the State's highest tribunal in Bushman" since the interpretation of section 415 used in the appeal court's ruling may no longer be the authoritative interpretation.
 Subsequent jurisprudence 
The Cohen ruling has been cited in many subsequent court rulings.
National Socialist Party of America v. Village of Skokie
The National Socialist Party of America v. Village of Skokie was a 1977 United States Supreme Court case. It concerned the constitutionality of an injunction against members of the National Socialist Party of America prohibiting them from holding a march in Skokie, Illinois, which had a large Jewish population. The Illinois Supreme Court and the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit cited Cohen v. California in their respective rulings on the case. The rulings in both courts found that, while the actions of the Nazi marchers were offensive to Jewish Skokie residents, mere offensiveness was not enough to justify curtailing free speech and assembly. In the Illinois Supreme Court ruling, the opinion states, "The decisions of that [Supreme] court, particularly Cohen v. California (1971) ... in our opinion compel us to permit the demonstration as proposed, including display of the swastika."
Specifically, the Cohen ruling was used to justify whether the actions of the Nazi marchers could be classified as "fighting words", which are among several categories of speech that are not protected by the First Amendment. In U.S. Supreme Court case Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire (1942), fighting words were defined as "those that inherently cause harm or are likely to result in an immediate disturbance". In the Skokie ruling, the Court instead relied on the ruling from Cohen that stated that offensiveness was not a sufficient justification for curtailing free speech. Subsequently, the Court ruled that it was unconstitutional to prohibit the march on the grounds that a swastika was a "fighting word", as the offense it caused to the audience was irrelevant to the law.
R.A.V. v. St. Paul
R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul was a 1992 United States Supreme Court case which ruled that St. Paul's Bias-Motivated Crime Ordinance was unconstitutional because it discriminated by the content of "fighting words". The Court stated that while the law applied to "fighting words", which are not protected under the First Amendment, it was unconstitutional because it specifically targeted fighting words that "insult or incite violence on the basis of race, religion, or gender". In its ruling, the Court acknowledged that while cross-burning was an abhorrent act, the ordinance was nevertheless void and the defendants could be prosecuted by other means. In his opinion on the ruling, Justice John Paul Stevens cited Cohen in his claim that "we have consistently construed the 'fighting words' exception set forth in Chaplinsky narrowly".
The State of Washington v. Marc D. Montgomery
In State of Washington v. Marc D. Montgomery, 15-year-old Montgomery successfully won an appeal overturning his convictions for disorderly conduct and possession of marijuana on the grounds of free speech. Montgomery was arrested after shouting obscenities, such as "fucking pigs, fucking pig ass hole" at two police officers passing in their patrol car. Citing Cohen v. California, the Court ruled that Montgomery's words could not be classified as fighting words, and restricting speech based merely on its offensiveness would result in a "substantial risk of suppressing ideas in the process".
FCC v. Pacifica Foundation
In the Supreme Court case Federal Communications Commission v. Pacifica Foundation (1978), the Court ruled that the commission could regulate broadcasts that were indecent, but not necessarily obscene. In the ruling, the Court stated that while the Cohen ruling disputed that Cohen's speech would offend unwilling viewers, and that no one in the courthouse had actually complained, the commission was responding to a listener's complaint. Furthermore, the ruling noted that the while Cohen was sentenced to 30 days in jail, "even the strongest civil penalty at the commission's command does not include criminal prosecution".
In the dissenting opinion, the ruling cited Cohen to argue that listeners could simply turn the radio off, and therefore offensive speech on the radio did not infringe on people's right to privacy.
Bethel School District v. Fraser
In Supreme Court case Bethel School District v. Fraser (1986), the court ruled that public schools had the right to regulate speech that was indecent, but not necessarily obscene. The Court stated that while adults could not be prohibited from using offensive speech while making a political statement, this protection did not extend to public school students. The ruling cited New Jersey v. T.L.O., arguing that "the constitutional rights of students in public school are not automatically coextensive with the rights of adults in other settings".
Other cases
The following is an incomplete list of other court cases that have cited Cohen v. California:
State of Louisiana v. Meyers, 462 So.2d 227 (1984)
Collin v. Smith, 578 F.2d 1197 (7th Cir. 1978)
Lewis v. City of New Orleans, 415 U.S. 130 (1974)
Gooding v. Wilson, 405 U.S. 518 (1972)
New Jersey v. T.L.O., 469 U.S. 325 (1985)
 Scholarly response 
In his critique of the Cohen ruling, Professor R. George Wright wrote that it would be reasonable to expect all speakers to maintain at least a minimum level of decorum in their speech, such that they do not disrespect "substantial numbers of reasonably tolerant people". Wright pushed back on claims made by other scholars that Cohen should not be censored because the word "Fuck" in the phrase "Fuck the Draft" expressed the depth of Cohen's emotion, and instead argued that it is risky to assume that a slogan, "profane or otherwise, is likely to be particularly apt in expressing deep frustrations". He further argued that Cohen's emotions should not be assumed from his willingness to offend. Subsequently, Wright claimed that the effect of speech on the level of public discourse should not be ignored. Legal scholar Archibald Cox similarly argued that the expression, "Fuck the Draft", in the Cohen ruling unnecessarily lowered the standard of public debate.
In his retrospective on the ruling, legal scholar Thomas Krattenmaker points out that at the time of the ruling, uttering the word "Fuck" in public, especially in the presence of women, was exceptionally rare, and that it was not unreasonable that Cohen aimed to be offensive in his use of the word. Despite this, Krattenmaker states that the Cohen ruling successfully addresses and disputes arguments that Cohen's speech should not be protected because of the location of the speech, its perceived obscenity, and its potential classification as "fighting words". However, Krattenmaker does argue that governments should perhaps have more power to regulate hurtful speech, and criticizes the Court's treatment of the captive audience problem for providing little direction for future rulings.
Legal scholar William Cohen also noted the limitations of the ruling in providing guidance on whether profanity should still be protected in certain locations or given certain audiences. Cohen argues that because the ruling is "narrowly limited to its facts", it has not been used in future cases pertaining to the regulation of offensive speech, such as FCC v. Pacifica Foundation. As a result, the ruling has been contradicted in future cases that have attempted to interpret the limitations of the First Amendment in specific contexts.
See also
 Mahanoy Area School District v. B.L. (2021), a case involving the word fuck by a pupil while off campus and outside of school hours
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 403
 Notes 
References
Further reading
External links
 First Amendment Library entry for Cohen v. California
 ; a retrospective on the case by Thomas G. Krattenmaker, the Supreme Court clerk who drafted the majority opinion
Category:Conscription in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Legal history of California
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:1971 in California
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Protests against the Vietnam War
"""

From "Cohen v. Cowles Media Co." ==> """
Cohen v. Cowles Media Co., 501 U.S. 663 (1991), was a U.S. Supreme Court case holding that the First Amendment freedom of the press does not exempt journalists from generally applicable laws.. 
Dan Cohen, a Republican associated with Wheelock Whitney's 1982 Minnesota gubernatorial run, provided inculpatory information on the Democratic challenger for Lieutenant Governor, Marlene Johnson, to the Minneapolis Star Tribune and St. Paul Pioneer Press in exchange for a promise that his identity as the source would not be published. Over the reporters' objections, editors of both newspapers independently decided to publish his name. Cohen consequently lost his job at an advertising agency. He sued Cowles Media Company, who owned the Minneapolis Star Tribune.
In 1988, a jury of six found in Cohen's favor. The Minnesota Supreme Court reversed. The United States Supreme Court, while refusing to reinstate the damages, remanded the case to the Minnesota Supreme Court, which reinstated the jury's original verdict of $200,000.
The Cowles Media Company was found liable based on a theory of promissory estoppel.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court found, in a majority decision, that:
 Against respondent's claims that it had no jurisdiction: citing Orr v. Orr (1979), whether the arguments in inferior courts were federal law arguments was irrelevant, and moreover the Minnesota  Supreme Court had used federal law and respondent had relied on First Amendment protection.
 Promissory estoppel being a state action, the Fourteenth Amendment applies, and hence the First Amendment is triggered, citing New York Times Co. v. Sullivan (1964). However, since the state principle of promissory estoppel is a generally applicable principle, there is no specific application of the First Amendment to the press, over and above that of any other citizen, citing Associated Press v. NLRB (1937). Cohen had not used the promissory estoppel argument to avoid the hurdle of a libel case, but for identifiable pecuniary losses, distinguishing the case from Hustler Magazine, Inc. v. Falwell (1988). Consequently, any restriction on reporting was "incidental, and constitutionally insignificant" result of applying a generally applicable law.
 Deciding whether the claim under promissory estoppel was valid, and whether the state constitution shielded the press, was a matter for the Minnesota Supreme Court, and on that basis the request for reinstatement of damages was denied, and the case remanded to the inferior court.
Dissents
Justice Blackmun's dissent focussed on the proposition that applying promissory estoppel punished the publication of truth.
Justice Souter's dissent was based on the balance of "the importance of the information to public discourse" to the other interests involved. In this case the potential effect of the publication of Cohen's identity on an election for public office was thought to be compelling.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 501
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 Promissory estoppel
References
Further reading
  This author was Cohen's lawyer at the original trial.
External links
Category:1991 in United States case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Cohens v. Virginia" ==> """
Cohens v. Virginia, 19 U.S. (6 Wheat.) 264 (1821), is a landmark case by the Supreme Court of the United States that is most notable for the Court's assertion of its power to review state supreme court decisions in criminal law matters if defendants claim that their constitutional rights have been violated.. The Court had previously asserted a similar jurisdiction over civil cases involving U.S. parties.
The defendants were members of a prominent Baltimore banking family. A U.S. senator and two U.S. representatives served as attorneys for the opposing sides. The two defendants, Mendes I. Cohen and Philip J. Cohen, would later rise to the positions of U.S. Army Colonel and Maryland Delegate (Mendes), and U.S. Postmaster (Philip).Jean Edward Smith, John Marshall: Definer Of A Nation, New York: Henry Holt & Company, 1996, pp. 456-459 
Background
thumb|1818 portrait of Mendes I. Cohen by artist Joseph Wood. Smithsonian American Art Museum.
Congress passed a bill to establish a National Lottery to raise money for the District of Columbia that was conducted by the municipal government. Meanwhile, Virginia had established its own state lotteries and passed a law to prohibit the sale of out-of-state lottery tickets.
Philip and Mendes Cohen were brothers and managed the Norfolk, Virginia branch of Cohens Lottery and Exchange Office of Baltimore, Maryland. The Cohen firm was a leading vendor of lottery tickets in the United States through its offices in New York, Philadelphia, Charleston, and Norfolk and nationwide through the mail. The firm had a strong reputation in an otherwise-unsavory field and was known for quick payouts to winners. Their reputation helped the firm later become successful in the insurance and banking fields. The firm had been established in 1812 by an older brother, Jacob I. Cohen, Jr., who had emigrated from Bavaria and brought each of his five brothers into the firm. He later was elected to and served as a president of the Baltimore City Council.Cohen, The 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia
On June 1, 1820, both Cohens were charged by authorities in Norfolk with selling tickets in Virginia for the National Lottery. The brothers were convicted in a local court and fined $100.
The issue was significant as "lotteries were one of the chief means by which governments raised capital in the" early 19th century. The case challenged the "free flow of commerce" embodied in the U.S. Constitution and could have emboldened other states to challenge the sale of National Lottery tickets in their jurisdictions.
The Cohens hired two of the country's top lawyers for their appeal: U.S. Senator William Pinkney of Maryland and David A. Ogden, who had recently retired as a U.S. Representative from New York. Pinkney, an acquaintance of the Cohen family and a strong proponent of the necessary and proper clause and the doctrine of sovereign immunity, organized a public relations campaign on behalf of the federal government's powers in this case.
Judicial history
The state courts found that the Virginia law prohibiting sale of out-of-state lotteries could be enforced, notwithstanding the act of Congress authorizing the D.C. lottery. The Cohens appealed to the United States Supreme Court by arguing that their conduct was protected by the Act of Congress authorizing the D.C. lottery.
The Supreme Court concluded with two opinions on this case that were published together. The first opinion, containing the major rulings of constitutional and historical significance, concerned Virginia's motion to dismiss for purported lack of US Supreme Court jurisdiction. The ruling was issued on March 2, 1821, and asserted the Supreme Court's constitutional right to jurisdiction in this case.  
Having resolved the significant jurisdictional issues, the Court issued an opinion the next day on the merits of the case: it construed the Congressional statute as authorizing a lottery only in the City of Washington, District of Columbia. (At the time, the District of Columbia consisted of two cities, the other being Alexandria. In the 1840s, it was retroceded to the State of Virginia so that its major slave market could be operated outside the federal capital.) It upheld the convictions of the Cohens in Virginia.
The main issue in Cohens v. Virginia was the preliminary issue of whether the Supreme Court had jurisdiction to hear an appeal in a criminal case decided by the courts of Virginia. Virginia argued that the U.S. Constitution does not give the Supreme Court appellate jurisdiction over criminal judgments by the state courts. Virginia also argued that the U.S. Constitution does not give the Supreme Court appellate jurisdiction over cases in which a state is a party. In effect, Virginia argued that its decision was final and could not be reviewed by the federal courts even though the decision involved the interpretation and application of an act of Congress. Virginia asserted that it had an unreviewable right to interpret and apply federal law as it saw fit.
The Supreme Court relied on Article III, Section 2, of the U.S Constitution, which grants the Supreme Court jurisdiction in "all Cases, in Law and Equity, arising under this Constitution, the Laws of the United States, and Treaties made, or which shall be made, under their Authority." The Court found that the U.S. Constitution provides no exceptions to this grant of jurisdiction for cases arising in the state courts or for cases in which a state is a party. Therefore, under its language, all cases arising under federal law are within the its grant of appellate jurisdiction. That conclusion was reinforced by the Supremacy Clause of Article VI, which makes federal law superior to state law.
The Court stated that if state court decisions involving federal law were unreviewable by the federal courts, each state could prevent the federal government from executing federal laws in that state and thus allow each state a veto power over federal law. The Court found that to be inconsistent with the language and the intent of the U.S. Constitution, including the explicit grant of judicial power to the federal courts: 
"There is certainly nothing in the circumstances under which our Constitution was formed, nothing in the history of the times, which would justify the opinion that the confidence reposed in the States was so implicit as to leave in them and their tribunals the power of resisting or defeating, in the form of law, the legitimate measures of the Union." The Court said that the Constitution's framers had decided to "confer on the judicial department the power of construing the Constitution and laws of the Union in every case, in the last resort, and of preserving them from all violation from every quarter, so far as judicial decisions can preserve them."
The Court also said that unless state court decisions involving federal law could be reviewed by federal courts, there would be as many interpretations of federal law as there are states. Quoting "Federalist No. 80," the Court found that the Constitution was not intended to create "a hydra in government from which nothing but contradiction and confusion can proceed." Rather, relying on "Federalist No. 82," the Court found that the framers intended for the Supreme Court to have appellate jurisdiction over state court cases involving federal law.
Accordingly, the Supreme Court found no restriction or limitation on the plain language of the Constitution granting it appellate jurisdiction over all cases arising under the Constitution or laws of the United States. The Court, therefore, had jurisdiction over the appeal from the Virginia courts.
Having found that it had jurisdiction, the Supreme Court upheld the Cohens' convictions. The Court found that Congress did not intend to authorize the sale of National Lottery tickets outside the District of Columbia. Therefore, there was no conflict between the act of Congress authorizing a lottery there and Virginia's statute prohibiting sale of out-of-lotteries within its boundaries.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 19
References
External links
Category:1821 in United States case law
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:Supremacy Clause case law
Category:Criminal cases in the Marshall Court
Category:Legal history of Virginia
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Coit v. Green" ==> """
Coit v. Green, 404 U.S. 997 (1971), was a case in which the  United States Supreme Court  affirmed a decision that a  private school  which practiced  racial discrimination  could not be eligible for a  tax exemption.See Green v. Kennedy, 309 F. Supp. 1127 (D.D.C. 1970),  later decision reported sub nom. Green v. Connally, 330 F. Supp. 1150 (D.D.C. 1971), summarily aff'd sub nom  (African-Americans "need not be required to plead and show that, in the absence of illegal governmental encouragement, private institutions would not "elect to forgo 'favorable tax treatment, and that this will' result in the availability to complainants of services previously denied");  McGlotten v. Connally,  338 F. Supp. 448 (D.D.C. 1972);  Pitts v. Wisconsin Dept. of Revenue,  333 F. Supp. 662 (E.D. Wis.1971)  ("As perusal of these reported decisions reveals, the lower courts have not assumed that such allegations and proofs were somehow required by  Article Three of the United States Constitution"); .
Summary of findings
In Green v. Connally,Green v. Connally, 330 F. Supp. 1150 (D.D.C. 1971), aff'd sub nom, . the court declared that neither IRC 501(c)(3) nor IRC 170 provided for tax-exempt status or deductible contributions to any organization operating a private school that discriminates in admissions on the basis of race. Since this time, if a school has adopted and announced a racially non-discriminatory admissions policy and has not taken any overt action to discriminate in admissions, the Service concludes that the school has a racially non-discriminatory admissions policy. The U.S. Supreme Court, however, specifically did not rule on the hypothetical possibility of a school which discriminated against minorities for religious reasons.
In the interim, the IRS took steps to implement the nondiscrimination requirement including Revenue Ruling 71–447, 1971–2 C.B. 230, Revenue Procedure 72–54, 1972–2 C.B. 834, Revenue Procedure 75–50, 1975–2 C.B. 587, and Revenue Ruling 75–231, 1975–1 C.B. 158. Without comment, the Supreme Court affirmed the judgment of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia at the end of 1971 for the families in this case.
Results
left|thumb|Educational separation in the US prior to Brown v. Board of Education
A decade later, scores of schools had not changed policies and remained ineligible for tax-exempt status.
See also
United States Supreme Court cases during the Burger Court
References
Doe and Rabago v. Kamehameha Schools/Bernice Pauahi Bishop Estate, et al. (2007).
IRS (1982). Update on Private Schools.
Goluboff, R. L. (2000). "The Thirteenth Amendment and the Lost Origins of Civil Rights." Duke Law Journal, 50 Paper was presented at the 2000 Annual Meeting of the American Society for Legal History. p. 1609.
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:United States school desegregation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
"""

From "Coker v. Georgia" ==> """
Coker v. Georgia, 433 U.S. 584 (1977), held that the death penalty for rape of an adult woman was grossly disproportionate and excessive punishment, and therefore unconstitutional under the Eighth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution..  A few states continued to have child rape statutes that authorized the death penalty. In Kennedy v. Louisiana (2008), the court expanded Coker, ruling that the death penalty is unconstitutional in all cases that do not involve homicide or crimes against the State.
Background
While serving several sentences for rape, kidnapping, one count of first degree murder, and aggravated assault, Ehrlich Anthony Coker escaped from prison. He  broke into Allen and Elnita Carver's home near Waycross, Georgia; raped Elnita Carver, and stole the family's vehicle. Coker was convicted of rape, armed robbery, and the other offenses. 
He was sentenced to death on the rape charge after the jury found two of the aggravating circumstances present for imposing such a sentence: the rape was committed by a person with prior convictions for capital felonies, and the rape was committed in the course of committing another capital felony, the armed robbery. The Supreme Court of Georgia upheld the death sentence.Coker v. State, 234 Ga. 555, 
Decision
Plurality
thumb|150px|Justice Byron White
Justice White wrote the plurality opinion,Coker, 433 U.S. at 586-600. on behalf of Justices Stewart, Blackmun, and Stevens.
The Court's proportionality jurisprudence is informed by objective evidence, which comes from the laws enacted by state legislatures and the behavior of sentencing juries. The Court had found that it was always a minority of states that allowed the death penalty for rape."A Cruel and Unusual Punishment", The Nation
In 1925, 18 of 48 states, the District of Columbia, and the federal government authorized the death penalty for rape of an adult woman. 
In 1963, the figure was 17 of 50 states, almost all of them in the Southern and Western United States, as well as the District of Columbia and the federal government.Death As A Penalty For Rape
By 1971, on the eve of the Court's Furman decision, the number of jurisdictions supporting the death penalty for rape of an adult woman had declined to 16 states and the federal government. When Furman forced the states to rewrite their capital sentencing laws, only three states (Georgia, North Carolina, and Louisiana) retained the death penalty for rape of an adult woman.Three more (Mississippi, Florida and Tennessee) authorized the death penalty for child rape.
In 1976, the capital sentencing laws of North Carolina and Louisiana were struck down for a different reason. In response to the reversals, the legislatures of North Carolina and Louisiana did not retain the death penalty for rape. Thus, at the time of the Coker decision, only Georgia retained the death penalty for the crime of rape of an adult woman.
At the time of decision, the Supreme Court of Georgia had reviewed 63 rape cases. Only six of these involved a death sentence. The Georgia court had set aside one, leaving five death sentences for rape intact from among all the rape convictions obtained since Furman. From the statistical evidence, the Court concluded that in at least 90% of rape cases, the jury did not impose a death sentence. The objective evidence, state death penalty laws, and behavior of juries, suggested that the death penalty for rape was rare.Coker, 433 U.S. at 596-597.
But objective evidence does not dictate the outcome of the Court's proportionality analysis. The Court also brings to bear its estimation of how the death penalty in the circumstances in question would serve the goals of retribution and deterrence. Rape is a serious crime: "short of homicide, it is the ultimate violation of self." It typically involves violence and injury, both physical and psychological, but the Court denied that it involves "serious" injury:Coker, 433 U.S. at 598. "Rape is without doubt deserving of serious punishment; but in terms of moral depravity and of the injury to the person and to the public, it does not compare with murder, which does involve the unjustified taking of human life." In light of such facts, the Court concluded that death was an excessive punishment for "the rapist who, as such, does not take human life."
The fact that the jury had found that two aggravating factors applied to Coker's crime (his prior convictions and the fact that the rape was committed during the course of a robbery) did not change the Court's conclusion. The rape may have been committed during the course of another crime and by a hardened criminal, but the rape did not escalate into a killing.Coker, 433 U.S. at 599. Finally, even a deliberate killing does not merit a death sentence under Georgia law without the finding of aggravating factors.Coker, 433 U.S. at 600.
Concurring opinion
Justices Brennan and Marshall concurred in the judgment because the case struck down a death penalty, in keeping with their view that the death penalty is per se cruel and unusual punishment.Coker, 433 U.S. at 600-601.
Concurring/dissenting
Justice Powell concurred in the judgment, but he emphasized that the death penalty may be appropriate for rape if there are aggravating circumstances.Coker, 433 U.S. at 601-602 (Powell, J., concurring/dissenting).
Dissenting
Chief Justice Burger, joined by Justice Rehnquist, dissented because he believed that the proportionality principle the Court had engrafted onto the Eighth Amendment encroached too much on the legislative power of the states. Burger preferred to concentrate on the narrow facts of the case: was it proper for Georgia to impose the death penalty on Coker, a man who had escaped from prison while serving a sentence for murder and raped another young woman? "Whatever one's view may be as to the State's constitutional power to impose the death penalty upon a rapist who stands before the court convicted for the first time, this case reveals a chronic rapist whose continuing danger to the community is abundantly clear."
Burger defended a state's prerogative to impose additional punishment for recidivists, including a death sentence for prisoners who commit crimes. Congress had enacted an early three-strikes law, and the federal crime of assault on a mail carrier carried a stiffer penalty for a second such offense. Other states also carried harsher penalties for "habitual criminality." He believed that "the Eighth Amendment does not prevent the State from taking an individual's 'well-demonstrated propensity for life-endangering behavior' into account in devising punitive measures which will prevent inflicting further harm upon innocent victims."
If the Court was serious about sanctioning the continued use of the death penalty, it should allow states to use it in appropriate circumstances.
Furthermore, rape is a heinous crime: "A rapist not only violates a victim's privacy and personal integrity, but inevitably causes serious psychological as well as physical harm in the process. The long-range effect upon the victim's life and health is likely to be irreparable; it is impossible to measure the harm which results." He disagreed with the Court's conclusion that there were no circumstances under which it was a proportional response to crime. Such a conclusion turned the Court into "the ultimate arbiter of the standards of criminal responsibility in diverse areas of the criminal law throughout the country." That was an inappropriate role for the Court to assume in the American federal system. He felt that Furman had injected enough uncertainty into the debate over capital punishment; it was more expedient to allow subsequent legislative developments to evolve.
Burger disagreed with the Court's assessment of the retribution and deterrence value of the death penalty for rape. He thought that the death penalty might deter at least one prospective rapist. It might encourage victims to report the crime. It might increase the general feeling of security among members of the community. The fact that the magnitude of the harm caused by the murderer is greater than that caused by the rapist was beside the point. The Eighth Amendment was not the Code of Hammurabi; if "innocent life and limb are to be preserved I see no constitutional barrier in punishing by death all who engage in... criminal activity which consistently poses serious danger of death or serious bodily harm." Thus, the Court had no place dictating how the states might make law in the criminal arena.
Aftermath
The direct consequence was the overturning of the Georgia death sentences of Coker and five other rapists, including John W. Hooks, John W. Eberheart, Donald Boyer, and William J. Hughes.
Florida, Mississippi, and Tennessee had capital rape statutes authorizing the death penalty or life imprisonment for the rape of children. 
The Tennessee Supreme Court overturned its child rape statutes in 1977 because of Woodson (1976). 
In 1977 Florida sentenced to death child rapist William H. Shue. The state's Supreme Court vacated the sentence in 1978 and ordered him returned to the Ocala Circuit Court for resentencing. While declining to rule on the overall question of capital punishment for child rape, the court said there had been no showing in Shue's case of "extraordinary cruelty or of violence or injury to the young victims." The court noted that Judge Swigert had imposed the death penalty, although the jury that had convicted Shue had sentenced him to life imprisonment. Daniel Coler was sentenced to death in 1978 in Florida for the rape of his daughter as a child. Coler's death sentence was overturned in 1982 because the court found that irrelevant and prejudicial testimony had been introduced in his case, preventing a fair trial. The state said that it would not retry him, as the victim did not want to testify and the other chief witness had died in an auto accident. Coler was set free after 4 1/2 years on death row. 
On the basis of Coker, the Florida Supreme Court ruled that Florida capital child rape statutes were unconstitutional in the Robert L. Buford case of 1981 and the Lucious L. Andrews case in 1983. Before his sentence was overturned, Andrews was the last man on death row who had not murdered anyone.
The Mississippi Supreme Court overturned Mississippi capital rape statutes in 1989, in its ruling in Leatherwood v. State. It dismissed Alfred D. Leatherwood's death sentence on another basis, the fact that the Louisiana capital aggravators were written to apply only to capital murder and not to rape.
The main consequence of Coker was that the death penalty was largely restricted to crimes in which the defendant caused the death of another human being.
Until Kennedy v. Louisiana, some states were testing the limit of this restriction by enacting death penalty statutes for repeat child rapists. In terms of the Court's capital punishment jurisprudence, Coker signaled the Court's commitment to employing a robust proportionality test for deciding when the death penalty would be an appropriate punishment. The Court would later use this same proportionality test to evaluate the propriety of the death penalty for felony murder (except for the actual killer), mentally retarded offenders, juvenile offenders, and eventually all nonhomicide crimes and crimes against the state.
Coker
Erlich Coker (his given name is also spelled as Ehrlech, according to the Georgia Department of Corrections; under the GDC ID 0000379279) is still serving multiple life sentences at the Walker State Prison, Georgia as of 2021.
Kennedy case
Kennedy v. Louisiana was a decision by the Louisiana Supreme Court that reached the United States Supreme Court; its litigation expanded the Coker decision.
On May 22, 2007, the Louisiana Supreme Court held that it is constitutional to impose the death penalty for rape if the victim is a child. Ruling on an appeal brought in the case of defendant Patrick Kennedy, Justice Jeffrey Victory wrote for the court that the Louisiana law allowing the imposition of the death penalty under those circumstances was consistent with Coker because an aggravating circumstance, the age of the victim, justified the death penalty.
The case was struck down by the US Supreme Court in Kennedy v. Louisiana (2008), thus expanding Coker. The court ruled that the death penalty is unconstitutional in all cases that do not involve murder or crimes against the State.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 433
Notes
References
External links
Struck by Lightning: Louisiana's Electrocutions for Rape in the Forties and Fifties from Burk Foster
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:Capital punishment in Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:Legal history of Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:Rape in the United States
Category:History of women in Georgia (U.S. state)
"""

From "Colautti v. Franklin" ==> """
Colautti v. Franklin, 439 U.S. 379 (1979), was a United States Supreme Court abortion rights case, which held void for vagueness part of Pennsylvania's 1974 Abortion Control Act. The section in question was the following:
(a) Every person who performs or induces an abortion shall prior thereto have made a determination based on his experience, judgment or professional competence that the fetus is not viable, and if the determination is that the fetus is viable or if there is sufficient reason to believe that the fetus may be viable, shall exercise that degree of professional skill, care and diligence to preserve the life and health of the fetus which such person would be required to exercise in order to preserve the life and health of any fetus intended to be born and not aborted and the abortion technique employed shall be that which would provide the best opportunity for the fetus to be aborted alive so long as a different technique would not be necessary in order to preserve the life or health of the mother.
Doctors who failed to adhere to the provisions of this section were liable to civil and criminal prosecution "as would pertain to him had the fetus been a child who was intended to be born and not aborted." Franklin and others sued, arguing that the provision was both vague and overbroad. In a 6–3 decision written by Roe author Harry Blackmun, the Supreme Court agreed, finding that requiring a determination "if... the fetus is viable or if there is sufficient reason to believe the fetus may be viable" was insufficient and impermissibly vague guidance for physicians who might face criminal liability if a jury disagrees with their judgment.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 439
 Planned Parenthood of Central Missouri v. Danforth (1976), upholding a viability-related statute against allegations of vagueness.
 City of Akron v. Akron Center for Reproductive Health (1983), struck down an abortion restriction on grounds of unconstitutional vagueness
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:1979 in United States case law
Category:Void for vagueness case law
"""

From "Cole v. City of La Grange" ==> """
Cole v. City of La Grange, 113 U.S. 1 (1885), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the court ruled on eminent domain to benefit a private corporation.
Background
The city of La Grange attempted to use eminent domain to condemn property for the benefit of La Grange Iron and Steel Company to expand that served no public benefit.
Decision
The Court held that the Missouri legislature could not authorize  or any other city to issue bonds to assist corporations in their private business. The case was cited in the dissenting opinion of Justice Thomas in Kelo v. City of New London, .
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:Lewis County, Missouri
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
"""

From "Colegrove v. Green" ==> """
Colegrove v. Green, 328 U.S. 549 (1946), was a United States Supreme Court case. Writing for a 4–3 plurality, Justice Felix Frankfurter held that the federal judiciary had no power to interfere with malapportioned Congressional districts.Katz, Ellis. 2006. "Colegrove v. Green." Federalism in America: An Encyclopedia..See Kim Isaac Eisler, A Justice for All: William J. Brennan, Jr., and the decisions that transformed America, 11, 168 (1993). The Court held that the Elections Clause in Article I, section IV of the U.S. Constitution left to the legislature of each state the authority to establish the time, place, and manner of holding elections for Congressional Representatives, and that only Congress (and thus not the federal judiciary) could determine whether individual state legislatures had fulfilled their responsibility to secure fair representation for citizens.Colegrove, 328 U.S. at 554-55.
However, in Baker v. Carr, 369 U.S. 186 (1962) the United States Supreme Court distinguished the Colegrove decision holding that malapportionment claims under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment were not exempt from judicial review under Article IV, Section 4, as the equal protection issue in this case was separate from any political questions.
The "one person, one vote" doctrine which requires electoral districts to be apportioned according to population, thus making each district roughly equal in population, was further cemented in the cases that followed Baker v. Carr, including Gray v. Sanders, 372 U.S. 368 (1963), which concerned state county districts; Reynolds v. Sims, 377 U.S. 533 (1964), which concerned state legislature districts; Wesberry v. Sanders, 376 U.S. 1 (1964), which concerned U.S. Congressional districts; and Avery v. Midland County, 390 U.S. 474 (1968), which concerned local government districts, a decision which was upheld in Board of Estimate of City of New York v. Morris, 489 U.S. 688 (1989).
 Ruling 
Colegrove arose from the failure of Illinois to redistrict its Congressional delegation since 1901, despite internal migration that had left wide population disparities between various districts. Three voters sued, asserting what would now be known as malapportionment: a rural county of 1,000 and an urban county of 100,000 would have an equal vote.
The court characterized the case as "an appeal to the federal courts to reconstruct the electoral process of Illinois in order that it may be adequately represented in the councils of the Nation. Because the Illinois legislature has failed to revise its Congressional Representative districts in order to reflect great changes, during more than a generation, in the distribution of its population, we are asked to do this, as it were, for Illinois." The court decided that this was a nonjusticiable question: "The remedy for unfairness in districting is to secure State legislatures that will apportion properly, or to invoke the ample powers of Congress."
 Dissent by Justice Black 
Dissenting, Justice Hugo Black argued that the Constitution required each citizen's vote carry equal weight.Eisler, 169. "While the Constitution contains no express provision requiring that congressional election districts established by the States must contain approximately equal populations," Black wrote, "the constitutionally guaranteed right to vote, and the right to have one's vote counted clearly imply the policy that state election systems, no matter what their form, should be designed to give approximately equal weight to each vote cast." Black thought it wrong that a citizen living in a district of 900,000 people had a much smaller percentage of a vote than someone living in a district with 112,000.
 Plurality opinion 
The Colegrove case was decided by a 4–3 plurality. Plurality opinions result when a majority of Justices (usually five or more but in this rare occasion, four) agree on the result in a particular case but no single rationale or opinion garners five votes. The case was voted on by seven rather than nine justices because Chief Justice Stone had just died, and Justice Robert Jackson had taken leave to serve as chief prosecutor of the Nuremberg Trials.
 Aftermath 
The plaintiff responded with a second suit demonstrating that the Illinois State Legislature districts were even more malapportioned than the Congressional districts (so how then was he to succeed in using either the powers of State Legislatures or Congress when they are both heavily biased against him?).  This second case arrived as appeal to the Supreme Court in Colegrove v. Barrett, 330 U.S. 804 (1947) for which Frankfurter was with the majority again issuing Per Curiam dismissal for want of a substantial federal question.
Critics of Colegrove complained that it deprived state citizens of federal remedies, and that the outdated apportionments – dating to 1901,
45 years prior – were the vehicle by which rural, conservative interests were allowed to keep a disproportionate influence over the country's politics. Until it was overruled by Baker, Colegrove made it almost impossible for citizens' groups to get help from the federal courts in apportioning legislative and congressional districts.
An exception to the reach of Colegrove was allowed in a 1960 case called Gomillion v. Lightfoot, in which the appellants showed that the boundary lines of a district in Alabama had deliberately been drawn to minimize the voting rights of black residents. Frankfurter wrote the opinion in this case as well, making sure that Colegrove would not be seen as allowing blatant racial gerrymandering by recasting the issue as a Fifteenth Amendment case.Eisler, 169–170.
One week after the Gomillion ruling was handed down, Justice Black persuaded his colleagues to hear arguments in Baker v. Carr, the case which would ultimately overrule Colegrove.Eisler, 170.
 See also 
 One man, one vote
 References 
External links
Category:1946 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
Category:United States One Person, One Vote Legal Doctrine
Category:United States political question doctrine case law
Category:Congressional districts of Illinois
"""

From "Coleman v. Miller" ==> """
Coleman v. Miller, 307 U.S. 433 (1939), is a landmark decision of the United States Supreme Court which clarified that if the Congress of the United States—when proposing for ratification an amendment to the United States Constitution, pursuant to Article V thereof—chooses not to set a deadline by which the state legislatures of three-fourths of the states or, if prescribed by Congress state ratifying conventions in three-fourths of the states, must act upon the proposed amendment, then the proposed amendment remains pending business before the state legislatures (or ratifying conventions).. The case centered on the Child Labor Amendment, which was proposed for ratification by Congress in 1924.  
 Background 
The practice of limiting the time available to the states to ratify proposed amendments began in 1917 with the Eighteenth Amendment.  All amendments proposed since then, with the exception of the Nineteenth Amendment and the Child Labor Amendment, have included a deadline, either in the body of the proposed amendment, or in the joint resolution transmitting it to the states. In its decision the Court concluded that Congress was quite aware in 1924 that—had it desired to do so—it could have imposed a deadline upon the Child Labor Amendment and Congress simply chose not to.
 Decision 
According to Coleman, it is none other than the Congress itself—if and when the Congress should later be presented with valid ratifications from the required number of states—which has the discretion to arbitrate the question of whether too much time has elapsed between Congress' initial proposal of that amendment and the most recent state ratification thereof assuming that, as a consequence of that most recent ratification, the legislatures of (or conventions conducted within) at least three-fourths of the states have ratified that amendment at one time or another.
The Coleman ruling—which modified the high Court's earlier 1921 dictum in Dillon v. Gloss—held that the question of timeliness of ratification is a political and non-justiciable one, leaving the issue to the discretion of Congress. Thus it would appear that the length of time elapsing between proposal and ratification is irrelevant to the validity of the amendment. Based upon the Court's reasoning in Coleman, the Archivist of the United States proclaimed the Twenty-seventh Amendment as having been ratified when it surpassed the "three fourths of the several states" threshold for becoming a part of the Constitution. Declared ratified on May 7, 1992, it had been submitted to the states for ratification on September 25, 1789, an unprecedented time period of .
 Impact 
The Coleman decision has been described as reinforcing the political question doctrine which is sometimes espoused by Federal courts in cases wherein the court deems the matter at hand to be properly assigned to the discretion of the legislative branch of the Federal government. In light of the precedent established by this case, three proposed constitutional amendments, in addition to the Child Labor Amendment, are considered to be still pending before the state legislatures (the Congressional Apportionment Amendment since 1789; the Titles of Nobility Amendment since 1810; and the Corwin Amendment since 1861), as Congress did not specify a ratification deadline when proposing them to the states.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 307
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States Constitution Article Five case law
Category:United States political question doctrine case law
Category:1939 in United States case law
"""

From "Coleman v. Tollefson" ==> """
Coleman v. Tollefson, 575 U.S. 532 (2015), is a United States Supreme Court case dealing with a prisoner's inability to file lawsuits in forma pauperis after filing 3 lawsuits which are dismissed because they are "frivolous, malicious, or [fail] to state a claim upon which relief may be granted.".
Background
28 U.S.C. § 1915. allows federal litigants who are too poor to pay court fees to proceed in forma pauperis, allowing them to file without prepaying court costs. § 1915(g). The full text of 28 U.S.C. § 1915(g) is "In no event shall a prisoner bring a civil action or appeal a judgment in a civil action or proceeding under this section if the prisoner has, on 3 or more prior occasions, while incarcerated or detained in any facility, brought an action or appeal in a court of the United States that was dismissed on the grounds that it is frivolous, malicious, or fails to state a claim upon which relief may be granted, unless the prisoner is under imminent danger of serious physical injury." provides an exception for prisoners who have "on 3 or more occasions, while incarcerated..., brought an action or appeal in a court of the United States that was dismissed on the grounds that it is frivolous, malicious, or fails to state a claim upon which relief may be granted." Coleman was a prisoner who had 3 actions dismissed by a Federal Court on those grounds, and while his appeal of the third was pending, filed four new federal lawsuits. Coleman's motion to proceed in forma pauperis was denied on the basis of §1915(g), and Coleman appealed on the basis that the third dismissal did not count because his appeal of it was pending. The decision to deny Coleman's in forma pauperis motion was affirmed by the District Court, and the Sixth Circuit. Coleman appealed to the United States Supreme Court, who granted certiorari, referring to Henslee v. Keller, which lists (and agrees with) seven other circuit courts who disagreed with the Sixth Circuit.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court affirmed the Sixth Circuit's decision, stating that a dismissal counts "even if the dismissal is the subject of an appeal". The court acknowledged the risk that a prisoner might be wronged deprived of in forma pauperis status for lawsuits filed after a third dismissal but before reversal of said dismissal on  appeal. However, the court considers this risk minor because the Solicitor General could only find two cases where an Court of Appeals reversed a prisoner's third dismissal by a District Court. Coleman also presents the hypothetical situation where in forma pauperis status is denied for an appeal of the third dismissal because of the third dismissal, stating that such a situation would be unfair. Although the Solicitor General (arguing on behalf of the government) agreed with Coleman regarding this point, the Supreme Court declined on decide on the point, stating that if "the situation Coleman hypothesizes does arise, the courts can consider the problem in context."
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2015 in United States case law
"""

From "Colgrove v. Battin" ==> """
Colgrove v. Battin, 413 U.S. 149 (1973), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that six person civil juries were constitutional.Yeazell, S.C.  Civil Procedure, Seventh Edition.  Aspen Publishers, New York, NY: 2008, p. 600
 References 
 External links 
 Full text of the opinion at Justia.com
Category:United States civil procedure case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1973 in United States case law
Category:United States Seventh Amendment case law
Category:Juries in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Collector v. Day" ==> """
Collector v. Day, 78 U.S. (11 Wall.) 113 (1871), was a United States Supreme Court case that questioned the United States Federal government's ability to impose a tax upon the "salary of a judicial officer of the State."  Even though this particular case favors state employees' rights, it was overruled in 1939 by Graves v. New York, where the Supreme Court ruled that the income tax imposed by the State of New York on an employee of the Federal Home Owners Load Corporation was constitutional, since there was no requirement of immunity contained in the Constitution or in any act of Congress. Collector is still important to discussions of constitutional law because of Judge Nelson's statement of the doctrine of dual federalism in the case's opinion.
 Background 
In 1864, various statutes passed by the United States Congress imposed a 5 percent tax on all personal incomes over $1000.Mason, Alpheus and Donald Stephenson. American Constitutional Law. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Education, Inc., 2009. In 1866 and 1867, the tax collector for the internal revenue of the United States taxed Judge J.M. Day of the Court of Probate in Massachusetts. Since Judge Day believed this was not within the federal government's rights, he paid the amount of $61.50 under protest and then proceeded to sue the Circuit Court to recover his charges. After Day won this case, the United States issued a writ of error which brought the case to the Supreme Court of the United States.
Arguments
The plaintiff's main argument, in this case the Collector, claimed that the Federal Government of the United States is supreme in the area of taxation given to them in the U.S. Constitution. Specifically, they cite this right in the Constitution, "Under the general rules of taxation, every man and everything throughout the country (exports excepted) are subject to taxation in the discretion of Congress..." They argued that since the Judge works for his own salary from the state, but as a citizen of the United States, Judge Day should pay his taxes to support the Federal government. They believed that just because he worked for the state, he should not be exempted from his duties as an American citizen.
Judge J.M. Day, the county probate judge of Massachusetts, argued that the Federal government is stretching their limits by taxing an officer of the State. He claimed that these powers are not expressly given to them in the Constitution, and that the Collector is ultimately violating State power.
Supreme Court decision
Decided on April 3, 1871, in an 8 to 1 decision, the Supreme Court decided in favor of the Defendant, Judge Day. Justice Samuel Nelson delivered the opinion of the court and cites several court cases from the past, including McCulloch v. Maryland, Dobbins v. The Commission of Erie County, and Weston v. Charleston. Justice Nelson uses these examples to highlights the examples of federalism v. states powers. In his opinion, Nelson makes very clear that the national and state governments are part of one another but remain as "separate and distinct sovereignties, acting separately and independently of each other, within their respective spheres". He makes his opinion stronger by stating that since it is already in the Constitution that that state may not tax the national government, then it should be the same way that the Federal government may not hinder upon state taxes. Justice Nelson refers to this action as the doctrine of  "reciprocal immunity."
In the dissenting opinion delivered by Justice Bradley, he claims that he sees no distinct difference between the national government and the state government taxing the officials of the state. He claims that since every citizen living in a state is in fact a part of the United States, the national government has the ability to tax the officials of the states. Justice Bradley does not agree with the defendant's idea that being an official of a particular state makes him exempt from the federal law. He believes that if the court gives the states this right of taxing their own officials, then what would stop them from furthering their powers? He sees the gray line that this decision could bring about.
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States federalism case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1871 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
"""

From "College Savings Bank v. Florida Prepaid Postsecondary Education Expense Board" ==> """
College Savings Bank v. Florida Prepaid Postsecondary Education Expense Board, 527 U.S. 666 (1999), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States relating to the doctrine of sovereign immunity..
 Opinion of the Court 
A companion case to the similarly named (but not to be confused) Florida Prepaid Postsecondary Education Expense Board v. College Savings Bank,. the court held – in a decision authored by Justice Antonin Scalia – that sovereign immunity precluded a private action brought under the Lanham Act. For such an action to be sustained, the Court explained, the state must either consent to the suit, or have had its sovereign immunity waived by Congress:
The abrogation exception did not apply, because the U.S. Congress can only waive sovereign immunity pursuant to the power granted by § 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment (see Fitzpatrick v. Bitzer; Seminole Tribe v. Florida), and both the Lanham Act and the Trademark Remedy Clarification Act were enacted pursuant to Congress' Article I powers. Moreover, § 5's "term 'enforce' is to be taken seriously—that the object of valid § 5 legislation must be the carefully delimited remediation or prevention of constitutional violations," College Savings Bank at __, and because the asserted property right in question was not in fact a property right ("The hallmark of a protected property interest is the right to exclude others ... [but] [t]he Lanham Act's false-advertising provisions ... bear no relationship to any right to exclude; and Florida Prepaid's alleged misrepresentations concerning its own products intruded upon no interest over which petitioner had exclusive dominion") (id. at __), and so the court declined to "pursue the follow-on question that City of Boerne v. Flores would otherwise require us to resolve: whether the prophylactic measure taken under purported authority of § 5 (viz., prohibition of States' sovereign-immunity claims, which are not in themselves a violation of the Fourteenth Amendment) was genuinely necessary to prevent violation of the Fourteenth Amendment." Id. at __.
There was no suggestion that Florida expressly consented to suit, and what was instead asserted was the concept of constructive waiver – the premise that merely by engaging in an activity regulated by Congress, the state waives its immunity. This concept sprang from a single case in the Court's jurisprudence, Parden  v. Terminal R.R. Co. of Ala. Docks Dep't, 377 U.S. 184 (1964). But the court characterized Parden as "elliptical," "an anomaly in the jurisprudence of sovereign immunity, and indeed in the jurisprudence of constitutional law," and noted that within ten years of Parden, the court was in headlong retreat from it, saying that there was "'no place' for the doctrine of constructive waiver in our sovereign-immunity jurisprudence, and we emphasized that we would "find waiver only where stated by the most express language or by such overwhelming implications from the text as [will] leave no room for any other reasonable construction." College Savings Bank at __. Parden, the Court observed, "broke sharply with prior cases, and is fundamentally incompatible with later ones. We have never applied the holding of Parden to another statute, and in fact have narrowed the case in every subsequent opinion in which it has been under consideration." The Court expressly overruled "Whatever may remain" of the decision after its narrowing by intervening cases.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 527
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:1999 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Florida
"""

From "Collet v. Collet" ==> """
Collet v. Collet, 2 U.S. (2 Dall.) 294 (C.C.D. Pa. 1792), was a Supreme Court of the United States decision that was the earliest appellate case docketed although it was never heard by the Court. Van Staphorst v. Maryland was the first case docketed with the court. West v. Barnes was the first case decided by the court.
Collet originated as an assumpsit case in Pennsylvania state court, but eventually came to the federal Circuit Court in Philadelphia where the Circuit Court ruled that Congress' power of naturalization was concurrent with the state's. Collet obtained a writ of error but dropped the case before reaching the Supreme Court.James R. Perry, The Documentary History of the Supreme Court of the United States, 1789-1800, Volume 6, "Collet v. Collet," pp. 27-30. 
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 2
 List of United States Supreme Court cases prior to the Marshall Court
References
Category:1791 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Jay Court
"""

From "Collins v. Virginia" ==> """
Collins v. Virginia, No. 16-1027, 584 U.S. ___ (2018), was a case before the US Supreme Court involving search and seizure. At issue was whether the Fourth Amendment's motor vehicle exception permits a police officer uninvited and without a warrant to enter private property, approach a house, and search a vehicle parked a few feet from the house that is otherwise visible from off the property. In an 8–1 judgement, the Supreme Court ruled that the automobile exception does not apply to vehicles parked within the home or the curtilage of a private homeowner..
Background
In Albemarle County, Virginia, Officer David Rhodes observed from the street what appeared to be a motorcycle with a distinctive appearance under a tarp parked on the property of a home in which the Charlottesville resident Ryan Austin Collins was staying. Rhodes had recognized the colors from a previous high-speed chase two months earlier in which the rider of the motorcycle had eluded him. Officer Rhodes obtained the vehicle's license plate number using footage from his dashcam video. Rhodes then found photographs of the motorcycle on Collins's Facebook pages that appeared to be taken from where he had seen it parked, which was near the home in an area that was walled on one side by the home and on two sides by a short brick wall. With that as probable cause, Rhodes entered the property in the absence of Collins and, without a warrant, lifted the tarp, took additional photographs, and determined that the bike had been stolen. When Collins returned to the home, Rhodes arrested him on charges of stealing the bike, and the key to the motorcycle was discovered in Collins's possession on arrest. Collins denied owning or having ridden the bike for months.
At trial court, Collins argued that the police had illegally entered the property to search it, as the vehicle was parked with the walled area that he considered the curtilage of the home, a violation under the Fourth Amendment, and sought to void the evidence taken by Rhodes's search.
The state argued that the previous chase and both photographs Collins had posted on Facebook of himself and the motorcycle were sufficient probable cause.Collins v. Commonwealth, 292 Va. 486, 790 S.E.2d 611 (2016). The trial court agreed with the state that Rhodes has probable cause to search under the tarp. The ruling was upheld both in the state's appeal courts and in the Virginia Supreme Court, with the latter affirming that Rhodes's search was proper under the motor vehicle exception to the Fourth Amendment defined by past Supreme Court cases, which allowed for warrantless searches for automobiles with probable cause.
Supreme Court
Collins petitioned the Supreme Court for writ of certiorari on whether the Fourth Amendment protected his rights of privacy for the area a few feet from the boundaries of his home. The Supreme Court agreed in September 2017 to hear the case. The Court heard oral arguments on January 9, 2018.
In oral arguments, the Justices discussed the curtilage, the homeowner's expectation of privacy there, and the officer's right to enter on the property. They discussed the officer's right to lift the tarp, which was potentially a search. Also, they discussed the difference between an automobile, which is potentially mobile and creates an exigent circumstance for search, with drugs or papers, which are immobile. The discussion devolved into a discussion of the differences between garage, carport, driveway, and street. Justice Ginsburg pointed out that protection of the garage but not a driveway burdens people who cannot afford a garage.
Decision
The Court announced judgment in favor of the accused on May 29, 2018, reversing and remanding the case back to lower courts. The Court ruled 8–1 that the automobile exemption does not include the home or curtilage and that vehicles that are stored within the home's curtilage cannot be searched without a warrant. Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote the majority opinion, which was joined by all but Justice Samuel Alito. 
Justice Clarence Thomas also wrote a concurring opinion agreeing with the decision but questioning if the Court had the right to force states to suppress incriminating evidence that was obtained unconstitutionally, as that would be akin to forcing states to follow the federal exclusionary rule. 
Alito wrote the sole dissenting opinion, arguing that whether the motorcycle was parked in the curtilage or not was unnecessary since the motorcycle was within plain view and so there was a reasonable cause for the officer to examine the vehicle.
 See also 
 Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution
 References 
External links
 Case page at SCOTUSblog
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:Albemarle County, Virginia
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
"""

From "Collins v. Yellen" ==> """
Collins v. Yellen, 594 U.S. ___ (2021), was a United States Supreme Court case dealing with the structure of the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA). The case follows on the Court's prior ruling in Seila Law LLC v. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau,. which found that the establishing structure of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), with a single director who could only be removed from office "for cause", violated the separation of powers; the FHFA shares a similar structure as the CFPB. The case extends the legal challenge to the federal takeover of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in 2008.
In a two-part decision, the Supreme Court ruled that the restriction on removal of the FHFA director by the President was unconstitutional in light of Seila Law, and secondly, dismissed the lawsuit brought against the FHFA by shareholders of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac as the takeover of these firms was an established power of the agency under terms of the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008.
Background
Part of the contributing factors to the subprime mortgage crisis from 2007 to 2010 was the role of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, for-profit government sponsored enterprises (GSE) that purchase mortgages and backed almost half of the mortgages in the United States. Analysis had found that the two GSEs had purchased a number of risky mortgages, those offered at below the prime interest rate as to encourage home ownership, during the housing market peak in 2005 and 2006 and represented a large risk should they fail. At the start of the crisis, the rationalization of the number of these low-interest mortgages disrupted the banking system, causing some larger banks to go into bankruptcy or seek means to avoid this, which disrupted the credit system and further exacerbated the crisis and caused a recession.
Congress passed the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008. in July of that year to try to stave off the effects of the recession. Among the law's goals included the formation of the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA), merging the existing Federal Housing Finance Board (FHFB) and Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO). The new FHFA was run by a single Director, with James B. Lockhart III, the prior Director of OFHEO, named to the initial position. In September 2008, Lockhart issued an order to bring in Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac under FHFA's authority for the purposes of stabilizing both GSEs using funds allocated by Congress as a means to alleviate the mortgage crisis.
As part of this takeover, once the mortgage crisis was subdued in 2012, the FHFA routed the ongoing profits earned by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to the Treasury Department on the basis that these funds were needed to offset the taxpayers' costs of the government's intervention to resolve the crisis. The decision also prevents both GSEs from using Treasury funds to pay their shareholders. Shareholders of both companies challenged the government's actions, stating that these decisions prevents the company from building capital and is excessive governmental overreach.
As the case progressed, the Supreme Court heard Seila Law LLC v. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. In this case, the structure of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) was called into question. Like FHFB, the CFPB was formed by legislation passed by Congress, and specified that it was to be overseen by a single Director that can only be removed from office "for cause" and did not give the option for the President to remove the person "at will". The Supreme Court agreed that this structure was unconstitutional as it violated the separation of powers between the executive and legislative branches. The Supreme Court ruled that the Director position of CFPB must be also removable by will, but otherwise did not challenge the function of the CFPB since they had found its purpose to be severable from the implementation of the Director position.
Seila Law progressed through lower courts at the same time as Collins. Seila Law had been heard in the Ninth Circuit, which had ruled that the structure of the CFPB was constitutional. Collins was heard in the Fifth Circuit, which ruled both on its initial three-judge panel and at an en banc hearing that the FHFB was unconstitutional.
Both sides of Collins petitioned to the Supreme Court in 2019 to hear the case; the shareholders sought to resolve the split in the Circuit Courts as well as to question whether any decisions – including the profit taking decision 2012 – made under the unconstitutional structure should be reversed, while the government challenged the Fifth Circuit's ruling. Following the ruling in Seila Law issued in June 2020, the Supreme Court certified the case.
Supreme Court
Oral hearings for the case were held on December 9, 2020.
The Supreme Court issued its decision on June 23, 2021. It ruled on two areas which affirmed, reversed, and vacated the Fifth Circuit's decision in parts and remanded the case for further review. On the subject of the constitutionality of the FHFA director, the Court ruled 7–2 to uphold the Fifth Circuit's decision that, as with Seila Law and the CFPB, the inability for the President to terminate the director of FHFA beyond "for cause" was unconstitutional. Related to the standing of the Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac shareholders, the Court was unanimous in that the FHFA's actions in taking over the GSEs was outlined by congressional authority in the Recovery Act of 2008, along with an "anti-injunction clause" and thus the lower courts should not have allowed their case to proceed.
Justice Samuel Alito wrote the majority opinion to which all Justices had joined in full or in part. Justices Clarence Thomas, Neil Gorsuch, and Elena Kagan wrote concurring opinions. Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote a concurrent in part and dissension in part, related to the FHFA directorship, joined by Justice Stephen Breyer.
Impact
On the day of the decision, President Joe Biden announced he would move forward with replacing the current FHFA director, Mark A. Calabria, who had been appointed under Donald Trump, "with an appointee who reflects the Administration's values".
References
 External links 
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
"""

From "Collins v. Yosemite Park & Curry Co." ==> """
Collins v. Yosemite Park & Curry Co., 304 U.S. 518 (1938), is a court case in which the appellee, the Yosemite Park and Curry Co., brought this suit to enjoin the California State Board of Equalization and the State Attorney General from enforcing the 'Alcoholic Beverage Control Act' of the State of California, within the limits of Yosemite National Park.
Supreme Court involvement
The court distinguished between the State's power under the Twenty-first Amendment to regulate the importation of liquor to the state, and its "territorial jurisdiction" over a federal enclave  like the park.
The court held that the sections of a California statute which levied excises on sales of liquor in Yosemite National Park were enforceable in the Park, while sections of the same statute providing regulation of the Park liquor traffic through licenses were unenforceable.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 304
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:1938 in United States case law
Category:United States Twenty-first Amendment case law
Category:Yosemite National Park
"""

From "Talk:Colorado Caucus" ==> """
 Pro and Con section needed 
There are good and bad sides to everything. What do you like most about the Colorado Caucus? What don't you like? JohnSWren (talk) 22:56, 14 January 2016 (UTC)
If we get a good response (10 or more comments) they will be compiled and added to the main Wikipedia listing for Colorado Caucus. JohnSWren (talk) 22:58, 14 January 2016 (UTC)
Best: Best chance the common person has of serving in elected public office. See recent books that have documented this: Grassroots Rules, Why Iowa? Others.
LEAST: The Secretary of State is not producing a TV special about the Colorado Caucus. Yet. :-) JohnSWren (talk) 23:02, 14 January 2016 (UTC)
 Overnight Reporting via Wikipedia articles by 6000 volunteers at all caucuses March 1 
See also
 Colorado Republican caucuses, 2008
 Colorado Democratic caucuses, 2008 
 United States presidential election in Colorado, 2008
 United States presidential election in Colorado, 2012
Caucus
If you will be able to attend the March 1 Colorado Caucus you are invited to write a Wikipedia article about it starting now to list location, current (and new when they are elected that evening) precinct committee people, who is elected chair person (sometime precinct committee people assume they are to chair, but by Colorado law that's incorrect), who are elected delegates, and for Democrats who are they pledged to, for GOP what did they say that seemed to get them elected, etc. 
Could someone help build a standard template for gathering this info? My hunch is that even half of the 6000 precinct caucuses are reported on this way it will make the national news and shed a lot of light on the caucus systems strengths and weaknesses. JohnSWren (talk) 23:29, 6 February 2016 (UTC)
Thanks  JohnSWren (talk) 23:31, 6 February 2016 (UTC)
 Props 107 and 108 were in the 2016 election.  
We voted for those in the 2016 election. The referenced article clearly states that they were from "last year" (article written in 2017). The header is misleading, so I suggest that it be changed to "The 2016 Propositions 107 and 108."--Sbwinter2 (talk) 04:51, 6 March 2018 (UTC)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Colorado River Water Conservation District v. United States" ==> """
Colorado River Water Conservation District v. United States, 424 U.S. 800 (1976), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States extensively refined the abstention doctrine to prevent duplicative litigation between state and federal courts..
Background
In the Southwestern United States, water scarcity was (and remains) a critical problem.  The McCarran Amendment, , was a statute enacted by United States Congress in 1952 allowing the United States to be joined as a defendant in certain suits concerning the adjudication or administration of rights to use of waters.  In 1969, the state of Colorado enacted a law to attempt to reorganize the procedure for legal determination of water claims within the state.
The procedure that Colorado created divided the state into seven Water Divisions, each one encompassing one or more drainage basins for the largest rivers in the state.  Each month, Water Referees in each division would rule on applications for water rights, or refer the case to a Water Judge, who would rule on referred or contested applications on a six-month schedule, applying the prior appropriation doctrine.  A State Engineer, along with engineers for each division, were responsible for the administration and distribution of waters in each division.
Facts and procedural history
The federal government reserves the water rights on federal lands such as Indian reservations and national parks and forests.  The rights to such federal lands in the state of Colorado affect the rights of users in Colorado Water Division No.7.  On November 14, 1972, the government filed suit in the United States District Court for the District of Colorado, asserting jurisdiction under both  (the federal question jurisdiction statute) and , which grants the United States district courts with original jurisdiction over all civil actions in which the United States is the plaintiff.  The government sued for a declaratory judgment asserting its own reserved rights and those of several Native American tribes, against over 1,000 water users named as defendants.  The government had previously filed similar suits in three other divisions.
Shortly after the suit over Division No.7 was commenced, one of the defendants in one of the other suits filed an application in state court to join the United States as a party in a state court proceeding, pursuant to the McCarran Amendment.  Several defendants in the federal court suit then moved to dismiss, challenging the federal court's jurisdiction to continue to hear matters pertaining to water rights.  The district court granted the defendant's motion on ground of abstention doctrine, but the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit reversed, holding that abstention was inappropriate.
Majority opinion
Justice Brennan wrote for the majority.  He first determined that the McCarran Amendment did not create an express or implied exception to § 1331 or § 1345, and then turned to the issue of whether or not the district court should have dismissed the suit because of the concurrent proceedings in state court.  The McCarran Amendment permitted adjudication of the Native American tribes' rights in state court, and Brennan held there was no strong policy argument to eliminate the state courts' jurisdiction in this area.  Moreover, the circumstances necessitating abstention were not present here, largely because this case did not present complex issues of state law or policy to be resolved, as was the case in past abstention cases such as Railroad Commission v. Pullman Co. (1941), Burford v. Sun Oil Co. (1943), or Louisiana Power & Light Co. v. City of Thibodaux (1959).  Nor was this an attempt to enjoin state criminal proceedings, as in Younger v. Harris (1971).
However, Brennan also ruled that even though the case did not fall into any of the previously recognized categories of abstention, certain principles of judicial administration militated in favor of upholding the district court's decision to dismiss the case.  Even though dismissal of a federal suit to avoid duplicative litigation was something of an exceptional nature, Brennan determined that it was permissible in some circumstances.  He compared this case to an in rem action over the disposition of property, wherein a court first assuming jurisdiction may exercise jurisdiction to the exclusion of other courts.  He listed factors federal courts may consider in determining the appropriateness of dismissal where concurrent jurisdiction exists:
 Inconvenience of the federal forum
 The desirability of avoiding piecemeal litigation
 The order in which jurisdiction was obtained by the concurrent forums
Brennan concluded by explaining that the whole policy advanced by the McCarran Amendment was to avoid "piecemeal adjudication of water rights," which would lead to concurrent litigation with inconsistent outcomes.  Congress was well aware of pre-existing state procedures to determine water rights when it passed the McCarran Amendment.  Furthermore, the federal government was already involved in pending state lawsuits in three other Water Divisions (4, 5, and 6), there was a 300-mile distance between the federal courthouse in Denver and the state courthouse in Division 7 (which potentially created transportation difficulties for the over 1,000 defendants named in the federal suit), and there had been very few proceedings in the federal suit prior to the district court's dismissal.  Brennan held that when all these factors were taken into account, the district court ruled correctly in dismissing the suit.
Dissenting opinions
Justice Stewart's dissent
Justice Stewart agreed with the majority that the McCarran Amendment did not diminish the federal courts' jurisdiction, and that the conventional doctrines of abstention were not implicated here.  He disputed the majority's comparison of this suit to an in rem action, because a rule creating exclusive jurisdiction for the first court to take control of the property only applies when exclusive control of the property in question is required.  In the litigation of water rights, where actual administration or control of a river was not being determined, this rule was clearly unnecessary.
Additionally, Stewart reasoned that dismissal of the federal suit was unnecessary because the  rights the federal government sought to uphold were different from those being litigated in the state courts.  Specifically, the federal suit was about rights the federal government had previously reserved, rather than rights based on the prior appropriation doctrine.  Finally, Stewart gave two more reasons not to dismiss the federal suit: issues of federal law were involved, as were the rights of Native American tribes (who were typically free of state jurisdiction).
Justice Stevens' dissent
Justice Stevens also added a brief dissenting opinion.  He felt that the majority was unfairly shrinking the scope of federal jurisdiction, and that it was anomalous to forbid the federal government the right to a federal forum.  He urged the affirmation of the opinion of the Tenth Circuit.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 424
Abstention doctrine
 Moses H. Cone Memorial Hospital v. Mercury Construction Corp., 460 U.S. 1 (1983)
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States abstention case law
Category:1976 in the environment
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:United States water case law
"""

From "Colorado v. Bannister" ==> """
Colorado v. Bannister, 449 U.S. 1 (1980), is a  U.S. Supreme Court case concerning the automobile exception to constitutional protections against searches and seizures..
 Facts 
In the early morning hours of October 15, 1979, a Colorado Springs Police Officer observed a blue 1967 Pontiac GTO automobile moving along a road at a speed above the legal limit. The vehicle disappeared from the Officer's sight before he could stop the vehicle. Shortly thereafter, the officer heard a police radio dispatch reporting that a theft of motor vehicle parts had occurred in the area he was patrolling in his car. The radio dispatch announced that a number of chrome lug nuts were among the items stolen, and provided a description of two suspects. A few minutes later, the officer spotted the same automobile still speeding. He saw the car enter a service station, and followed it there for the purpose of issuing a traffic citation to its driver.
Upon approach of the car, both of its occupants exited. The officer observed chrome lug nuts in an open glove compartment located between the vehicle's front bucket seats, as well as two lug wrenches on the floorboard of the back seat. These items were in plain view, illuminated by the lights of the service station. Because the respondent and his companion fit the description of those suspected of stealing motor vehicle parts, the officer immediately arrested both of them. He then seized the lug nuts and wrenches from their automobile.
 Procedural history 
Prior to trial, Bannister moved to suppress the contraband seized by the arresting officer. The trial court granted the motion, the Supreme Court of Colorado affirmed. The State subsequently filed a petition for certiorari in the United States Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
In a per curiam opinion, the Court held that the circumstances provided not only probable cause to arrest, but also under  Carroll v. United States, 267 U.S. 132 (1925) and Chambers v. Maroney, 399 U.S. 42 (1970), probable cause to seize the incriminating items without a warrant.
First, the stop of the Defendants was justified because the officer observed the occupants of the vehicle breaking the traffic laws. The seizure of the Defendants became proper when, upon approach and after hearing the description of the vehicle and the defendants on the flash call, the officer had probable cause to make the arrest.
Finally, the seizure of the items was lawful because they were in plain view.  Notwithstanding the fact that these items were ordinary and not necessarily incriminating as contraband, the fact that the car and defendants fit the description broadcast on the flash call, coupled with the fact that they were suspected of stealing auto parts, justified the warrantless seizure of the items.
References
External links
Category:1980 in Colorado
Category:1980 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Legal history of Colorado
"""

From "Colorado v. Bertine" ==> """
Colorado v. Bertine, 479 U.S. 367 (1987), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the Fourth Amendment does not prohibit the State from proving charges with the evidence discovered during an inventory search..
This case is controlled by the principles governing inventory searches of automobiles and of an arrestee's personal effects, as set forth in South Dakota v. Opperman,. and Illinois v. Lafayette,. rather than those governing searches of closed trunks and suitcases conducted solely for the purpose of investigating criminal conduct. United States v. Chadwick,. and Arkansas v. Sanders,. distinguished.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Colorado v. Connelly" ==> """
Colorado v. Connelly, 479 U.S. 157 (1986), was a U.S. Supreme Court case that was initiated by Francis Connelly, who insisted that his schizophrenic episode rendered him incompetent, nullifying his waiver of his Miranda rights..
 Prior history 
Francis Connelly approached a Denver police officer and expressed interest in talking about a murder that he committed. After being read his rights, Connelly continued to want to confess to the murder, so a detective was called. The detective repeated Connelly's rights again, but Connelly remained willing to discuss the murder. Connelly then waived his right to counsel, and described the details of the murder.
Soon afterwards, the court determined that Connelly was not of sound enough mind to stand trial, and was given six months of therapy. After the six months was completed, Connelly stood trial. During the trial, the psychiatrist that evaluated Connelly testified that he believed that God told him to confess to the murder, or commit suicide. The lower court ruled that Connelly's waiver of his Miranda rights was made when he was incompetent due to his mental illness, so the confession of Connelly was not permitted in court.
The case then went to the Colorado Supreme Court, where the local court's decision was upheld. The evidence of Connelly's confession was suppressed under the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
 Case 
The Supreme Court heard the case, and decided that Connelly's confession should not have been suppressed, due to a specific sentence in Miranda v. Arizona that stated that confessions may only be thrown out if the accused is coercively interrogated by the government. The Supreme Court reversed the Colorado Supreme Court's decision to suppress the evidence, stating that there was no violation of the due process clause. In the words of the Supreme Court:
 Consequences 
Connelly significantly changed the voluntariness standard - the test used to determine the admissibility of confessions under the due process clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments.Connelly also affects the determination of whether a waiver of Fifth or Sixth Amendment rights was voluntary. Also, a Massiah or Miranda defective statement can be used to impeach the defendant if the statement was voluntary. Alternatively, Connelly could be read as merely emphasizing the requirement of state action as a predicate to a constitutional challenge and rebuffing the lower court's determination that admitting the confession was sufficient state action. Before Connelly the test was whether the confession was voluntary considering the totality of the circumstances.See ;  ("Considering the totality of these circumstances, we do not think it credible that petitioner's statements were the product of his free and rational choice");  ("If [a defendant's will was overborne], the confession cannot be deemed 'the product of a rational intellect and a free will"') "Voluntary" carried its everyday meaning: the confession had to be a product of the exercise of the defendant's free will rather than police coercion.See e.g.,  ("[A]n extrajudicial confession, if it was to be offered in evidence against a man, must be the product of his own free choice") After Connelly the totality of circumstances test is not even triggered unless the defendant can show coercive police conduct.Bloom & Brodin, Criminal Procedure (Aspen 1996) at 247. Questions of free will and rational decision making are irrelevant to a due process claim unless police misconduct existed and a causal connection can be shown between the misconduct and the confession.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 479
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
Exclusionary rule
 References 
 Further reading 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Miranda warning case law
Category:Insanity-related case law
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:1986 in Colorado
Category:Legal history of Colorado
Category:Schizophrenia
Category:History of Denver
"""

From "Colorado v. Spring" ==> """
Colorado v. Spring, 479 U.S. 564 (1987), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a suspect's awareness of the crimes about which he may be questioned is not relevant to his waiver of his Fifth Amendment rights.
 Background 
While on vacation in Colorado, a man named John Leroy Spring purportedly murdered one Donald Walker in the month of February 1979. There was supposedly an anonymous accomplice who assisted Spring, but no such person was ever apprehended in the investigation of Walker's death. An informant, whose identity was concealed, tipped off agents in the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) as to Spring's alleged involvement in the illegal interstate transportation of ill-gotten firearms. The agents also learned that John Spring talked with an unknown party about the Walker homicide and the role he played in it..
Working off the information provided by the informant, ATF agents planned out a sting operation to arrest Spring on the 30th of March. Their goal came to fruition, as Spring was successfully caught and arrested in Kansas City, Missouri for the crime of the illegal distribution of stolen firearms. They hoped this arrest would provide a launching pad from which to judge him as a suspect in the investigation of the Walker homicide.
As required by Miranda v. Arizona, Spring was advised of his fifth amendment rights to protection against self-incrimination, an attorney, and silence when interrogated. Spring was actually reminded twice of his rights: first on the scene of the arrest, then again back at the ATF office in Kansas City. However, Spring opted to waive them through written signature. He then voluntarily made a statement and answered questions regarding the ongoing investigation surrounding his involvement in illegal interstate firearms trafficking.
The ATF agents began the interrogation by asking Spring to elaborate on the firearms transactions that directly led to his arrest, so as not to give away that they planned on eventually questioning about the death of Walker. From there, the agents progressed to the topic of whether or not he had a prior a criminal record. When Spring admitted he shot his aunt at age ten, the agents saw an opportunity. Given Spring had just confessed to shooting someone as close to him as a family member, they questioned whether or not there were other victims. In response, Spring lowered his head and simply uttered the phrase, “I shot another guy once,”  without specifically naming or describing the man who he fired upon. The agents pressed further, first asking if he ever visited the state of Colorado in the past, and if the man he claimed to have shot was named Donald Walker. They also questioned if he used a snowbank to hide Walker's corpse, in the case that he did murder the man. Spring responded to both questions with a “no,” and the interview ended at this point.
Nearly two months later, on May 26, 1979, Spring, after having once again waived his Miranda rights through written signature, verbally confessed to the Colorado murder to Colorado law enforcement officers. He then signed a formal statement which bound him to this confession, a confession that would ultimately seal his fate for better or worse."FindLaw | Cases and Codes." FindLaw | Cases and Codes. Web. 27 Oct. 2014. <http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?court=US&vol=479&invol=564>
Trial
When charged with first-degree murder in a Colorado state court, however, Spring and his attorney did not sit idly by. Instead, they moved quickly to nullify the statements made by Spring on May 26 and March 30; the basis of their argument was that the interrogating agents violated his due process rights as decreed by Miranda v. Arizona. Spring and his defending attorney emphasized that, as he was not notified prior to interrogation that he would be questioned about the killing of Donald Walker, the ATF agents pushed him to incriminate himself.
The trial court insisted that this statement be deemed inadmissible not because of the failure by the ATF agents to notify Spring of the focus of the interrogation, but because his statement that he “shot another guy once” was irrelevant, and that the context of the discussion did not point to his aforementioned confession being about his participation in the Walker homicide. However, the court held that the May 26th statement, as it was made freely, voluntarily, and intelligently, should be admitted as evidence, thus convicting Spring of the first-degree murder of Donald Walker.
This holding was reversed by the Colorado Court of Appeals, who sided with the argument proposed by Spring's legal team that the failure on part of the ATF agents to inform Spring of the topic of questioning prior to the interrogation should invalidate the March 30th statement. The court also argued that the State of Colorado failed to substantially prove that the May 26th statement was not the illegal “fruit” of the March 30th statement; this doctrine of “fruit of the poisonous tree” holds that if any evidence is collected through illegal means, like entering a house without a (proper) search warrant, then such evidence must not be admitted into trial. This holds true even for an interrogation; if tactics used in an interrogation are illegal, or if the interrogation itself is illegally performed, then it, along with any physical evidence it produces, may be excluded from trial."Fruit of the Poisonous Tree." LII / Legal Information Institute. Cornell Law, n.d. Web. 10 Dec. 2014. <https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/fruit_of_the_poisonous_tree> The Colorado Supreme Court affirmed the holding made by the Court of Appeals, once again saying the murder confession made on May 26 was the illegal “fruit” of the March 30th statement.
The Supreme Court of the United States, in the Spring decision, reversed the rulings of both the Colorado Supreme Court and the Colorado Court of Appeals. By a vote of seven to two, the Supreme Court held that the interrogating officers’ failure to notify the suspect that they would question him about the Walker murder did not impact, and thus invalidate, his waiver of his Miranda rights."Validity of Waiver." LexisNexis Litigation Essentials. LexisNexis, n.d. Web. 11 Dec. 2014. <https://litigation-essentials.lexisnexis.com/webcd/app?action=DocumentDisplay&crawlid=1&srctype=smi&srcid=3B15&doctype=cite&docid=78+J.+Crim.+L.+%26+Criminology+828&key=33dbd2229300e98b276378656a57a6f0> Delivering the majority opinion, Associate Justice Lewis F. Powell, Jr. stated that the Court's only focus of inquiry was the March 30th statement, as it was the illegality of this statement that supposedly marred the May 26th statement.Spitzer, Gregory E. "Fifth Amendment--Validity of Waiver: A Suspect Need Not Know the Subjects of Interrogation." Journal of Criminal and Criminology. N.p., n.d. Web. 29 Oct. 2014. <http://scholarlycommons.law.northwestern.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=6572&context=jclc>
 References 
External links
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Miranda warning case law
"""

From "Comcast Corp. v. Behrend" ==> """
Comcast Corp. v. Behrend, 569 U.S. 27 (2013), is a United States Supreme Court case dealing with class certification under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.. The case restricted class certifications. The votes were split upon typical ideological lines, but, in an unusual move, the dissent was jointly written by two justices.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:Comcast
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States class action case law
"""

From "Comcast v. National Association of African-American-Owned Media" ==> """
Comcast v. National Association of African-American-Owned Media, 589 U.S. ___ (2020), is a United States Supreme Court case related to protections against racial discrimination in the Civil Rights Act of 1866. The case relates to whether cable television operator Comcast engaged in racial discrimination in refusing to carry channels from Entertainment Studios, a minority-owned network founded by Byron Allen. In a unanimous opinion in March 2020, the Court ruled that under the Civil Rights Act, Allen was burdened to show that race was but-for the sole reason Comcast failed to enter into a contract with his network.Comcast v. Nat'l Ass'n of African-American-Owned Media, . The parties reached a settlement after the Court's decision.
Background
Byron Allen founded Entertainment Studios in 1993 originally to produce syndicated television shows, but eventually grew to include a number of lifestyle channels. Since as recent as 2014, Allen started negotiations with Comcast to have the cable provider run Entertainment Studio's lifestyle channels, but they could not agree to contract terms. Allen filed a lawsuit (filed under both Allen's National Association of African-American-Owned Media and Entertainment Studios) in the United States District Court for the Central District of California against Comcast in February 2015, seeking  in damages and citing that Comcast had used racial discrimination to deny him a contract, in violation of section 1981 of the Civil Rights Act of 1866.. Allen alleged that Comcast was discriminating against 100%-minority owned networks like Entertainment Studios, as only  of the total  carriage fees Comcast paid were to 100%-minority owned networks. Comcast refuted the accusations, stating they had been in negotiations with Allen in good faith for several years to strike a deal. Comcast claimed that the lawsuit was "an ordinary business grievance masquerading as a racial discrimination claim".
Around the time of this filing, Comcast was in the midst of trying to acquire Time Warner, and Time Warner had been named in Allen's suit, but by April 2015, Comcast called off its acquisition. Allen also named several other groups including the NAACP, the National Urban League, the National Action Network, Al Sharpton and Meredith Attwell Baker, arguing that they had supported Comcast's earlier 2011 merger with NBCUniversal through a memorandum of understanding (MOU), in which Allen claimed was to "whitewash Comcast’s discriminatory business practices".
In the Comcast case, Judge Terry Hatter at the District Court had dismissed the case without prejudice in August 2015, stating that Allen had "failed to allege a plausible claim for relief", but later allowed Allen to refile an amended complaint. Allen's revised complain left only Comcast and Time-Warner as the defendants, but still asserted racial discrimination related to the MOU that had been signed earlier. By May 2016, Hatter had again dismissed Allen's suit for the lack of claim of relief, but allowed Allen to file a second amended claim.
Simultaneous cases
Allen had launched a similar lawsuit in December 2014 against AT&T, which owned DirecTV, but this was settled out of court by the end of 2015, with AT&T agreeing to pick up Allen's channels. Allen also filed a  lawsuit against Charter Communications in January 2016, also in the Central District Court of California. The Charter case was approved of by Judge George H. Wu, finding that Allen had provided sufficient claims for potential discrimination.
Ninth Circuit appeal
Allen had appealed the ruling in the Comcast case to the Ninth Circuit, while Charter had done the same for its case. In November 2018, the Ninth Circuit overturned the Comcast case dismissal and rejected the Charter's request to dismiss, stating that, in the case of the Charter decision, "Plaintiffs' allegations regarding Charter's treatment of Entertainment Studios, and its differing treatment of white-owned companies, are sufficient to state a viable claim." The Ninth Circuit rejected arguments made by Comcast and Charter that they had "editorial discretion" to select channels for their cable line-ups under the First Amendment.
Supreme Court
Comcast petitioned the Supreme Court of the United States for writ of certiorari to challenge the Ninth Circuit's decision, which the Court granted in June 2019. (Charter separately filed its own petition to the Supreme Court in March 2019, which as of November 2019 remains at the petition stage, and thus not joined with the Comcast case.)
Oral arguments for the case were heard on November 13, 2019. The arguments focused on which of two tests to use to determine the merits of Allen's case that had been considered in the case's prior legal history. The first was whether there was evidence that race was a "motivating factor" in Comcast's decision to deny entering a contract with Allen, which had been used by the Ninth Circuit. This took into account the language of the Comcast/NBCUniversal MOU that Allen claimed established Comcast's motivation. The other "but-for" test was suggested by Comcast, in that if there was no race issue involved, that Comcast would still not have entered a deal with Allen.
The Court released its opinion on March 23, 2020. In a unanimous decision vacating the decision of the Ninth Circuit and remanding the case to be reheard, the Court sided with Comcast's "but-for" test, in that Allen had to have shown that race was the sole deciding factor for the case, rather than the possibility that it may have only been a motivating factor. The decision was based on prior rulings from University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center v. Nassar.. Justice Neil Gorsuch wrote the majority opinion joined by all but Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, who wrote a concurrence in part that concurred in the judgement. Ginsburg specifically wrote to counter Comcast's claims that such discrimination can only be only evaluated at the finalization of contract, as such discrimination could occur at any time during contract negotiations, such as when a bank requests letters of reference for a potential lender. Ginsburg also wrote, as a footnote, of having stated her past concern that "a strict but-for causation standard is ill suited to discrimination cases and inconsistent with tort principles" but recognized it was an established principle from past Supreme Court cases.
Impact
Civil rights organizations and leaders have condemned Comcast for its behavior in the case. In the weeks leading to the oral arguments at the Supreme Court, Representative Bobby Rush argued that Comcast should be broken up, stating "Comcast has enjoyed the largesse – as has the cable industry, in general – of the African-American and other minority communities and has reached such prominence that it now  these communities with a cold, callous corporate insensitivity that is stultifying, arrogant, harmful, and intensely painful."
Ian Millhiser of Vox said of the Supreme Court decision that it represented a change in the liberal justices' stance of the court to approach discrimination cases through a mixed motive discrimination, as previously set out in Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, which gave plaintiffs seeking discrimination a greater benefit of the doubt than the "but-for" ruling from Comcast. Millhiser referred to the cases of Gross v. FBL Financial Services, Inc. and University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center v. Nassar as cases since Price Waterhouse that went against the mixed motive allowance. Millhiser suggested that the liberal side of the court may have given in to the conservative majority in Comcast to establish that the liberal side of the court was respecting the principle of stare decisis from previous court decisions such that the conservative side should also uphold stare decisis in other pending decisions.
In June 2020, Allen and Comcast reached a settlement to end the lawsuit, with Comcast agreeing to carry three of the channels in Allen's lineup in addition to the Weather Channel which Allen had acquired in the interim, in addition to other terms.
In Allen's concurrent action against Charter Communications in the United States District Court for the Central District of California, Judge George H. Wu ruled in August 2020 that Allen's suit could proceed based on evidence Allen had provided that met the requirements by the Supreme Court in the Comcast ruling.
References
External links
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Commil USA, LLC v. Cisco Systems, Inc." ==> """
Commil USA, LLC v. Cisco Systems, Inc., 135 S.Ct. 1920 (2015), was a 2015 decision by the United States Supreme Court pertaining to the standard for induced patent infringement.  Writing for a 6-2 majority, Justice Anthony Kennedy held that (1) a claim of induced infringement requires a showing that the defendant knew that it is engaging in infringing conduct and (2) a defendant's belief that a patent is invalid is not a defense to a claim of induced infringement.  Justice Antonin Scalia dissented from the second point, arguing that, in his view, a good faith belief in a patent's invalidity should constitute a defense to a charge of induced infringement.
Background
In 2002, the United States Patent and Trademark Office awarded U.S. Patent No. 6,430,395 ("the '395 patent") to Commil. The '395 patent claims as its invention an improved short-range wireless network that allows mobile devices to more quickly and efficiently move between various nodes in a network. 
In 2007, Commil sued Cisco Systems in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Texas alleging infringement of the '395 patent by Cisco's wireless access points and controllers.  In 2010, the case was tried to a jury who found that Cisco did not induce others to infringe the '395 patent. The district court overturned this verdict due to certain improper comments made by Cisco's counsel during the trial and ordered a second jury trial.  At the second trial, Cisco attempted to argue that it did not induce infringement of the '395 patent because it held a good faith belief that the '395 patent was invalid. However, the district court did not allow Cisco to make this argued and refused to provide Cisco's requested instruction to the jury.  The jury at the second trial subsequently found that Cisco had, in fact, induced infringement of the '395 patent and ordered it to pay $63.8 million in damages.
Cisco appealed this verdict to the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, arguing, among other things, that the district court was incorrect to refuse to instruct the jury on Cisco's good faith belief that the '395 patent was invalid.  The Federal Circuit agreed with Cisco and reversed the jury verdict against it.  Judge Pauline Newman of the Federal Circuit however criticized this ruling and argued that a good faith belief as to the invalidity of a patent was not a defense to induced infringement.  Both parties subsequently appealed the Federal Circuit's opinion to the Supreme Court for further review.
Supreme Court opinion
alt=Official portrait of Justice Anthony Kennedy.|thumb|Justice Kennedy delivered the majority opinion for the Court.
The Supreme Court heard oral argument on March 31, 2015 and issued its opinion on May 26, 2015.  Justice Kennedy, writing for a 6-2 majority, addressed two issues in the Court's opinion.
First, the Court clarified and reiterated its holding in Global-Tech v. SEB that, in making a claim for induced infringement, a plaintiff must show that the defendant knew, not only of the patent itself, but also knew that its actions constituted infringement of that patent. Second, the Court considered Cisco's claim that it held a good faith belief that the '395 patent was invalid and found that this assertion, even if true, did not constitute a defense to a claim of induced infringement. The Court's conclusion focused heavily on the distinction between infringement and invalidity, with Justice Kennedy noting that, while invalidity may be a defense to liability in a patent case, it is not separately a defense to a finding of infringement. The Court further considered that, under 35 U.S.C. § 282, a patent is presumed valid such that allowing a good faith belief of invalidity to act as a defense would undermine that presumption. Finally, the Court noted that to rule otherwise would encourage litigants to develop post-hac, litigation-driven invalidity theories solely to escape a finding of induced infringement. Finally, the Court, in a somewhat unusual fashion, devotes a final section of the opinion to a discussion of non-practicing entities, such as patent trolls, and notes that precluding this defense does not provide plaintiffs with free license to accuse companies of induced infringement and that defendants have many avenues with which to attack the validity of patents.  
alt=Official portrait of Justice Antonin Scalia.|thumb|Justice Scalia, joined by Chief Justice Roberts, delivered a dissenting opinion.
Justice Scalia, joined by Chief Justice John Roberts, dissented from the Court's ruling. While Justice Roberts agreed with the Court's conclusion that inducement requires both knowledge of the patent and of the alleged infringement of that patent, he disagreed with the majority's holding that a good faith belief of invalidity could not act as a defense to a charge of inducement. While Justice Scalia acknowledged that infringement and invalidity are legally distinct concepts, he also noted that, as a practical matter, it was impossible to infringe an invalid patent. 
Reactions to the Supreme Court's decision
In the wake of the Supreme Court's decision, legal commentators believed that the decision would have a significant impact on how companies evaluated allegations of patent infringement. Ronald Mann of SCOTUSblog expressed surprise at the Court's ruling, noting that Commil had "managed to pull off a hard trick" by "getting a majority of the Justices to ignore the explicit language of an opinion so recent that all of those who signed it are still on the Court." As Mann saw it, the Court's ruling in Global-Tech v. SEB had implicitly suggested that a good faith belief of invalidity could serve as a defense such that the Court's new decision was a surprising reversal for defendants. Gene Quinn of IP Watchdog remarked that the decision was a "reasonable" one while criticizing several factual errors in the Court's opinion as demonstrating "how little the Supreme Court actually knows about patent law." Other commentators noted that the Court's ruling would likely reduce the number of pre-litigation opinion letters related to invalidity and that companies seeking to minimize infringement claims would be more likely to seek opinions regarding non-infringement. 
Subsequent proceedings
Following the Supreme Court's decision, the case was remanded to the Federal Circuit for consideration of how the case should proceed.  On remand, the Federal Circuit held that neither Cisco nor its customers infringed the '395 patent and that judgment should be entered in Cisco's favor, thus wiping out the $63.8 million verdict entered by the jury.
References
External links
Text of the Court's Opinion
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Patent law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Commissioner v. Banks" ==> """
Commissioner v. Banks, 543 U.S. 426 (2005), together with Commissioner v. Banaitis, was a case decided before the Supreme Court of the United States, dealing with the issue of whether the portion of a money judgment or settlement paid to a taxpayer's attorney under a contingent-fee agreement is income to the taxpayer for federal income tax purposes. The Supreme Court held when a taxpayer's recovery constitutes income, the taxpayer's income includes the portion of the recovery paid to the attorney as a contingent fee.. Employment cases are an exception to this Supreme Court ruling because of the Civil Rights Tax Relief in the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004.Avoiding a Contingency Fee Tax Trap Banaitis Commissioner Banks The Civil Rights Tax Relief amended Internal Revenue Code § 62(a)(a). to permit taxpayers to subtract attorney's fees from gross income in arriving at adjusted gross income.American Jobs Creation Act of 2004, § 703.
Background
In the first case, John W. Banks, II was fired from his job with the California Department of Education. He retained an attorney on a contingent-fee basis and filed a civil suit against his employer alleging employment discrimination against his employer. Banks settled the case for $464,000 and paid $150,000 to his lawyer. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) contended that the entire amount was income to Banks, a position upheld by the United States Tax Court. The United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit ruled in favor of Banks, holding the lawyer's share could be excluded from the taxpayer's gross income. The Court of Appeals reasoned the contingent-fee arrangement "is more like a partial assignment of income-producing property than an assignment of income." Under this theory, Banks and his attorney were in effect partners in a joint venture who shared a recovery, and who should each be taxed only on his separate part.
In the second case, Sigitas J. Banaitis, a vice president of the Bank of California, retained an attorney on a contingent-fee basis and sued the bank and its successor in ownership, the Mitsubishi Bank, for interference with his employment agreement and wrongful discharge. The parties settled the case. The defendants paid $4.9 million to Banaitis and $3.9 million to his attorney, following the formula set forth in the contingent-fee contract. The IRS viewed the entire amount as gross income to Banaitis. This view was rejected by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, which reasoned that because the state law granted attorneys a superior lien in the contingent-fee portion of any recovery, that part of Banaitis’ settlement was not includable as gross income.
Both cases were then heard by the United States Supreme Court.
Issue
The issue presented to the United States Supreme Court was whether the portion of a money judgment or settlement paid to a taxpayer's attorney under a contingent-fee agreement is income to the taxpayer for federal income tax purposes.
 Opinion of the Court 
The United States Supreme Court held that a taxpayer's income includes the portion of the recovery paid to the taxpayer's attorney as a contingent fee.
 Subsequent developments 
Successful plaintiffs may face an unintended and unfair tax result because of this ruling.  Gross proceeds from settlement or litigation are considered income and the related legal fees are deductible only as an itemized deduction.  Some or all of the deduction benefit may be lost because of the 2% limitation on miscellaneous itemized deductions or the loss of the deduction for legal fees for purposes of calculating the Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) with larger awards.. Double taxation of the attorney fees may result because the amount for attorney fees is income to the plaintiff and the attorney who is eventually paid.David L. Hudson Jr., Singling Out Double Taxation, 3 ABA Journal eReport 42 (2004) Some plaintiffs may be put in a worse financial situation after winning a case if the attorney fees far exceeded plaintiff's actual damages.
The impact of this decision may have little impact on future tax disputes involving substantially the same facts.  After these cases arose, the Internal Revenue Code Section 62(a)(20),(a)(20). enacted as part of the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004, expressly permits a taxpayer to subtract from his or her gross income, in arriving at adjusted gross income, the "attorneys fees and court costs paid by, or on behalf of, the taxpayer in connection with any action involving a claim of unlawful discrimination" as defined by the Act.  The Act was not retroactive and only applied to attorney fees paid after the date of enactment with respect to any settlement or judgment occurring after its enactment.. This provision eliminates the double taxation of attorney fees on plaintiff discrimination awards by changing the deduction for attorney fees from itemized deduction to an above the line deduction.
Commissioner v. Banks is still precedent for those contingent fee arrangements not eligible for an above the line deduction, which include claims for defamation, invasion of privacy, and tortious interference with contract.
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2005 in United States case law
"""

From "Commissioner v. Duberstein" ==> """
Commissioner v. Duberstein, 363 U.S. 278 (1960), was a United States Supreme Court case from 1960 dealing with the exclusion of "the value of property acquired by gift" from the gross income of an income taxpayer.
It is notable (and thus appears frequently in law school casebooks) for the following holdings:
 When determining whether something is a gift for U.S. federal income tax purposes, the critical consideration is the transferor's intention. This is a question of fact that must be determined on a "case-by-case basis". The body that levies the tax must conduct an objective inquiry that looks to "the mainsprings of human conduct to the totality of the fact of each case." On review, the trier of fact must consider all of the evidence in front of it and determine whether the transferor's intention was either disinterested or involved:
 Gifts result from "detached and disinterested generosity" and are often given out of "affection, respect, admiration, charity or like impulses".
 Contrast payments given as an "involved and intensely interested" act.
Facts
The Court was presented with two sets of facts.
No. 376, Commissioner v. Duberstein
Berman was president of Mohawk Metal Corporation. Duberstein was president of the Duberstein Iron & Metal Company. They would often talk on the phone and give each other names of potential customers. After receiving some particularly helpful information, Berman decided to give Duberstein a gift of a Cadillac. Although Duberstein said he did not need the car as he already had a Cadillac and an Oldsmobile, he eventually accepted it. Mohawk Metal Corporation later deducted the value of the car as a business expense, but Duberstein did not include the value of the Cadillac in his gross income when he filed his tax return, deeming it a gift. The Commissioner asserted a deficiency for the car's value against Duberstein. The Tax court affirmed.
No. 546, Stanton v. United States
Stanton worked for the Trinity Church in New York City as the comptroller of the Church corporation and president of the corporation. He resigned from both positions to go into business for himself. As a "gratuity" the corporation's directors awarded Stanton $20,000 in appreciation of the services rendered. While some directors testified that Stanton had been well liked by all in the Vestry and the $20,000 was a gift to show that good will, there was also some evidence given that Stanton was being forced to resign. The trial judge made a simple finding that the payments were a "gift".
The Issues
Was the car that Duberstein received a gift for taxation purposes?
Was the money that Stanton received a gift for taxation purposes?
Holdings
Justice William J. Brennan, Jr., for the majority, upheld the Tax court's ruling with regard to Duberstein:  Duberstein's car was not a gift, because the motives were certainly not "disinterested"—it was given to compensate for past customer references or to encourage future references.  Duberstein at 291-92.
The court split as to Stanton.  A plurality remanded Stanton's situation back to the trial court, to determine whether the Vestry intended to give the money as a gift or as compensation.  Id. at 292.
Reasoning
The Court first rejected the premise that a "gift" for taxation purposes was the same as "gift" in common law terms.  Duberstein at 285.  The Court also rejected the premise that there is a bright line as to what constitutes a gift for taxation purposes.  Id at 287.
Instead, when determining whether something is a gift for taxation purposes, the critical consideration is the transferor's intention.  Duberstein at 285-286 (citing Bogardus v. Commissioner, ).  This is a question of fact that must be determined on a "case-by-case basis".  Duberstein at 290.  The body that levies the tax must conduct an objective inquiry that looks to "the mainsprings of human conduct to the totality of the fact of each case." Duberstein at 289.  The trier of fact must consider all of the evidence in front of it and determine whether the transferor's intention was either disinterested or involved:
 Gifts result from "detached and disinterested generosity."  Duberstein at 285 (quoting Commissioner of Internal Revenue v. LoBue, 351 U.S. 243 (1956)).  Gifts are often given out of "affection, respect, admiration, charity or like impulses."  Duberstein at 285 (quoting Robertson v. United States, 343 U.S. 711, 714 (1952).
 Contrast payments given as an "involved and intensely interested" act.  See Olk v. United States, 536 F.2d 876 (9th Cir. 1976).
 Justice Whittaker's concurrence 
Justice Whittaker wrote separately to opine that sometimes, whether something is a gift is a mixed question of fact and law, not strictly a fact question as the majority wrote.  Id. at 293.
 Justice Douglas's dissent 
Justice Douglas dissented.   He believed that both were gifts.  Id.
 Justice Black's concurrence and dissent 
While siding with the majority on Duberstein, Justice Black believed that Stanton's money was a gift.  Id. at 294.
 Justice Frankfurter's concurrence and dissent 
While siding with the majority on Duberstein, Justice Frankfurter believed that Stanton's money was definitely not a gift because it was given to him as a result of his hard work.  Id. at 297-98.  He explained that when "[T]hings of value [are] given to employees by their employers upon the termination of employment" or when an employer gives "payments entangled in a business relation and occasioned by the performance of some service,"  a " strong implication is that the payment is of a business nature" and, therefore, not a gift.  Id. at 295-296.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 363
Bogardus v. Commissioner, 
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1960 in United States case law
"""

From "Commissioner v. First Security Bank of Utah, N.A." ==> """
Commissioner v. First Security Bank of Utah, N.A., 405 U.S. 394 (1972), was a Supreme Court case holding that a bank prohibited from doing insurance business did not need to include in gross income the insurance commissions on credit life insurance that the bank referred to an unrelated insurance company.  The case syllabus says that "no share of premium received by life insurance company on business referred to it by commonly controlled national banks could be attributed to banks, and holding company did not utilize its control over banks and insurance company to distort their true net incomes, although banks encouraged lenders to take out insurance and referred them to insurance company, where federal banking laws would have prohibited banks from receiving share in premiums."
Dissent
Justice Thurgood Marshall's dissent criticizes the majority opinion's holding that merely because doing insurance would be illegal for a bank, the bank did not do insurance and thus had no insurance commission income.405 U.S. at 413 n. 1 (Marshall dissenting).
References
External links
Category:Insurance law
Category:Legal history of Utah
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:1972 in Utah
"""

From "Commissioner v. Flowers" ==> """
Commissioner v. Flowers, 326 U.S. 465 (1946), was a Federal income tax case before the Supreme Court of the United States.Comm'r v. Flowers, . The Court held that in order to deduct the expense of traveling under § 162 of the Internal Revenue Code, the expense must be incurred while away from home, and must be a reasonable expense necessary or appropriate to the development and pursuit of a trade or business. In this case, the attorney in question could only deduct traveling expenses from her gross income when the railroad's business forced attorney to travel and live temporarily at some place other than the railroad's principal place of business. Where attorney preferred for personal reasons to live in a different state from the location of his employer's principal office, and his duties required frequent trips to that office, the evidence sustained Tax Court's finding that the necessary relation between expenses of such trips and the railroad's business was lacking.
Background
The taxpayer lived and practiced law in Jackson, Mississippi for a railroad.  The railroad's home offices were in Mobile, Alabama. The taxpayer was offered a job in Mobile (185 miles from Jackson), but was unwilling to move from Jackson.  The taxpayer arranged, with the railroad, to stay in Jackson on the condition that he pay his own traveling expenses between Mobile and Jackson and his own living expenses in both places.  The taxpayer deducted the amounts incurred to travel between Jackson and Mobile as traveling expenses under §162(a)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code.Flowers, 326 U.S. at 469.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court heard the issue of whether the taxpayer could deduct the costs incurred to travel between Jackson and Mobile from his taxes.Donaldson, Samuel A., Federal Income Taxation of Individuals:  Cases, Problems and Materials 668 (2d ed. 2007). The Supreme Court held that the expenses could not be deducted on the ground that the expenses in question had been incurred by the taxpayer for his own convenience rather than for business reasons.Flowers, 326 U.S. at 473.  The relevant test for deductibility was whether the travel had been motivated by “exigencies of business” or by considerations of personal preference.Flowers, 326 U.S. at 474.  The court opined, “[t]he facts demonstrate clearly that the expenses were not incurred in the pursuit of the business of the taxpayer's employer, the railroad.”  The court further held that the expenses in question “…were incurred solely as the result of the taxpayer’s desire to maintain a home in Jackson while working in Mobile, a factor irrelevant to the maintenance and prosecution of the railroad’s legal business.”  The court determined that the relevant test for deductibility was whether the travel had been motivated by “exigencies of business” or by considerations of personal preference.
 Relevant Statutes 
Today: 26 U.S.C. § 162(a)(2): [T]raveling expenses (including amounts expended for meals and lodging other than amounts which are lavish or extravagant under the circumstances) while away from home on the pursuit of a trade or business.
Predecessor: (at the time of this case:) 26 U.S.C.S. § 23(a)(1)(A) (1) The expense must be a reasonable and necessary traveling expense, as that term is generally understood. This includes such items as transportation fares and food and lodging expenses incurred while traveling. (2) The expense must be incurred while away from home. (3) The expense must be incurred in pursuit of business.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 326
 Chirelstein pp112–115
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1946 in United States case law
"""

From "Commissioner v. Glenshaw Glass Co." ==> """
Commissioner v. Glenshaw Glass Co., 348 U.S. 426 (1955), was an important income tax case before the United States Supreme Court.  The Court held as follows: 
Congress, in enacting income taxation statutes that comprehend "gains or profits and income derived from any source whatever," intended to tax all gain except that which was specifically exempted.
Income is not limited to "the gain derived from capital, from labor, or from both combined."
Although the Court used this characterization in Eisner v. Macomber, it "was not meant to provide a touchstone to all future gross income questions."
Instead, income is realized whenever there are "instances of [1] undeniable accessions to wealth, [2] clearly realized, and [3] over which the taxpayers have complete dominion."
Under this definition, punitive damages qualify as "income" -- even though they are not derived from capital or from labor..
Facts
Two factually distinct cases were consolidated because they presented the same issue.
In one case, the defendant Glenshaw Glass Company had won an award of punitive damages in an antitrust lawsuit. The defendant did not declare this award as income or pay taxes on it, claiming that it was not subject to taxation. The Internal Revenue Service brought suit to collect the tax.
In another case, William Goldman Theatres, Inc. neglected to report punitive damages as income.  Again, the Internal Revenue Service sued to collect the tax.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court, in an opinion by Chief Justice Earl Warren, held that the award of treble damages was taxable income.
In the opinion, Warren pointed out that the language of section 22(a) (the predecessor of current section 61(a)) was employed by Congress in order utilize "the full measure of its taxing power," as provided for under the Sixteenth Amendment.  Essentially, Congress, in enacting section 22(a), intended to tax all gains except those specifically exempted.
The Court then held that the amounts received by the taxpayers in this case were "instances of undeniable accessions to wealth, clearly realized, and over which the taxpayers have complete dominion."
This three-part "test" for determining income is broader than the earlier test employed by the Court in Eisner v. Macomber, and is to this day the preferred test for identifying gross income.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 348
Clark v. Commissioner
Commissioner v. Indianapolis Power & Light Co.
Haverly v. United States
Raytheon Production Corp. v. Commissioner
References
Further reading
External links
Category:1955 in United States case law
Category:United States Sixteenth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Commissioner v. Groetzinger" ==> """
Commissioner v. Groetzinger, 480 U.S. 23 (1987), is a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States, which addressed the issue of what qualifies as being either a trade or business under Section 162(a) of the Internal Revenue Code... Under the terms of § 162(a), tax deductions should be granted "for all the ordinary and necessary expenses paid or incurred during the taxable year in carrying on any trade or business for tax purposes."Id. However, the term "trade or Business" is not defined anywhere in the Internal Revenue Code.See Donaldson (2007), p. 223.  The case of Commissioner v. Groetzinger examined what is required for an activity to rise to the level of a "trade or business" for tax purposes. The particular question presented in this case was whether a full-time gambler who made wagers for his own account was engaged in a "trade or business."
Holding
In the absence of an all-purpose definition by statute or regulation, the Court decided not to create a specific test to determine what qualifies as a trade or business. Instead, the Court found that such a decision requires an examination of the facts in each case. As for gambling in particular, the Court concluded that "if one's gambling activity is pursued full time, in good faith, and with regularity, to the production of income for livelihood, and is not a mere hobby" it is a trade or business within the meaning of §162(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.Groetzinger, 480 U.S. at 35.
Behind the Holding
Historically, Congress has distinguished between business and trade and transactions that a party might have entered into for purposes of profit but that are not necessarily related to trade or business. The Court agreed that to be engaged in a trade or business, the taxpayer must be involved in the activity with continuity and regularity and that the taxpayer's primary purpose for engaging in the activity must be for profit or income. The taxpayer in this case spent 60 to 80 hours a week doing gambling-related activities.Groetzinger, 480 U.S. at 24. He had no other type of employment. In the tax year at issue in the case, the taxpayer had earned $70,000 in gambling winnings. The Court found that the constant and large scale effort the taxpayer made towards gambling qualified it being a trade or business.Groetzinger, 480 U.S. at 36.  It was more than just a hobby or amusement; it was his livelihood. Under the basic concepts of fairness, the Court held that the ordinary and necessary expenses paid or incurred during the taxable year in carrying out the taxpayer's gambling business could be deducted under the terms of §162(a).Groetzinger, 480 U.S. at 33.
Importance
Commissioner v. Groetzinger explains that in deciding whether an activity is a trade or business courts need to examine the facts on a case-by-case basis, looking into whether the taxpayer devoted his or her full-time efforts towards the activity on a regular, continuous, and substantial basis.See Donaldson (2007), p. 231.
See also
 Internal Revenue Code section 162(a)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 480
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1987 in United States case law
"""

From "Commissioner v. Idaho Power Co." ==> """
Commissioner v. Idaho Power Co., 418 U.S. 1 (1974), was a United States Supreme Court case..
 Background 
Taxpayer, Idaho Power Co., used its own equipment and employees to improve and add to its capital facilities. On its books, Idaho Power capitalized the construction-related depreciation on this equipment used for construction of the capital asset. But for income tax purposes, the taxpayer deducted the entire amount of depreciation on equipment used in construction of the capital asset under § 167(a)I.R.C. § 167(a) (). including the amount capitalized as construction costs.
Issue
Whether, for federal income tax purposes, a taxpayer is entitled to a deduction from gross income under § 167(a) of the Code for depreciation on equipment the taxpayer owns and uses in the construction of its own capital facilities, or whether the capitalization provision of § 263(a)(1) of the CodeI.R.C. § 263(a)(1) ().  bars the deduction.
Rule
Construction-related expense items, such as tools, materials, and wages to construction workers are treated as part of the cost of acquisition of a capital asset. Reasonable wages paid in carrying on of a trade or business qualify as a deduction from gross income, but when wages are paid in connection with construction or acquisition of a capital asset they must be capitalized and are then entitled to be amortized over the life of the capital asset so acquired.
§ 263(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code denies a deduction for any amount paid out for construction or permanent improvement of facilities. This extends to the cost of acquisition, construction, or erection of buildings. Treas. Reg. § 1.263(a)-2(a).
Application
The cost of the transportation equipment used for construction activities was paid out in the same manner as the cost of supplies, materials, and the wages of construction workers. The taxpayer does not question the capitalization of these other items, because they are elements of the cost of acquiring a capital asset. Thus, construction-related depreciation should also be capitalized.
§ 161I.R.C. . and § 261I.R.C. . of the Internal Revenue Code require that the capitalization provision of § 263(a) take precedence, on the facts here, over § 167(a).
Conclusion
The equipment depreciation allocable to taxpayer's construction of capital facilities is to be capitalized.
Significance
This case deals with the costs and tax consequences related to producing real and tangible personal property, when a taxpayer constructs property instead of purchasing it. This result was codified in  § 263A of the Internal Revenue Code (known as the uniform capitalization rules or the Unicap rules). This requires the capitalization of all direct and indirect costs allocable to the construction or production of real property or tangible personal property. It also applies to the acquisition of inventory materials and wages paid to builders or other production workers.
Direct costs include raw materials and wages paid to builders or other production workers. Treas. Reg. § 1.263A-1(e)(2).
Indirect costs include repairs, depreciation, utilities, rent, sales tax, property tax, insurance, storage, and packaging. Treas. Reg. § 1.263A-1(e)(3).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 418
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1974 in United States case law
Category:Idaho Power
"""

From "Commissioner v. Indianapolis Power & Light Co." ==> """
Commissioner v. Indianapolis Power & Light Company, 493 U.S. 203 (1990), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court addressed whether customer deposits constituted taxable income to a public utility company.
 Background 
Indianapolis Power & Light Company (IPL) required customers with suspect credit to make deposits with it to assure payment of future bills for electric service. IPL paid interest on deposits held for a certain period of time. A customer could obtain a refund prior to termination of service by making on time payments or by demonstrating acceptable credit.  The refunds were normally made in cash or by check but a customer could also choose to have the deposit amount applied against future bills. Any deposit unclaimed after seven years would escheat to the State. At the time of receipt, IPL did not treat the deposits as income for tax purposes. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) audited the utility and assessed a tax deficiency. IPL appealed this assessment to the United States Tax Court, which sided with IPL. This decision was then appealed, eventually reaching the Supreme Court.
 Analysis 
In front of the Supreme Court, the IRS argued that the deposits were advance payments for electricity and therefore taxable to IPL in the year of receipt. In response, the utility stressed its obligation to refund the deposits with interest. IPL argued the payments were not taxable income because they were similar to loans.
To determine whether the deposits were income, the Supreme Court noted that “undeniable accessions to wealth, clearly realized, and over which the taxpayers have complete dominion” constitute income, citing Commissioner v. Glenshaw Glass Co. The Court found that IPL did not enjoy “complete dominion” over the customer deposits; rather, the IPL had an express obligation to repay a deposit when a customer established good credit or terminated service. IPL's right to keep the money thus depended upon the customer's subsequent decision to have the deposit applied to future bills, not merely upon the utility's adherence to its contractual duties. As such IPL's dominion over the funds was far less than is ordinarily present in an advance payment situation.
The Court, in a unanimous decision, held that whether a payment constitutes income when received depends upon the rights and obligations of the parties at the time the payments are made. The ability to choose what happens to the deposit distinguishes a loan from an advance payment. An individual who makes an advance payment retains no right to insist upon the return of the funds. In contrast, the IPL utility customers retained the right to repayment. While a customer might apply the money to the purchase of electricity, customers assume no obligation to do so. Because the utility did not acquire unfettered “dominion” over the money, the deposits did not constitute income for tax purposes at the time of receipt.
 Importance 
This case highlights an ambiguous area in the U.S. tax code's treatment of deposits. The code treats advance payments and loans differently. Generally, the full amount of an advance payment for services is taxable income to the recipient in the year received. This is true even if the services extend beyond the taxable year. However, a loan is not gross income to the recipient. As the Court noted in this case, the rights of the contracting parties at the time of the payment determine if a deposit is an advance payment or a loan.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 493
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
Taxation in the United States
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1990 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Commissioner v. Kowalski" ==> """
Commissioner v. Kowalski, 434 U.S. 77 (1977), is a decision of the United States Supreme Court relating to taxation of meals furnished by an employer. In this case, the Court interpreted Internal Revenue Code §119(a)-(b)(4) and (d) and Treas. Reg. §1.119-1.US CODE: Title 26,119. Meals or lodging furnished for the convenience of the employerTaxAlmanac - Treasury Regulations, Subchapter A, Sec. 1.119-1 
Most notably, the Court held that:
§119 was intended to exclude meals received "in kind," and so does not exclude cash reimbursements for meals like the one in question.
Facts
The State of New Jersey instituted a cash meal allowance for its state police officers in July 1949. Before that, troopers were provided a mid-shift meal at one of several meal stations located throughout the State. The State had decided that this system was unsatisfactory, as it required troopers to leave their patrol areas unattended for extended periods of time. The new system provided troopers with a cash allowance, which troopers could use to purchase a meal at a location within their patrol area, thus making it unnecessary for them to leave the area unmonitored.
The meal allowance was paid bi-weekly in advance and was included, although separately, with a troopers salary. The money was also separately accounted for in the State's accounting system, and funds from the meal allowance account were never mixed with the salary accounts.  Troopers were not required to spend the allowance on mid-shift meals, nor were they required to account for the manner in which the money was spent. This meant that troopers were allowed to eat at home if their home was within their patrol area, or to bring a meal with them to eat in or near their patrol cars.
Kowalski, a state trooper, reported wages for 1970 that included only a portion of his meal allowances (he included $326.45, which omitted $1,371.09 in allowances). The Commissioner believed that this amount should have been included in income, and determined a tax deficiency. Kowalski argued that the cash meal allowance was not compensatory, but was furnished for the convenience of the employer and therefore wasn't income under I.R.C. §61(a), and that alternatively, it was excluded under I.R.C. §119.
Issue
When Kowalski's employer designated a cash payment as a meal allowance:
Is that payment excludable from gross income under §61(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, 26 U.S.C. §61(a)?
If not, is it excludable under §119 of the Code, 26 U.S.C. §119?
Holding
Justice Brennan, writing for the majority, first swiftly ruled out the possibility that the meal allowances payments are not "income" under §61(a): Commissioner v. Glenshaw Glass Co. defines income as all clearly realized accessions to wealth except where expressly excluded.  The Court then rejected Kowalski's two arguments for why I.R.C. §119 would expressly exclude the cash meal allowance.
Reasoning
§119 was intended to exclude only meals in kind.  The Court found that Congress intended the exclusion to refer only to meals furnished in-kind.
By its own terms, the text of this section applied only to "meals"—not "cash" reimbursements for meals.  (The statute excludes "the value of any meals ... furnished to [an employee] by his employer for the convenience of the employer, but only if ... the meals are furnished on the business premises of the employer.")
According to Senate Report No. 1622 (1954), "Section 119 applies only to meals ... in kind ... Any cash allowances for meals ... received by an employee will continue to be includable to the extent that such allowances constitute compensation."Samuel A. Donaldson, Federal Income Taxation of Individuals: Cases, Problems & Materials 81, Thomson West 2d ed (2007).
§119 was intended to end the confusion of the common law "Convenience of the Employer" doctrine.  The Court rejected the argument that §119 incorporated the doctrinal exclusion for benefits that were noncompensatory (or for the convenience of the employer) under lower court and administrative rulings.Id.at 80.  According to the Court, the drafting process of §119 shows that Congress intended to "end the confusion as to the tax status of meals and lodging furnished an employee by his employer" under prior law.Id.at 82. Section 119 "must therefore be construed as its draftsmen obviously intended it to be—as a replacement for the prior law, designed to "end its confusion."
Dissent
Justice Blackmun, joined by Chief Justice Burger, disagreed with the Court's conclusion that the payments did not fall under the exception in I.R.C. §119. Specifically, Blackmun disputed that the statute was as clear and distinct as the majority's opinion suggested.  Furthermore, Blackmun argued that the trooper's employer was the State of New Jersey, and therefore his business premise was "wherever the trooper is on duty in that State."
He concluded,
I fear that state troopers the country over, not handsomely paid to begin with, will never understand today's decision. And I doubt that their reading of the Court's opinion – if indeed, a layman can be expected to understand its technical wording – will convince them that the situation is as clear as the Court purports to find it.
See also
United States v. Correll - A 1967 Supreme Court decision on when meals count as a business expense for tax deductions.
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 434
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:Free meals
"""

From "Commissioner v. LoBue" ==> """
Commissioner v. LoBue, 351 U.S. 243 (1956), was an income tax case before the United States Supreme Court.
Background
Facts
Respondent's company offered stock options to its employees based on their performance and continued employment. Respondent exercised the options offered.
In recognition of his "contribution and efforts in making the operation of the Company successful," a corporation gave an employee options to purchase stock in the corporation. The options were nontransferable and were contingent upon continued employment. After some time had elapsed and the value of the shares had increased, the employee exercised the options and purchased the stock at less than the then current market price. For some of the shares, he gave the employer a promissory note for the option price; but the shares were not delivered until the notes were paid in cash, when the value of the shares had increased.
Tax return
The employee did not report as taxable income any of the gain resulting from the exercise of the option
Commissioner of Internal Revenue
The Internal Revenue Service levied a deficiency assessment against him.
Tax court
Respondent appealed and the Tax Court held that the options were granted to provide respondent with a proprietary interest in the company and not as compensation and they were not taxable.
Third Circuit
The Third Circuit affirmed a Tax Court decision that found stock options exercised by respondent represented a proprietary interest in a corporation and not compensation for services.
Opinion of the court
On certiorari, reversed and remanded.  Black wrote for a 5-4 Court.
The Court held that the interpretation given to § 22(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1939 was too narrow and that the options were compensation, includible as taxable income. The matter was reversed and remanded to the appellate court with instructions to remand to the lower court for further proceedings to determine the question of whether delivery of a binding promissory note marked the completion of the stock purchase for purposes of measuring taxable gain.
The Court held that the transfer of stock to the employee for less than its value was taxable compensation, notwithstanding the employer's purpose to confer a proprietary interest on the employee. The majority held, further, that the employee's gain was realized in the year that the options were exercised, and was to be measured as of the time of the exercise of the options, and not of the grant thereof.
Held:
Under the Internal Revenue Code of 1939, as amended, the resulting gain to the employee was taxable as income received at the time he exercised the option and purchased the stock, and his taxable gain should be measured as of the time when the options were exercised and not as of the time when they were granted. pp. 244–250.
(a) In defining "gross income" as broadly as it did in § 22 (a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1939, as amended, Congress intended to tax all gains except those specifically exempted. P. 246.
(b) The only exemption that could possibly apply to these transactions is the gift exemption of § 22 (b)(3), and these transactions were not "gifts" in the statutory sense. pp. 246–247.
(c) There is no statutory basis for excluding such transactions from "gross income" on the ground that one purpose of the employer was to confer on the employee a "proprietary interest" in the business. P. 247.
(d) The employee received a substantial economic and financial benefit from his employer, prompted by the employer's desire to get better work from the employee, and this is "compensation for personal service" within the meaning of § 22 (a). P. 247.
(e) In these circumstances, the employee "realized" a taxable gain when he purchased the stock. P. 248.
(f) The employee's taxable gain should be measured by the difference between the option price and the market value of the shares as of the time when the options were exercised and not as of the time when the options were granted. pp. 248–249.
(g) On remand, the Tax Court may consider the question, not previously passed on, whether delivery of a promissory note for the purchase price marked the completion of the stock purchase and whether the gain should be measured as of that date or as of the date the note was paid. P. 250. 
Concurrence
Frankfurter and Clark, concurring in the judgment of the majority and in its opinion on the main issue, stated that, since the time when the employee acquired the taxable interest was not an issue either before the Tax Court or the Court of Appeals, the majority had erred in departing from the general rule whereby the Supreme Court abstains from passing on such an issue in a tax case when that issue was not raised below.
Concurrence in part, dissent in part
Harlan, joined by Burton, concurring in part and dissenting in part, took the view that the taxable event was the grant of the options, and not their exercise, with the result that the gain to the taxpayer was to be measured as of the date of the grant of the options.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 351
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1956 in United States case law
"""

From "Commissioner v. Soliman" ==> """
Commissioner v. Soliman, 506 U.S. 168 (1993), was a case heard before the United States Supreme Court in which the court decided whether a portion of a dwelling unit exclusively used as a principal place of business for any trade or business of a taxpayer would allow a deduction to the taxpayer's income taxes under Internal Revenue Code Section 280A(c)(1)(A).
Soliman was an anesthesiologist who spent thirty to thirty-five hours per week with patients at three different hospitals but none of the hospitals provided him with an office. He used a spare bedroom in his house for contacting patients and surgeons, maintaining billing records, preparing for treatments, and reading medical journals.
The Supreme Court denied Soliman's home office deduction setting forth a two consideration test for whether the home was the taxpayer's principal place of business: (1) the relative importance of the activities performed, and (2) time spent at each place.
Congress's reaction to this decision was to amend Section 280A(c) in the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 so that a home office could meet the "principal place of business" test if it is the only fixed location where administrative or management activities are performed.  This effectively nullified the Supreme Court's decision ruling in the Soliman case.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 506
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1993 in United States case law
"""

From "Commissioner v. Sunnen" ==> """
Commissioner v. Sunnen, 333 U.S. 591 (1948), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States in 1948 in which the Court outlined the scope of collateral estoppel or estoppel by judgment in determinations of federal tax liability. This was important because a single controversial circumstance may have a bearing on income tax liability for several years. Res judicata, as part of the doctrine of judicial finality, protects a taxpayer's tax liability for a given year once the taxpayer wins a judgment in court. The judgment is controlling not only controlling with regard to the issues litigated but also with any issues that could have been raised if they would have affected the determination of tax liability for the year. However, of course, a single controversial circumstance may have a bearing on income tax liability for several years, and if a judgment fixes liability for one of the years, res judiciary forecloses the reopening of only that year's liability. But the related doctrine of collateral estoppel prevents relitigation of issues that were in fact raised and decided in the earlier litigation, even when they arise in a new cause of action, such as a dispute as to liability for a later year.
However, the Supreme Court said that collateral estoppel in determinations of tax liability "must be confined to situations where the matter raised in the second suit is identical in all respects with that decided in the first proceeding and where the controlling facts and applicable legal rules remain unchanged.".
See also
Privity (law)
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 333
References
External links
Goldstein, "Res judicata and collateral estoppel," 54 A.B.A.J. 1131 (1968)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1948 in United States case law
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
"""

From "Commissioner v. Tufts" ==> """
Commissioner v. Tufts, 461 U.S. 300 (1983), was a unanimous decision by the United States Supreme Court, which held that when a taxpayer sells or disposes of property encumbered by a nonrecourse obligation exceeding the fair market value of the property sold, the Commissioner of Internal Revenue may require him to include in the “amount realized” the outstanding amount of the obligation; the fair market value of the property is irrelevant to this calculation.
 Facts 
Taxpayers borrowed $1,851,500 on a non-recourse basis to build an apartment complex.  Later, they sold the complex for no consideration other than the assumption of the non-recourse liability.
At the time of the sale, the fair market value of the property was $1,400,000, and their basis in the property was $1,455,740 (i.e.: the $1,851,500 which they borrowed, plus their invested capital of $44,212, minus deductions taken in the amount of $439,972.)Commissioner v. Tufts, 461 U.S. 300 (1983).
The taxpayers argued that their tax consequences should equal the excess of fair market value over basis.  If so, they would have a loss of $55,740.
The Tax Commissioner argued that the tax should equal the excess of the principal amount of debt over basis. If so, then the taxpayers actually realized a gain of $400,000.
 Issue 
How should the tax court deal with the transfer of non-recourse mortgage debt in property dispositions when the fair market value of the property is less than the property's basis?
 Opinion 
The Court began by noting that all gains or losses on the disposition of property must be realized, under section 1001(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.Tufts at 304; see also . The definition for “amount realized,” found in 1001(b), states “the amount realized from the sale or other disposition of property shall be the sum of any money received plus the fair market value of the property (other than money) received.”Tufts at 304; see also .
The Court considered, and ultimately reaffirmed, the holding of a previous opinion rendered in Crane v. Commissioner; specifically that the phrase “amount realized” must include the amount of mortgage debt liability transferred.Tufts at 304-307; see also Crane v. Commissioner, .
The Court specifically noted that the fair market value of the property at the time of disposition is irrelevant.Tufts at 307. Further, the nature of the loan (recourse or non-recourse) is also insignificant for purposes of determining basis.Tufts at 308. The Court defended its position by observing that the stated requirements force a taxpayer to account for the proceeds of obligations he has received tax-free and included in the property's basis.Tufts at 312. A finding otherwise would allow a mortgagee to recognize a tax loss without suffering a corresponding economic loss.Tufts at 313.
In applying the opinion's statement of law to the present facts, the Court concluded that the taxpayers’ disposition of property realized a gain of approximately $400,000; not their claim of a $55,740 loss.Tufts at 317.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 331
Taxation in the United States
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:United States property case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
