"""

From "Givhan v. Western Line Consolidated School District" ==> """
Givhan v. Western Line Consolidated School District, 439 U.S. 410 (1979), is a United States Supreme Court decision on the free speech rights of public employees. The Court held unanimously in favor of a schoolteacher fired for her critical remarks in conversations with her principal. Justice William Rehnquist wrote the opinion, with a short concurrence by John Paul Stevens.
The petitioner, Bessie Givhan, had believed that various policies and practices of the newly integrated Western Line School District in Mississippi were meant to sustain school segregation. In private meetings with her new principal, she persistently complained about this. The principal in turn recommended the district not rehire her, citing those conversations as well as some other issues. She joined the ongoing desegregation lawsuit as an intervenor, alleging that her First and Fourteenth Amendment rights to free speech and due process had been violated. The district court hearing the case agreed, but then the Fifth Circuit reversed that decision, holding that since she had not spoken publicly she was not entitled to constitutional protection, distinguishing her case from two other recent decisions in which the Supreme Court had ruled in favor of non-tenured teachers let go by their districts following critical statements by noting that in those cases, the criticism had been expressed in a public context.
Rehnquist's opinion rejected that distinction, calling the Fifth Circuit's reading too narrow. He further rejected its claim that Givhan had forced herself on an unwilling listener, since the principal had invited her in. Since the district had cited other, potentially permissible reasons for its action, the Court remanded the case to the district court to apply the Mt. Healthy test, from one of the other two cases involving teachers, and determine if the district had adequate reason to fire her other than the speech. Three years later, the lower court found that it did not, and ordered Givhan reinstated after a 12-year absence.
The Court has not had to significantly revisit the holding since then, and it has not been subject to much commentary or legal analysis. Four years later, in Connick v. Myers, its next case on the free speech rights of public employees, it began to limit Givhan and its predecessors by sketching out a test for whether the employee's speech was on a matter of public concern. In the early 21st century, its holding in Garcetti v. Ceballos, that speech made by employees pursuant to their job duties was not protected, appeared to some to complicate Givhan although the Court said it would not.
Underlying dispute
An African American, Bessie Givhan began teaching junior high school-level English at the all-black Norma O'Bannon School in Greenville, Mississippi, in 1963. As with other school districts in the South in the wake of the Supreme Court's 1955 Brown v. Board of Education decision, a lawsuit had been brought to desegregate schools in the state. In the middle of 1970, the schools in the Greenville area were formally integrated per the Supreme Court's order in Alexander v. Holmes County Board of EducationAlexander v. Holmes County Board of Education,  that Southern schools desegregate immediately. She was reassigned to Riverside High School in Avon,  away.
At the beginning of the 1971 school year she was transferred again, to Glen Allan High School, near Avon. Years later she described Glen Allan as a "stepchild" within the newly created Western Line Consolidated School District. With a larger proportion of black students and faculty than the other two high schools in the new district, it was short of fundamental resources compared to them. "You could not compare [them]", she recalled in 2006.
She complained frequently to the principal, a white former teacher named James Leach. "I requested a pointer for my blackboard and an eraser, things of this sort that I needed as a teacher," she said. This did not endear her to Leach or the district administration. "I was labeled 'hostile' and 'unreasonable.'" At the end of the year she was informed that her contract would not be renewed. Leach told the superintendent that although she was "a competent teacher" she often had "an insulting and hostile attitude" and made "petty and unreasonable demands."Ayers v. Western Line Consol. Sch. Dist., 555 F.2d 1309, 1312  (5th Cir., 1977) She insisted that she be told why, and in a letter to her the district cited her refusal to administer standardized tests, her refusal to cooperate with the administration and an "antagonistic and hostile attitude ... throughout the school year."Givhan v. Western Line Consolidated School District, 
In lower courts
Givhan's case was heard first in federal district court, as part of the larger desegregation action against the school district. After it ruled in her favor, the school district appealed and won a partial reversal.
District court
Givhan joined the ongoing lawsuit in federal court for the Northern District of Mississippi over the integration of the school districts within its jurisdiction as an intervenor.Singleton et al v. Jackson Municipal Separate School District et al, 419 F.2d 1211 (5th Cir., 1970) She alleged that her dismissal violated not only the terms of that case, which required that the district develop nonracial objective criteria for the retention of teachers and staff, something which it had failed to do, but her own rights to free speech and due process under the First and Fourteenth amendments.
During the two-day bench trial, the district offered other reasons that it claimed justified her dismissal, not all of them speech-related, in addition to the standardized tests she did not administer (at the time, Givhan had argued that students had insufficient time to prepare for them). She had supposedly walked out of a meeting on the desegregation plan along with other teachers in 1969 and blown their car horns in an effort to disrupt the meeting; and in 1970 she and other teachers had threatened not to come to work after the midyear integration. Lastly, they said, she had helped a student conceal a knife he was in possession of during a search while at Riverside.Givhan, at 412n2.
Givhan admitted this last incident, but the district court found it to be unrelated to her dismissal as the superintendent did not seem to have considered it when deciding whether to retain it or not. The evidence on the other three allegations was inconclusive. The court found in her favor and ordered her reinstatement.Givhan, at 412.
Not only had her demands not been "constant" as the district claimed, the judge wrote "[t]he school district's motivation in failing to renew Givhan's contract was almost entirely a desire to rid themselves of a vocal critic of the district's policies and practices which were capable of interpretation as embodying racial discrimination." And under the Supreme Court's decision in Pickering v. Board of Education, in which it had ruled in favor of an Illinois teacher fired for writing a letter to the editor of a local newspaper critical of the school board,Pickering v. Board of Education,  Givhan's complaints to Leach were protected by the First Amendment as speech on a matter of public concern.Ayers, 1314
The district appealed to the Fifth Circuit. Givhan's case was heard along with several other teachers challenging their dismissals in the absence of the criteria that were supposed to have been developed to govern them. Judges Walter Pettus Gewin, Paul Hitch Roney and James Clinkscales Hill were empaneled to hear their cases.
Appeals court
In 1977, six years after Givhan's dismissal, the court reached its decision. Gewin wrote for a majority that first considered, per the Supreme Court's holding earlier that year in Mt. Healthy City School District Board of Education v. Doyle, an Ohio case also involving a nontenured high school teacher fired over critical speech,Mt. Healthy City School District Board of Education v. Doyle,  It required that the court consider whether, if there were other reasons for the adverse personnel action that did not violate the plaintiff's constitutional rights, they would have been enough to justify it.
Gewin was skeptical. "Appellants seem to argue that the preponderance of the evidence shows that the same decision would have been justified, but that is not the same as proving that the same decision would have been made," he wrote. The alleged incidents did not seem from the record to have been much of a factor in the district's decision at the time Givhan was let go. "Therefore appellants failed to make a successful 'same decision anyway' defense"Ayers, 1315.
However, the crucial question for Givhan was not that, it was whether her discussions with Leach enjoyed First Amendment protection. And on that score, Gewin began, "[n]ot all expression by a government employee is constitutionally protected." Pickering had held that the employee's constitutional interest had to be balanced against the government's interest in running the school system in an efficient and orderly manner. The court, he continued, had not found any of the cases in the party's briefs helpful in deciding whether it was, so it turned to "general free speech principles."Ayers, 1316–17.
In Pickering, Mt. Healthy and Perry v. Sindermann, the "trilogy" of cases brought by educators alleging unconstitutional retaliatory firings that served as precedent for Givhan, Gewin observed, the crucial factor had been that the plaintiffs' speech was public: Pickering had written a letter to the editor, Doyle had shared a memo with a local radio station that then reported its contents as news, and Sindermann had been a public critic of the state college's governing board. He found another recent case of a public employee's speech rights, Madison School District v. Wisconsin Employment Relations Commission, followed this pattern. There, the Court had held that the right of a nonunion teacher to speak at a public meeting prevailed over a provision of state labor law that forbade negotiations with anyone not in the bargaining unit.Madison School District v. Wisconsin Employment Relations Commission,  Other prominent recent free-speech cases, Gewin also found, emphasized the public context of the speech entitled to protection.Ayers, 1317–18.
Further, Gewin wrote, two other recent cases established that the First Amendment did not give speakers the right to compel that their speech be heard. Rowan v. U.S. Post Office Dept. had upheld a postal regulation allowing customers to refuse to receive potentially obscene advertising or advertising for such products or periodicals.Rowan v. U.S. Post Office Dept.  Lehman v. Shaker Heights had held that a public transit system had no obligation to carry political advertisements.Lehman v. Shaker Heights,  Based on these two precedents, Gewin wrote:
These general principles lead us to conclude that teacher Givhan did not engage in constitutionally protected speech in her expressions to principal Leach. Neither a teacher nor a citizen has a constitutional right to single out a public employee to serve as the audience for his or her privately expressed views, at least in the absence of evidence that the public employee was given that task by law, custom, or school Board decision. There is no evidence here that Givhan sought to disseminate her views publicly, to anyone willing to listen. Rather, she brought her complaints to Leach alone. Neither is there evidence that the Board or Mississippi law delegated to Leach the task of entertaining complaints from all comers and that he discriminated in choosing to reject her complaints and not to rehire her because she impressed him into such service.Ayers, 1319.
To explain further, Gewin invoked the legal saying that hard cases make bad law. While he agreed that the substance of Givhan's complaints to Leach might well have been seen as "laudable" by some observers, "[p]rotection of the First Amendment, however, does not turn on the social worth of ideas. If we held Givhan's expressions constitutionally protected, we would in effect force school principals to be ombudsmen, for damnable as well as laudable expressions." While such a policy might not be such a bad idea, he continued, it would be better being adopted by the school board or legislature, rather than being imposed by a court.
Since the court had found against Givhan on her constitutional claims, it reversed the Northern District. However, the district court had not reached a verdict on her claims that the ongoing desegregation suit had been violated by her dismissal, so the case was remanded for further proceedings to decide that issue.Ayers, 1320.
Supreme Court
Instead of returning to district court, Givhan petitioned the Supreme Court for certiorari. It was granted, and the Court heard oral arguments in November 1978. Givhan herself, who was working at a community counseling organization as she could not find another teaching job due to the ongoing litigation, flew to Washington to watch those proceedings in person.
The Court announced its decision two months later, at the beginning of 1979. All nine justices had sided with Givhan, holding that her conversations with Leach were indeed, per Pickering, protected speech on a matter of public concern. Justice William Rehnquist wrote the opinion.Givhan v. Western Line Consolidated School District, 
Opinion of the Court
Rehnquist responded harshly to the Fifth Circuit's opinion. After quoting its concern that ruling for Givhan would force principals to be "ombudsmen", he said that the justices were "unable to agree that private expression of one's views is beyond constitutional protection, and therefore reverse the Court of Appeals' judgment and remand the case so that it may consider the contentions of the parties freed from this erroneous view of the First Amendment."Givhan, 413–16, Rehnquist, J.
Gewin had further erred in distinguishing Givhan's case from the Pickering–Perry–Mt. Healthy trilogy by the fact that those three had involved public expression rather than private discussions. Rehnquist looked to the text of the amendment itself in response:
While he speculated that, based on its citation to another one of its cases, the Fifth Circuit had also seen the fact that Givhan was speaking to her principal rather than the school board as significant in assessing its disruptive effect on district operations, as per Pickering, Rehnquist did not see a difference there, either.In a footnote to this section of the opinion, Rehnquist conceded that while in a public context only the content of the speech matters for that side of the Pickering balancing test, "[p]rivate expression, however, may in some situations bring additional factors to the Pickering calculus. When a government employee personally confronts his immediate superior, the employing agency's institutional efficiency may be threatened not only by the content of the employee's message but also by the manner, time, and place in which it is delivered." (Givhan, 415n4)
The facts of the case dispensed with the Fifth Circuit's other grounds for excluding Givhan's speech from constitutional protection. "Nor is the Court of Appeals' view supported by the 'captive audience' rationale. Having opened his office door to petitioner, the principal was hardly in a position to argue that he was the "unwilling recipient" of her views."
Since Mt. Healthy had not been decided when the district court had tried the case, the burden-shifting mandated by that decision was not yet part of the process. Therefore, Rehnquist noted, the school district had not been allowed to prove that Givhan's other alleged misconduct was sufficient to fire her if the protected conversations could not be considered.He allowed in a footnote that, unlike the Fifth Circuit, the justices believed that that cause existed if some of the documented incidents had actually occurred. (Givhan, 417n5) The Court thus instructed that it be considered on remand to the trial court. Justice John Paul Stevens added a short concurrence clarifying that the district court could make that finding on the basis of the existing record, without retrying the case, if it so chose.Givhan, 417–18.
Subsequent proceedings
Later that year, the district court applied the Mt. Healthy test and again held for Givhan. It stated that the school district's other reasons for the firing were just rationalizations it found afterwards and ordered not only that she be reinstated but given full back pay and attorney's fees. The school district appealed again to the Fifth Circuit, but in 1982 it upheld the district court's decision.
Aftermath and legacy
Although she had not taught for the 12 years it had taken her to win her case, Givhan decided to return. "It was really a big decision," she said in 2006. "It was like the show, Deal or No Deal. It was a tough call." Ultimately she decided to do so for the other teachers in the district. "For them, I went on back to see if I could make positive change."
She taught for another five years, then retired. Several years later she was ordained a Methodist minister, a position she has also since retired from. In her 2006 interview, she said it still "blows my mind in a positive way" that she won at the Supreme Court. "It gave me more faith in the justice system ... I believe justice can be done. It can prevail if it gets into the right hands."
Subsequent jurisprudence
There have not been many cases that have dealt further with the issues raised by Givhan. The Supreme Court has heard two other cases that turned on speech on a matter of public concern by a public employee within the workplace, and there have been some cases in the appeals court cases that have relied in some measure on Givhan or discussed it at length.
Supreme Court
The Court's two most important post-Givhan cases where a public employee spoke privately resulted in rulings for the employers and narrowed the circumstances under which employees can make a First Amendment claim. Both however distinguished themselves from Givhan, emphasizing that the speech in that case was still protected.
Connick v. Myers
Four years after Givhan, the Court considered another case where a public employee sought damages for her dismissal over a private speech act on a matter of public concern. In Connick v. Myers the respondent, Sheila Myers, a former prosecutor working for Harry Connick Sr., Orleans Parish district attorney at that time, had distributed a questionnaire to her fellow employees in the wake of accepting a transfer she had had mixed feelings about. Among other things, it asked if they still had confidence in Connick and his top subordinates, and if they had ever been pressured to work on his political campaigns. When Connick, who was not in the office the day Myers distributed it, found out, she was fired. Both the district courtMyers v. Connick, 507 F.Supp. 752, (E.D. La., 1981). and (again) the Fifth Circuit had ruled for her.Connick v. Myers, 654 F.2d 719 (5th Cir., 1981).Connick v. Myers, 
The Supreme Court reversed. Byron White, writing for a five-justice majority, distinguished Myers' conduct from Givhan's first by noting that much of her questionnaire did not touch on what the Court considered to matters of public concern. He also invoked the footnote to Givhan allowing contextual factors to be considered, rather than just the content of the speech, when the speech was private. "Here the questionnaire was prepared and distributed at the office; the manner of distribution required not only Myers to leave her work but others to do the same in order that the questionnaire be completed," White wrote. It was additionally distinctive that Myers had distributed the questionnaire immediately following her decision to accept the transfer.Connick, at 152–53, White, J. Givhan's speech with Leach, he further noted, had addressed racial issues in the school district, "a matter inherently of public concern."Connick, at 148n8.
In dissent, William Brennan faulted the majority for conditioning its finding that the questionnaire did not address a matter of public concern in part on it having been distributed privately. "[W]hether a particular statement by a public employee is addressed to a subject of public concern does not depend on where it was said or why," he wrote. "This conclusion is implicit in Givhan's holding."Connick, at 159, Brennan, J., dissenting
Garcetti v. Ceballos
It would be more than 20 years before the Court again took a case turning on the private speech of public employees. In Garcetti v. Ceballos the respondent, another prosecutor in a large city, challenged as unconstitutional an adverse employment action by his superior, Los Angeles County District Attorney Gil Garcetti. He had recommended a case be dismissed after he had come to believe a deputy sheriff had made misrepresentations on a search warrant affidavit, which caused some friction between the district attorney's office and the sheriff's office and ultimately testified on the defense's behalf in an attempt to suppress the evidence obtained through the warrant. In response, he claimed, he was denied an expected promotion, demoted, and transferred to an outlying office.Garcetti v. Ceballos, 
Like Myers and Givhan, he filed suit. Unlike them, he lost at trial. On appeal, the Ninth Circuit reversed, saying that the D.A.'s office had failed the Pickering balancing test by not presenting any evidence that Ceballos's actions disrupted its efficient functioning. Circuit precedent also held that speech made as part of an employee's job was protected as well.Ceballos v. Garcetti, 361 F.3d 1168 (9th Cir., 2004) However, Judge Diarmuid O'Scannlain wrote a special concurrence arguing that while precedent compelled the holding it should be revisited and overruled, since he did not see public employees as having any protectable personal interest in speech made as part of their job duties.Ceballos, 1185 et seq.Garcetti, at 413–417, Kennedy, J.
The Supreme Court reversed, in a 5–4 decision that greatly revised this area of the law. Writing for the majority, Justice Anthony Kennedy agreed that while Givhan still protected private speech to a superior such as had occurred in that case, other intervening precedent such as Rosenberger v. University of Virginia and Rust v. SullivanRust v. Sullivan,  had established that the government enjoyed great control over speech it paid for,Rosenberger v. University of Virginia, , Kennedy, J. such as the memo Ceballos had been required to write in any event.Garcetti, 420.
That was the difference. Kennedy distinguished Ceballos from Givhan and the other plaintiffs who had come before her by noting that while they had spoken as citizens, he was just doing his job: "The controlling factor in Ceballos' case is that his expressions were made pursuant to his duties ... We hold that when public employees make statements pursuant to their official duties, the employees are not speaking as citizens for First Amendment purposes, and the Constitution does not insulate their communications from employer discipline."Garcetti, 421.
Two of the three dissents mentioned Givhan, failing to see any distinction. "We had no difficulty recognizing that the First Amendment applied when Bessie Givhan, an English teacher, raised concerns about the school's racist employment practices to the principal," noted John Paul Stevens. "Our silence as to whether or not her speech was made pursuant to her job duties demonstrates that the point was immaterial."Garcetti, at 427, Stevens, J., dissenting.
David Souter put Givhan in the context of the entire Pickering line. "In each case, the Court realized that a public employee can wear a citizen's hat when speaking on subjects closely tied to the employee's own job, and Givhan stands for the same conclusion even when the speech is not addressed to the public at large, " he wrote.
Lower courts
Within a year of the decision appeals courts were viewing Givhan primarily as a clarification of the standard of proof required under the Mt. Healthy test. "Under Givhan, the initial burden is upon plaintiffs to show that their conduct was constitutionally protected," the First Circuit wrote in Rosaly v. Ignacio. "Plaintiffs must next establish that this conduct was a 'substantial factor' or a 'motivating factor' in [the adverse action] ... If the plaintiffs are to recover, the court (or jury) must expressly find that plaintiffs would not have been discharged 'but for' the constitutionally immunized activity"Rosaly v. Ignacio, 592 F.2d 145, 149 (1st. Cir., 1979)
In the course of endorsing this view the following year, the Seventh Circuit noted that in one case the Second Circuit had chosen to stick with the balancing test from Pickering rather than the "but-for" test from Givhan.Wren v. Jones, 635 F.2d. 1277, 1284–85 (7th Cir., 1980) In that case, Janusaitis v. Middlebury Volunteer Fire Dept., it considered the appeal of a Connecticut volunteer firefighter who alleged that he was dismissed in retaliation for his efforts to correct what he saw as financial improprieties in the department's operations, some of which involved letters he had prepared to be sent to regulatory agencies as well as his being the subject of a local newspaper article. The district court had found only the newspaper article to be constitutionally protected activity, and found that the plaintiff's generally abrasive and antisocial conduct justified his dismissal on Mt. Healthy grounds.Janusaitis v. Middlebury Volunteer Fire Dept., 607 F.2d 17 (2nd Cir., 1979)
The panel reversed the district court on that issue, holding that all Janusaitis's other activities, such as the letters, came under First Amendment protection. "Hence, we cannot rely on the doctrine of Mt. Healthy in this case," wrote Judge Murray Irwin Gurfein. Therefore, the court returned to Pickering's test: did Janusaitis's activities disrupt the orderly functioning of what the court had already held to be a public agency?Although the fire department was a privately run organization, the court had held that it was a governmental agency for this case since it performed a key governmental function (fire protection and suppression) under an agreement with the town as specifically authorized by state statute for that purpose.Janusaitis, at 25.
While it had rejected Givhan's but-for test, the court found Rehnquist's fourth footnote particularly dispositive, due to both its factual findings and the unique nature of the work the government agency performed.
After Garcetti, plaintiffs have sought protection by comparing their speech to Givhan's rather than Ceballos's. A Lake Pontchartrain Causeway police officer fired for his mishandling of an incident where Eddie Price III, mayor of nearby Mandeville, drunkenly crashed a city-owned vehicle through a closed tollbooth, claimed the action was in part for his threat during the investigation to reveal evidence of widespread police misconduct. When he filed suit in the Eastern District of Louisiana, he argued that his speech was, like Givhan's, made to his superior and thus was not to be considered part of his job duties. Judge Sarah S. Vance disagreed, distinguishing his speech from Givhan's by noting hers had not been made during an investigation into her conduct and thus her job had not been at stake.Kast v. Greater New Orleans Expressway Commission, 719 F.Supp.2d 662, 673 (E.D.La., 2010)
In a 2012 order, a magistrate judge of the Western District of Arkansas also used Givhan as a standard to compare the plaintiff with. In Greer v. City of Warren, a police officer alleged his dismissal for allegedly using a racial slur during an arrest and displaying the Confederate flag at his home and on his MySpace page was itself a retaliatory act for his report of a racial slur used by another officer. Since Givhan's speech to her principal on the racial issues at the school had been called "inherently a matter of public concern" in Connick's footnote 8, the magistrate found the plaintiff's report to his superior was also protected speech.Greer v. City of Warren, No. 1:10-cv-01065 (W.D.Ark., 2012)
Weintraub v. Board of Education of New York City School District
Whether to apply Garcetti or Givhan split a court in 2010. In Weintraub v. Board of Education of New York City School District, the Second Circuit considered the appeal of a teacher at a Brooklyn elementary school who claimed he was retaliated against and fired after he filed a grievance with the teachers' union when the school's principal refused to discipline a student who had thrown a book at him. After the Eastern District of New York held that neither his conversation with the principal nor the grievance were protected speech under Garcetti, he filed an interlocutory appeal. While other circuits had ruled on the latter question, the Second never had.Weintraub v. Board of Education of New York City School District, 593 f.3d 196, 200 (2nd Cir, 2010).
In the majority opinion, Judge John M. Walker, Jr. distinguished Weintraub's speech to his principal from Givhan's to Leach's by noting that hers was not related to her core duties as an English teacher, whereas his was since it concerned classroom discipline. Further, he continued the speech in the form of a grievance, for which "there is no relevant citizen analogue ... [It is] an internal communication made pursuant to an existing dispute-resolution policy established by his employer."Weintraub, 204–05.
Guido Calabresi, former dean of Yale Law School, dissented. He felt the majority had read Garcetti too expansively, particularly in the educational context, since so many factors could relate to a teacher's core duties of "effective teaching and classroom learning," as they had described them. "Would Givhan come out the same way under the majority's framework? Givhan's speech concerned her students' opinions on the school's handling of racial issues, a matter that has serious pedagogical implications."Weintraub, 205–209. In a footnote, he further criticized how the majority had construed the union, via the grievance process, as an extension of the employer. "As a general matter, I doubt that most employers would view union activity as something that their employees do for the employer's benefit. There is a distinct irony in the idea that unions, which so many employers seek to exclude from the workplace, are somehow transmuted into entities that "promote the employer's mission," for purposes of the First Amendment."Weintraub, 209n6.The next year, in Borough of Duryea v. Guarnieri (564 U.S. ___, 2011), the Court held that the Petition Clause of the First Amendment only protects a labor grievance if its substance is a matter of public concern.
Analysis and commentary
Writing in the Western New England Law Review a year after the decision, John Koltes III considered it a generally positive development. "[It] clarified the weight to be accorded the factors set forth in Pickering and established Doyle as the test to be used when employees assert that their dismissal or transfer was unconstitutionally motivated."Koltes, John R. III; "Public Employees May Speak a Little Evil ", 3 WNE Law Rev 289, 310, 1980. Nevertheless, he was concerned by how lower courts had been interpreting footnote 4 to consider the time, place and manner of an employee's public speech, when evaluating the constitutionality of the adverse action, citing Janusaitis  and another Texas case involving a fired teacher's aide.Barbre v. Garland Independent School District, 474 F.Supp. 687 (N.D.Tex., 1979) "This expanded reading ... works to the detriment of public employees' First Amendment rights."Koltes, at 307.
In another contemporary comment, William & Mary law professor Frederick Schauer considered the effect of the decision in extending First Amendment protection to speech made in a private context. "It has much to commend it," he wrote.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 439
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
Notes
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1979 in United States case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States public employment case law
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States constitutional torts case law
Category:African-American history of Mississippi
Category:Greenville, Mississippi
Category:Education in Washington County, Mississippi
Category:Education segregation in Mississippi
"""

From "Glass v. Louisiana" ==> """
Glass v. Louisiana, 471 U.S. 1080 (1985), was a case denied for hearing by the United States Supreme Court in 1985. The case is famous for Justice Brennan's dissent from the denial of certiorari, joined by Justice Marshall, arguing that the death penalty is always unconstitutional.
 Background 
thumb|Louisiana State Penitentiary, where Glass was confined and executed
Jimmy L. Glass (May 27, 1962 – June 12, 1987) was an American convicted murderer who was sentenced to death by the state of Louisiana.
Glass originally hailed from Arkansas. He was a high school dropout and had a criminal record. With fellow inmate Jimmy C. Wingo (March 14, 1952 – June 16, 1987), Glass escaped from the Webster Parish, Louisiana Jail in December 1982 and, during their escape, they killed Newt Brown (born 1927) and his wife, Erlene Nealy Brown (born 1931), at their home on Christmas Eve in Dixie Inn outside Minden. The Browns' son, Gary Lamar Brown, was the son-in-law of Judge Charles A. Marvin (1929–2003) of the Louisiana Court of Appeal for the Second Circuit, based in Shreveport. Glass and Wingo were soon arrested. Both were sentenced to death in the electric chair.
According to then Louisiana's law, the only authorized method of execution was the electric chair. Glass and his lawyers argued that executions by electrocution violate the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution, because causing to pass through the body of the person convicted a current of electricity of sufficient intensity to cause death, and the application and continuance of such current through the body of the person convicted until such person is dead and electrocution causes the gratuitous infliction of unnecessary pain and suffering and does not comport with evolving standards of human dignity.
 Opinion of the Court 
The court denied certiorari, thereby allowing the lower court's decision to stand.
Justice William J. Brennan (joined by Justice Thurgood Marshall) dissented from the denial of certiorari. In his dissent, Brennan reiterated his "belief that the 'physical and mental suffering' inherent in any method of execution is so 'uniquely degrading to human dignity' that, when combined with the arbitrariness by which capital punishment is imposed, the trend of enlightened opinion, and the availability of less severe penological alternatives, the death penalty is always unconstitutional."
Brennan's dissent is known for its gruesome depiction of electrocution:
"Th[e] evidence suggests that death by electric current is extremely violent and inflicts pain and indignities far beyond the 'mere extinguishment of life.' Witnesses routinely report that, when the switch is thrown, the condemned prisoner 'cringes,' 'leaps,' and 'fights the straps with amazing strength.' 'The hands turn red, then white, and the cords of the neck stand out like steel bands.' The prisoner's limbs, fingers, toes, and face are severely contorted. The force of the electric current is so powerful that the prisoner's eyeballs sometimes pop out and 'rest on [his] cheeks.' The prisoner often defecates, urinates, and vomits blood and drool."
Brennan also concluded that electrocution is ""nothing less than the contemporary technological equivalent of burning people at the stake."
 Subsequent developments 
The Court, by majority 5-4, found that electrocution as an authorized method of executions is constitutional.
Glass was electrocuted on June 12, 1987 at the age of twenty-five. His accomplice, Jimmy Wingo, was executed four days later, on June 16, 1987.
It was said that Glass was grinning as he was confined in the electric chair. His last words  were "I'd rather be fishing".
Despite the failure of Glass v. Louisiana, electrocution has now been retired as a method of execution in most US states and none of the states retaining it uses it as their primary execution method.
 See also 
 Capital punishment in Louisiana
 Capital punishment in the United States
 List of people executed in Louisiana
References
General
 . Retrieved on 2007-11-12.
 Executions in the U.S. from 1987-1990. Death Penalty Information Center. Retrieved on 2007-11-12.
 U.S. Executions Since 1976. The Clark County Prosecuting Attorney. Retrieved on 2007-11-12.
Specific
 External links 
Category:Capital punishment in Louisiana
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1985 in Louisiana
Category:1985 in United States case law
"""

From "Glass v. The Sloop Betsey" ==> """
Glass v. The Sloop Betsey, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 6 (1794), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that French consuls in the United States cannot hear cases to determine the property rights of foreign ships captured by French vessels and brought into American ports. In this case Glass was an American shareholder in a captured Swedish vessel and sued to determine his rights in District Court.  The Supreme Court determined that the District Courts of the United States have the exclusive right to hear admiralty cases.Glass v. The Sloop Betsey, .
 Subsequent developments 
After this opinion, Chief Justice John Jay received praise for his decision and was sent to Europe to negotiate a treaty regarding admiralty rights.  Upon his return, he was elected Governor of New York and left the high court.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Jay Court
Category:United States admiralty case law
Category:1794 in United States case law
"""

From "Glasser v. United States" ==> """
Glasser v. United States, 315 U.S. 60 (1942), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court on two issues of constitutional criminal procedure. Glasser was the first Supreme Court decision to hold that the Assistance of Counsel Clause of the Sixth Amendment required the reversal of a criminal defendant's conviction if his lawyer's representation of him was limited by a conflict of interest.
Further, Glasser held that the exclusion of women (other than members of the League of Women Voters who had taken a jury training class) from the jury pool violated the Impartial Jury Clause of the Sixth Amendment, but declined to reverse the other two convictions on this ground for technical reasons. Glasser is the first majority opinion of the Court to use the phrase "cross-section of the community." Glasser was also the first jury discrimination case to invoke the Sixth Amendment (rather than Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment).
The facts of Glasser were unusual as well. According to a contemporary Chicago Tribune article, it was "the first time federal employees here have been charged with tampering with federal court justice." The five-week trial involved more than 100 witnesses, more than 4,000 transcript pages of testimony and argument, and 228 exhibits.Jury Ponders Fate of Five in 'Fix Ring' Case, , Mar. 8, 1940, at 12.
Background
All of the Court's prior jury pool discrimination cases had involved the exclusion of African-Americans and been litigated under the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause. The Court had come the closest to articulating a "fair cross-section of the community" doctrine in Smith v. Texas (1940). There, the Court stated:  "It is part of the established tradition in the use of juries as instruments of public justice that the jury be a body truly representative of the community."Smith v. Texas, 311 U.S. 128, 130 (1940) (emphasis added).
Daniel D. Glasser and Norton I. Kretske were Assistant United States Attorneys in the Northern District of Illinois, specializing in liquor and revenue offenses. Glasser and Kretske solicited bribes from defendants under indictment, or soon to be indicted.Glasser, 315 U.S. at 64. Glasser and six other assistants resigned on April 7, 1939, during the tenure of  U.S. Attorney William Joseph Campbell.Daniel Glasser, Assistant U.S. Attorney Quits, , Apr. 8, 1939, at 20. According to Campbell: "Mr. Glasser has the best record of convictions of any one in this office and his conviction record in alcohol cases is the best in the entire country. Since I have been in office, Mr. Glasser has prosecuted ninety-nine cases and lost only one. He hasn't lost a jury case in three and a half years."
Prior history
District Court
Indictment
U.S. Attorney Campbell presented the case to the grand jury personally. Glasser, Kretske, Alfred E. Roth, Anthony Horton, and Louis Kaplan were indicted in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois on two counts of a bribery conspiracy on September 29, 1939.Federal Court Fixing Charged; 5 Are Indicted, , Sept. 30, 1939, at 3. Glasser and Kretske were former Assistant U.S. Attorneys; Roth was a defense attorney representing the bribe payors in the majority of the cases alleged to be fixed; and Horton and Kaplan were "go-betweens" for the bribes. Horton was an African-American bail bondsman; Kaplan was a purveyor of untaxed liquor. The allegations were that the prosecutors either agreed to recommend the dismissal of charges or ensured that the grand jury would not return an indictment. The maximum authorized sentence under the charges was two years imprisonment and a $10,000 fine. All five made bail of $1,500 each.Five Accused of Federal Fix Free on Bonds, , Oct. 1, 1939, at 22.
Prosecution's case
The trial began on February 6, 1940 before Judge Patrick Thomas Stone, of the Western District of Wisconsin, sitting by designation.Two Former U.S. Prosecutors on Trial as Fixers, , Feb. 7, 1940, at 5. The prosecution's opening statement was delivered by Martin Ward, the chief of the criminal division. Defense attorney William Scott Stewart's opening statement argued that Glasser and Kretske were set up by E.C. Yellowly, the head of the alcohol tax unit.Glasser Blames Yellowly Feud for Fix Charges, , Feb. 8, 1940, at 11. Stewart was the leader of a "battery of high priced defense counsel."
The government's first witness, U.S. Attorneys' Office clerk Gordon Morgan testified that Glasser had suggested that Sidney S. Eckstone be appointed foreperson of a grand jury that returned only eight out of twenty indictments and that Glasser and Eckstone had conferred frequently.Ex-Prosecutors Linked to Slain Capone Mobster, , Feb. 9, 1940, at 15. Another prosecution witness, illegal distillery landlord William F. Workman, testified that Capone-affiliated Louis Schiavone had posted approximately $1,000,000 in bail bonds.
On the sixth day of trial, alcohol tax agent Patrick Donoghue testified that, in a case that Donoghue had investigated, Glasser persuaded a grand jury to reverse itself after returning an indictment by placing the matter on the pending call indefinitely.Tells of Playing Bootlegger to Nab 'Fix' Figures, , Feb. 15, 1940, at 2. Another government witness, bootlegging handyman Ralph Sharp testified that he had paid Kretske $250 in order for Kretske, as prosecutor, to recommend that the charges against him be dismissed (which they were). Frank Hodorowicz, another bootlegger turned government witness, testified that he had paid Kretske $1,300 to recommend the dismissal of two cases and was convicted in the third case after he refused to pay $1,000. After he was indicted the third time, he testified, Glasser declined to intervene on his behalf, saying: "You're going to jail for five years; I can't do anything about it. For all the money in the world I couldn't help you. This isn't an ordinary case. Agents are in town from Washington."
Still another, Walter Kwiatkowski, testified that he paid Horton $600 (in addition to the $200 bond) to have the case against him dropped where Glasser was acting as prosecutor.Free Bootlegger Says He Paid $600 'Fix' , , Feb. 16, 1940, at 20. And another, Victor Raubunas, testified that he twice paid bribes to Kretske in cases that Glasser was handling (Raubunas was convicted a third time, after refusing to pay Kretske, in a case prosecuted by Ward himself).Testifies He Was Convicted After Fixers Broke Him, , Feb. 17, 1940, at 6. Mae and Anthony Jurkas, two small-time bootleggers, testified that Glasser declined to prosecute them in exchange for the name of their bootlegging boss.Tell How Needy Family Lived by Masking a Still, , Feb. 22, 1940, at 13.
Bootlegger Nicholas Abosketes and his accountant William Brantman testified that Abosketes transferred $3,000 to Brantman that was paid to Kretske.<ref name="trib6">Bribe Offered 'The Way We Do It in Chicago''', , Feb. 24, 1940, at 8.</ref> Alexander Campbell, an Assistant U.S. Attorney from Indiana testified that Roth had offered him a bribe in a bootlegging case, saying: "That's the way we handle things in Chicago." The government's final witness, alcohol tax investigator Thomas Bailey, testified that Glasser had repeatedly delayed a grand jury in a case he was involved with.Rest Liquor Fix Case Against Two Ex-Prosecutors, , Feb. 27, 1940, at 2.
The government rested its case on February 26. Judge Stone denied the defense's motion for a directed verdict.
Defense case
Three judges testified as character witnesses: John P. Barnes (N.D. Ill.) on behalf of Glasser, Kretske, and Roth; Charles Edgar Woodward (N.D. Ill.) on behalf of Glasser and Kretske; and state judge John F. Haas on behalf of Kretske.Federal Judges on Stand to Aid Two Ex-Prosecutors, , Feb. 28, 1940, at 11. Kaplan and Horton both took the stand, denying that they ever paid money to Glasser or Kretske. Two defense attorneys, Henry Balaban and Edward J. Hess (who was representing Kaplan at the trial), who had also defended clients in cases the government's case-in-chief had alleged to be fixed, denying paying bribes to Glasser or Kretske (although the government had not accused them of this). Glasser's testimony took three hours, as he was cross-examined individually about every single case that the government had alleged to have been fixed.Glasser Makes Three Hour Defense of Prosecutions, , Mar. 2, 1940, at 8.
The defense rested on March 4, after five weeks of trial.Testimony Ends in Fix Trial of Two Ex-Prosecutors, , Mar. 5, 1940, at 10. Assistant United States Attorney Francis McGreal delivered the prosecution's closing argument.Federal Court Fix Ring Trial Nearing Jurors, , Mar. 6, 1940, at 10. Stewart and George Callaghan closed for Glasser and Kretske; Hess for Kaplan; Cassius Poust for Roth; Ward concluded the government's argument.Fix Ring Case Expected to Go to Jury Today, , Mar. 7, 1940, at 20.  Stewart's closing focused on the credibility of the prosecution's witnesses, many of whom had been transported from prison to testify. Stewart urged the jury not to take the word of "crooks and convicts."
Conviction and sentencing
The jury retired at 3:30 p.m. March 7. At 11:30 p.m., Judge Stone ordered the jury to continue deliberating through the night. The jury returned at 7:20 a.m. March 8, after 16 hours of deliberation; all five were convicted of a conspiracy to defraud the United States.3 Found Guilty in Fix Ring Face Income Tax Quiz, , March 9, 1940, at 9.  For several hours, the jury had been deadlocked 11 to 1 for conviction, with one female juror as the holdout.
Judge Stone denied the defendants' motion for a new trial.Ex-Prosecutors Get 14 Months Each in Fix Case, , Apr. 24, 1940, at 5. Glasser and Kretske were sentenced to 14 months imprisonment.Glasser v. United States, 315 U.S. 60, 63 (1942). Roth was fined $500; Horton was placed on two-years probation with a suspended sentence of one year and one day. Kaplan was sentenced to 14 months imprisonment, failed to surrender on June 28, and was captured on August 1.Seize Fugitive Under Sentence in Alky Fix Ring, , at 13.
Revenue department special intelligence agent Clarence L. Converse had observed the entire trial with an eye towards a follow-on tax prosecution. On June 3, Judge Philip Leo Sullivan sentenced three of the government witnesses in the trial to probation.3 Witnesses in Alky Fix Case Get Probation, , June 4, 1940, at 11.
Seventh Circuit
Glasser, Kretske, and Roth appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit. Oral arguments were heard on October 17 before Judges William Morris Sparks, Walter Emanuel Treanor, and Otto Kerner, Sr.Appeals Court to Study Bootleg Liquor Fix Case, , Oct. 18, 1940, at 19; Retrial Pleas in Johnson Case Are Postponed, , Oct. 16, 1940, at 21. The Seventh Circuit, in an opinion by Judge Kerner, affirmed their convictions on December 13, 1940.United States v. Glasser, 116 F.2d 690 (7th Cir. 1940). "On oral argument the principal point stressed was that the evidence failed to sustain the verdict of the jury, although other points were raised in the briefs."Glasser, 116 F.2d at 694.
The defendants argued: (1) that the indictment should have been quashed because of the absence of women from the grand jury; (2) that the indictment was not returned in open court;Glasser, 116 F.2d at 694–95. (3) that the indictment was duplicitous, inconsistent, and vague;Glasser, 116 F.2d at 695–96. (4) that there was insufficient evidence to support the verdict;Glasser, 116 F.2d at 696–700. (5) that the trial judge should have granted a continuance, rather than appoint Stewart to represent Kretske;Glasser, 116 F.2d at 700–01. (6) that Roth should have been severed from the other defendants;Glasser, 116 F.2d at 701. (7) that the reports of the Alcohol Tax Unit were hearsay; (7) that the two government exhibits not admitted into evidence were sent to the jury during its deliberations; (8) that Glasser had been cross-examined on matters not pertinent to the charge and not within the scope of his direct examination;Glasser, 116 F.2d at 702. (9) that the cross-examination of U.S. Attorney Campbell had been unduly restricted; (10) that evidence beyond the scope of the bill of particulars had been introduced; (11) that there was insufficient corroboration of the accomplice testimony against Kretske;Glasser, 116 F.2d at 702–03. (12) that certain testimony of Alexander Campbell was erroneously admitted;Glasser, 116 F.2d at 703. (13) that the admission of various prejudicial evidence had the cumulative effect of denying the defendants a fair trial;Glasser, 116 F.2d at 703–04. (14) that the trial judge's cross-examination of witnesses and other comments crossed the line into advocacy;Glasser, 116 F.2d at 704–05. and (15) that the trial judge should have granted a new trial because of the exclusion of women from the jury pool.Glasser, 116 F.2d at 705.
Former United States Attorney General Homer S. Cummings petitioned the Supreme Court for certiorari, which was granted on April 7, 1941.Ex Prosecutors Win Review of Plot Conviction, , Apr. 8, 1941, at 14. Ralph M. Snyder also represented Glasser before the Supreme Court.Glasser Wins New Trial on 'Fix' Charges, , Jan. 20, 1942, at 16. By this time, J. Albert Woll was the U.S. Attorney in the Northern District.
 Opinion of the Court 
In an opinion by Justice Murphy, the Court reversed the conviction of Glasser (No. 30) and affirmed the convictions of the other two defendants (Nos. 31 and 32).Glasser, 315 U.S. at 88.
Conflict-free counsel
Glasser was represented by Callaghan and Stewart.Glasser, 315 U.S. at 68. Kretske was dis-satisfied with his prior retained counsel, and the trial judge proposed appointing Stewart to also represent Kretske. Stewart explained the potential conflict thus:
[There is] some little inconsistency in the defense, and the main part of it is this: There will be conversations here where Mr. Glasser wasn't present, where people have seen Mr. Kretske and they have talked about, that they gave money to take care of Glasser, that is not binding on Mr. Glasser, and there is a divergency there, and Mr. Glasser feels that if I would represent Mr. Kretske the jury would get an idea that they are together ...
The trial judge, over the prior objection of Glasser, appointed Stewart to represent Kretske.Glasser, 315 U.S. at 68–69. Stewart represented both Glasser and Kretske throughout the proceeding.Glasser, 315 U.S. at 69. Glasser did not raise the issue again until the appeal was filed.Glasser, 315 U.S. at 88–89 (Frankfurter, J., dissenting).
The Court reversed Glasser's conviction because his counsel had a conflict of interest.Glasser, 315 U.S. at 68–77. The Court held that:
[T]he "assistance of counsel" guaranteed by the Sixth Amendment contemplates that such assistance be untrammeled and unimpaired by a court order requiring that one lawyer shall simultaneously represent conflicting interests. If the right to the assistance of counsel means less than this, a valued constitutional safeguard is substantially impaired.Glasser, 315 U.S. at 70.
The Court rejected the suggestions that Glasser had waived his Sixth Amendment right by failing to re-objectGlasser, 315 U.S. at 70 ("To preserve the protection of the Bill of Rights for hardpressed defendants, we indulge every reasonable presumption against the waiver of fundamental rights. Glasser never affirmatively waived the objection which he initially advanced when the trial court suggested the appointment of Stewart." (citations omitted)). or that Glasser's status as an experienced former federal prosecutor precluded relief.Glasser, 315 U.S. at 70 ("We are told that, since Glasser was an experienced attorney, he tacitly acquiesced in Stewart's appointment because he failed to renew vigorously his objection at the instant the appointment was made. The fact that Glasser is an attorney is, of course, immaterial to a consideration of his right to the protection of the Sixth Amendment. His professional experience may be a factor in determining whether he actually waived his right to the assistance of counsel. But it is by no means conclusive." (citation omitted)).
The Court concluded that the conflict of interest materialized in a few ways. First, Stewart declined to cross-examine one of the witnesses, who could implicate Kretske but not Glasser, for fear that it would strengthen the case against Kretske.Glasser, 315 U.S. at 72–73. Stewart also failed to object to the testimony of other witnesses regarding prior statements of Kretske; under the rules of hearsay, these statements were obviously admissible against Kretske, but less obviously admissible against Glasser without a predicate showing that Glasser was a co-conspirator.Glasser, 315 U.S. at 73–75. Stewart feared that an objection only on behalf of Glasser would highlight the admissibility of the statements against Kretske.
In addition to finding that Glasser was prejudiced by the conflict, the Court further stated that:
Glasser wished the benefit of the undivided assistance of counsel of his own choice. We think that such a desire on the part of an accused should be respected. Irrespective of any conflict of interest, the additional burden of representing another party may conceivably impair counsel's effectiveness. To determine the precise degree of prejudice sustained by Glasser as a result of the court's appointment of Stewart as counsel for Kretske is at once difficult and unnecessary. The right to have the assistance of counsel is too fundamental and absolute to allow courts to indulge in nice calculations as to the amount of prejudice arising from its denial.Glasser, 315 U.S. at 75–76.
But, the court declined to reverse the convictions of Kretske and Roth on this basis, concluding that they were not prejudiced.Glasser, 315 U.S. at 76–77.
Exclusion of women from the jury pool
The defendants alleged in an affidavit that only women who were members of the Illinois League of Women Voters and who had completed a jury training class (taught by a local prosecutor) were included in the jury pool.Glasser, 315 U.S. at 83–84. The defendants' jury was composed of six men and six women.Glasser, 315 U.S. at 84.
The Court dwelt at length on the defendants' claim.Glasser, 315 U.S. at 83–87. The Court held that:
[Federal jury selectors] must not allow the desire for competent jurors to lead them into selections which do not comport with the concept of the jury as a cross-section of the community. Tendencies, no matter how slight, toward the selection of jurors by any method other than a process which will insure a trial by a representative group are undermining processes weakening the institution of jury trial, and should be sturdily resisted. That the motives influencing such tendencies may be of the best must not blind us to the dangers of allowing any encroachment whatsoever on this essential right. Steps innocently taken may, one by one, lead to the irretrievable impairment of substantial liberties.Glasser, 315 U.S. at 86.
The Court further held that: "The deliberate selection of jurors from the membership of particular private organizations definitely does not conform to the traditional requirements of jury trial." But, the Court held that the submission of an affidavit, even if un-contradicted, which contained an offer to prove the exclusion of women from the jury pool was insufficient to preserve the error; instead, the defendants must actually introduce evidence, or attempt to formally offer evidence, to support the claim.Glasser, 315 U.S. at 87.
Other issues
The court rejected the defendant's other arguments: (1) that women were improperly excluded from the grand jury under Illinois law (as incorporated by federal jury selection law at the time);Glasser, 315 U.S. at 64–65. (2) that the indictment was not returned in open court because the notation indicating that the indictment was returned in open court was added after the fact;Glasser, 315 U.S. at 65–66. (3) that the indictment was insufficiently definite;Glasser, 315 U.S. at 66–67. (4) that the evidence was insufficient to sustain the conviction;Glasser, 315 U.S. at 67, 77–81. (5) that the admission of certain evidence was prejudicial;Glasser, 315 U.S. at 81–82. and (6) that the trial judge's own questioning of certain witnesses and limitations on cross-examination were prejudicial.Glasser, 315 U.S. at  82–83.
The Court stated that: "Since we are of opinion that a new trial must be ordered as to Glasser, we do not at this time feel that it is proper to comment on the sufficiency of the evidence against Glasser."
 Frankfurter's dissent 
Justice Frankfurter, joined by Chief Justice Stone, in dissent, would not have reversed Glasser's conviction.Glasser, 315 U.S. at 88–93 (Frankfurter, J., dissenting). They argued that Glasser had acquiesced to the appointment by his silence, especially in light of his years of experience as a federal criminal prosecutor, and had failed to preserve the error by not objecting. Further, the dissent argued that the joint representation was beneficial:
A conspiracy trial presents complicated questions of strategy for the defense. There are advantages and disadvantages in having separate counsel for each defendant or a single counsel for more than one. Joint representation is a means of insuring against reciprocal recrimination. A common defense often gives strength against a common attack.Glasser, 315 U.S. at 92 (Frankfurter, J., dissenting).
Further, the dissent denied that prejudice had arisen in the two examples highlighted by the majority.Glasser, 315 U.S. at 92–93 (Frankfurter, J., dissenting).
Subsequent developments
On remand, Judge Stone denied Kretske probation and set his sentence to begin on April 10, 1942.Probation Plea Lost By Kretske, Ex-Prosecutor, , Mar. 28, 1942, at 13. Judge Sullivan dismissed a different indictment against Kretske on April 9.Drop One Charge as Prison Term on Second Nears, , Apr. 9, 1942, at 26. Judge F. Ryan Duffy, of the Eastern District of Wisconsin, sitting by designation, denied a government motion to dismiss Kretske's habeas petition on April 14 and set a hearing for the following day.Convicted U.S. Prosecutor Wins Hearing Today, , Apr. 15, 1942, at 19. Judge Duffy denied Kretske bail and denied the petition of April 15.Kretske Writ Denied; Jailed to Await Prison, , Apr. 16, 1942, at 19.
Pending retrial, Glasser was free on $2,500 bail. Attorney General Francis Biddle appointed Assistant United States Attorney Edward A. Kelly as a special assistant to consider whether Glasser should be retried. Kelly recommended that Glasser not be retried, and Biddle wrote to Judge Evan Alfred Evans of the Seventh Circuit asking him to assign a judge to the nol pros motion; Judge Evans assigned himself. Over the protests of Judge Evans, all charges against Glasser were dropped on January 6, 1943.Glasser Freed of Prosecution on Case Fixing, , Jan. 7, 1943, at 5. Kelly argued to Judge Evans that there would be insufficient evidence at a retrial because much of the original evidence would not be admissible if Glasser were retried alone. Judge Evans was "suspicious" of the motion and "all but argued that the case had been fixed."Fix?, , Jan. 11, 1943, at 12. Glasser returned to private practice.
Legacy
Conflict-free counselGlasser was "the Supreme Court's first vehicle for the examination of joint representation."Margaret J. Ryan, The Sixth Amendment Right to Counsel: A Criminal Defendant's Right to Counsel of Choice v. The Courts' Interest in Conflict-Free Representation, 14  657, 660 (1990). The Court continued to deal with this issue in Dukes v. Warden (1972), Holloway v. Arkansas (1978), Cuyler v. Sullivan (1980), Burger v. Kemp (1987), Wheat v. United States (1988), and Mickens v. Taylor (2002).Cuyler summarized Glasser as follows:
Glasser established that unconstitutional multiple representation is never harmless error. Once the Court concluded that Glasser's lawyer had an actual conflict of interest, it refused "to indulge in nice calculations as to the amount of prejudice" attributable to the conflict. The conflict itself demonstrated a denial of the "right to have the effective assistance of counsel." Thus, a defendant who shows that a conflict of interest actually affected the adequacy of his representation need not demonstrate prejudice in order to obtain relief. But until a defendant shows that his counsel actively represented conflicting interests, he has not established the constitutional predicate for his claim of ineffective assistance.Cuyler v. Sullivan, 446 U.S. 335, 349–50 (1980) (citation omitted).
Justice Frankfurther's statement in dissent that "A common defense often gives strength against a common attack" was quoted by the majority in Holloway.Holloway v. Arkansas, 435 U.S. 475, 482–83 (1978).
Fair cross-section of the community
thumb|right|A 19th-century painting of a jury composed exclusively of white menGlasser is the first majority opinion of the Court to use the phrase "cross-section of the community,"Eric M. Albritton, Race-Conscious Grand Juror Selection: The Equal Protection Clause and Strict Scrutiny, 31  175, 207 n.629 (2003); Martha Craig Daughtrey, Cross Sectionalism in Jury-Selection Procedures After Taylor v. Louisiana, 43  1, 21 (1975); Andrew D. Leipold. Constitutionalizing Jury Selection in Criminal Cases: A Critical Evaluation, 86  945, 952 (1998); Robert William Rodriguez, Comment, Batson v. Kentucky: Equal Protection, the Fair Cross-Section Requirement, and the Discriminatory Use of Peremptory Challenges, 37  755, 768 (1988).Sanjay K. Chhablani, Re-Framing the 'Fair Cross-Section' Requirement, 13  931, 942 (2011). and the first jury discrimination case to invoke the Sixth Amendment (rather than equal protection).Barbara D. Underwood, Ending Racial Discrimination in Jury Selection: Whose Right Is It Anyway?, 92  725, 728 n.11 (1992). "The democratic overhaul of the jury began with the Supreme Court's decision in Glasser v. United States."Stephanie Domitrovich, Jury Source Lists and the Communities Need to Achieve Racial Balance on the Jury, 33  39, 49 (1994).
Prof. Barbara Underwood has opined that:
Equal protection may have seemed inapt to the litigants or to the Court for a case of sex discrimination in 1942, or it may have seemed inapt for a case of cross-group challenge. The Sixth Amendment was not again invoked by the Supreme Court against jury discrimination for thirty years; the Sixth Amendment did not (yet) apply to state juries, and in federal cases the Court seemed to prefer its supervisory power over lower federal courts.
The Supreme Court would eventually reverse criminal convictions due to the exclusion of women from the jury pool in Taylor v. Louisiana (1975) and Duren v. Missouri (1979). The fair cross-section requirement was extended to civil cases in Thiel v. Southern Pacific Co.'' (1946), where wage earners had been excluded from the jury pool.
See also
 Women in United States juries
Footnotes
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1942 in United States case law
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:United States Sixth Amendment conflict-free counsel case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment jury case law
Category:Conspiracy to defraud the United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
"""

From "Glidden Co. v. Zdanok" ==> """
Glidden Co. v. Zdanok (consolidated with Lurk v. United States), 370 U.S. 530 (1962), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that judges of the Court of Claims and the Court of Customs and Patent Appeals were judges created under Article III of the Constitution  (also known as Article III judges).  As such, it was permissible for the Chief Justice of the United States under 28 U.S.C. § 293(a) to designate judges from the Court of Claims and the Court of Customs and Patent Appeals to serve on district courts and courts of appeals.Glidden Co. v. Zdanok, .
 Background 
In Ex parte Bakelite Corp.. and Williams v. United States,. the Court held that the United States Court of Customs and Patent Appeals and the United States Court of Claims were courts created under Article I of the Constitution.  However, the U.S. Congress in 67 Stat. 226 (1953) and 72 Stat. 848 (1958), had indicated that the two courts were constituted under Article III of the Constitution.  This distinction was important as judges of Article III courts are considered part of the independent judiciary as they are appointed for life and their salary cannot be decreased, which is in turn considered a requirement for the operation of judiciary as a separate branch of government.  In the two cases at hand, judges from these courts had been assigned to courts of appeals and districts court by the Chief Justice of the United States as part of the task of balancing the workloads among the various courts.  It was contended that these judges were judges of Article I courts and therefore could not adjudicate decisions on Article III courts.  It was contended that as the judgments of the Court of Claims had traditionally required Congressional appropriation to pay prevailing plaintiffs, because the Court of Claims issued advisory reports in response to matters referred to it by Congress under , and because the Court of Customs and Patent Appeals could review certain administrative decisions of the Tariff Commission under , that they there not truly independent as required by Article III.
 Opinion of the Court 
In a plurality opinion, the Justice Harlan, writing for himself, Justice Brennan and Justice Stewart,  held that Bakelite and Williams were decided incorrectly and that the courts had always been Article III courts and that the Congressional act of 1953 and 1958 confirmed that status. As such, it was permissible for judges from either court to be designated for service on courts of appeals and district courts and the decisions of the lower courts in this instance were valid.  Justice Clark, writing for himself and the Chief Justice, concurred in the result, but concurred on the grounds that the 1953 and 1958 Acts made the courts Article III courts in light of the confusion that led to the Bakelite and Williams decisions, which were otherwise accurate.  He found that the issues of Congressional reference cases under  could be resolved by the Court of Claims declining future cases and that the Tariff Commission cases under  were too insignificant to countermand the express Congressional intent of the 1958 act. Justice Douglas, writing for himself and Justice Black, dissented on the grounds that the courts were Article I courts and that the importance of an independent judiciary prevented non-Article III judges from deciding matters brought before Article III courts.  The same confluence of practical considerations that dictated the result in Canter has governed the decision in later cases sanctioning the creation of other courts with judges of limited tenure.  Tenure that is guaranteed by the Constitution is a badge of a judge of an Article III court. The argument that mere statutory tenure is sufficient for judges of Article III courts was authoritatively answered in Ex parte Bakelite Corp.:Bakelite, 279 U.S. at 459-460.
... the argument is fallacious. It mistakenly assumes that whether a court is of one class or the other depends on the intention of Congress, whereas the true test lies in the power under which the court was created and in the jurisdiction conferred. Nor has there been any settled practice on the part of Congress which gives special significance to the absence or presence of a provision respecting the tenure of judges. This may be illustrated by two citations. The same Congress that created the Court of Customs Appeals made provision for five additional circuit judges and declared that they should hold their offices during good behavior; and yet the status of the judges was the same as it would have been had that declaration been omitted. In creating courts for some of the Territories Congress failed to include a provision fixing the tenure of the judges; but the courts became legislative courts just as if such a provision had been included.Zdanok, 370 U.S. at 596-97.   
In United States v. Coe, for example, the Court sustained the authority of the Court of Private Land Claims to adjudicate claims under treaties to land in the territories, but left it expressly open whether such a course might be followed within the States.. Upon like considerations, Article III has been viewed as inapplicable to courts created in unincorporated territories outside the mainland, and to the consular courts established by concessions from foreign countries.
 Subsequent developments 
In response to this decision, Congress passed 80 Stat. 958 in 1966 which assigned Congressional reference cases from the Article III appellate division judges of the Court of Claims to the Article I trial division commissioners of the Court of Claims..  This permitted the Court of Claims to resume hearing Congressional reference cases, which it had ceased accepting in light of Glidden.  In 1982, as part of the Federal Courts Improvement Act,. Congress passed 96 Stat. 25, which removed the ability to designate judges from the new Article I Claims Court for use on Article III courts.Congressional Reference Cases, 8 West's Fed. Forms, National Courts § 13133 (2d ed.)
Despite the reasoning's status as a plurality opinion that lacks stare decisis, it remains important, having been cited in 68 Supreme Court cases and at least 367 lower court cases.  It also stands as a defining case in the distinctions between Article I and Article III courts. Further, the need to retain Congressional reference jurisdiction was a reason that the Claims Court was specifically designated an Article I court by Congress in 1982.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:1962 in United States case law
"""

From "Global-Tech Appliances, Inc. v. SEB S.A." ==> """
Global-Tech Appliances, Inc. v. SEB S.A., 563 U.S. 754 (2011), is a United States Supreme Court case..  The case considered whether a party, in order to "actively [induce] infringement of a patent" under 35 U.S.C. § 271(b),. must know that the induced act constitutes patent infringement, or whether deliberate indifference to the existence of a patent can be considered a form of actual knowledge. In an 8–1 decision delivered by Justice Samuel Alito, the Court held that induced infringement requires knowledge of patent infringement, but because the petitioners had knowledge of a patent infringement lawsuit involving the respondent and Sunbeam Products over the same invention, the Federal Circuit's judgement that petitioners induced infringement must be affirmed under the doctrine of willful blindness.
Justice Anthony Kennedy filed a dissenting opinion.
 Background 
In the late 1980s, respondent SEB, S.A., a French maker of home appliances, invented an innovative deep fryer, the external surfaces of which remain cool-to-the-touch during operation. The "cool-touch" fryer consisted of a framing that suspends the metal frying pot within the plastic housing, leaving an insulating air space between the heated pot and the exterior. SEB obtained U.S. Patent No. 4,995,312 for this design in 1991 and began manufacturing and selling it under the T-Fal brand. With no similar products in the American market, the fryer became a commercial success. In 1997, Sunbeam Products asked Pentalpha Enterprises, Ltd., a Hong Kong maker of home appliances and wholly owned subsidiary of Global-Tech Appliances, Inc., to design a deep fryer meeting certain specifications that could be sold under the Sunbeam label. To fulfill the request, Pentalpha purchased an SEB fryer in Hong Kong which lacked the U.S. patent notices and copied all but its cosmetic features. Pentalpha then retained an attorney to conduct a right-to-use study for the United States, but neglected to inform the attorney that the design was copied from an SEB fryer. Failing to discover SEB's patent, the attorney issued an opinion letter in August, 1997, stating that Pentalpha's product did not infringe upon any U.S. patents that he had found. That same month, Pentalpha began manufacturing and selling its fryer to Sunbeam, which sold them in the United States.
Sunbeam's fryer, which cost less to manufacture than SEB's, allowed Sunbeam to sell the same invention at a lower cost. Once purchasers of cool-touch deep fryers began selecting Sunbeam's product, SEB sued Sunbeam in March, 1998, alleging patent infringement. Sunbeam notified Pentalpha of the lawsuit the next month, but Pentalpha, undeterred, went on to sell the fryers to Fingerhut Corporation and Montgomery Ward & Co., which each resold the fryers in the United States under their respective labels.
SEB accepted a settlement with Sunbeam and proceeded to sue Pentalpha under two theories. First, SEB claimed that Pentalpha had directly infringed upon its patent in violation of 35 U.S.C. §271(a).. Second, SEB claimed that Pentalpha had induced Sunbeam, Fingerhut, and Montgomery Ward to infringe upon the patent, contravening §271(b). The jury found for SEB on both claims and additionally that Pentalpha had willfully infringed upon SEB's patent, awarding SEB $4.65 million. Pentalpha filed post-trial motions on a number of grounds with the District Court for the Southern District of New York. The District Court granted them in part, reducing the jury award to $2.65 million.
Pentalpha appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, which affirmed the District Court's ruling after finding no reversible error in the proceedings.  Pentalpha then filed a petition for a writ of certiorari to the Federal Circuit with the Supreme Court on June 23, 2010.  The case was argued before the Supreme Court on February 22, 2011, with former Texas Solicitor General Ted Cruz appearing for the French société anonyme.https://www.oyez.org/cases/2010/10-6 
 Opinion of the Court 
In an 8–1 decision delivered by Justice Alito, in which Roberts, Scalia, Thomas, Ginsburg, Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan joined, the court held:
 Induced infringement under §271(b) requires knowledge that the induced acts constitute patent infringement.
 Deliberate indifference to a known risk that a patent exists does not satisfy the knowledge required by §271(b). Nevertheless, the Federal Circuit's judgment must be affirmed because the evidence in this case was plainly sufficient to support a finding of Pentalpha's knowledge under the doctrine of willful blindness.
 Kennedy's dissent 
In Kennedy's dissenting opinion, he agreed with the Court that to contravene §271(b), the inducer must know that "the induced acts constitute patent infringement". However, he argued that willful blindness does not suffice for actual knowledge of the infringement, writing that the Court justifies substitution of willful blindness for knowledge in two ways, "neither of which is convincing".
 References 
External links
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:Ted Cruz
"""

From "Globe Newspaper Co. v. Walker" ==> """
Globe Newspaper Co. v. Walker, 210 U.S. 356 (1908), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held Congress having provided a remedy for those whose copyrights in maps are infringed, a civil action at common law for money damages cannot be maintained against the infringers..
 References 
External links
Category:1908 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Glossip v. Gross" ==> """
Glossip v. Gross, 576 U.S. 863 (2015), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held, 5–4, that lethal injections using midazolam to kill prisoners convicted of capital crimes do not constitute cruel and unusual punishment under the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution.  The Court found that condemned prisoners can only challenge their method of execution after providing a known and available alternative method.
Background
On January 7, 1997, Justin Sneed beat Barry Van Treese to death with a baseball bat.Liliana Segura & Jordan Smith, What Happened in Room 102, The Intercept (July 9, 2015).  The killing occurred at the Best Budget Inn in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, where Van Treese was the owner, Sneed was the maintenance-man, and Richard Glossip was the manager. In exchange for avoiding the death penalty, Sneed confessed and told police that Glossip had instructed him to commit the murder.
Glossip insisted on his actual innocence and refused to accept a plea bargain.  In July 1998, an Oklahoma jury convicted Glossip of the murder and sentenced him to death. In 2001, the unanimous Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals threw out that conviction, calling the case "extremely weak" and finding Glossip had received unconstitutionally ineffective assistance of counsel.Glossip v. Oklahoma, 29 P.3d 597, 2001 O.K. C.R. 21 (Okla. Crim. App. 2001).
In August 2004, a second Oklahoma jury convicted Glossip of the murder and sentenced him to death.  Glossip complained that prosecutors had intimidated his defense attorney into resigning, but, in April 2007, the Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals affirmed the death sentence, with two judges in the majority, one judge specially concurring, and two judges dissenting.Glossip v. Oklahoma, 157 P.3d 143, 2007 O.K. C.R. 12 (Okla. Crim. App. 2007).  Glossip attracted the advocacy of Sister Helen Prejean, but failed to get the clemency board to consider letters from Sneed’s family, who believe Sneed is lying.
After a three-justice plurality opinion of the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the use of the sedative sodium thiopental during lethal injections in Baze v. Rees (2008), disconcerted pharmaceutical companies began refusing to supply states with the drug.The Supreme Court, 2014 Term — Leading Cases, 129 HARV. L. REV. 171 (2015). Oklahoma replaced the general anaesthetic with an untested off-label use of midazolam, keeping the drug’s origin secret.Jeffrey E. Stern, The Cruel and Unusual Execution of Clayton Lockett, The Atlantic (June 2015). Condemned prisoners Clayton Lockett and Charles Warner sued, and the state trial court found the secrecy law unconstitutional. However, pending an appeal by Oklahoma Attorney General Scott Pruitt, the Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals refused to then stay the plaintiffs' imminent executions, so, on April 21, 2014, the Oklahoma Supreme Court did.Lockett v. Evans, 356 P.3d 58, 2014 O.K. 33 (Okla. 2014) (per curiam).  Faced with conflicting court orders, Governor Mary Fallin decided to disobey the supreme court order, explaining the "attempted stay of execution is outside the constitutional authority of that body". The day after the Oklahoma House of Representatives drafted articles of impeachment against the supreme court justices, the court withdrew its stay of execution and reversed the trial court's holding against the state.Lockett v. Evans, 330 P.3d 488, 2014 O.K. 34 (Okla. 2014) (per curiam).
On April 29, 2014, Oklahoma used midazolam in the execution of Clayton Lockett. After executioners had performed the lethal injection, Lockett began to struggle on the gurney, reportedly groaning "this shit is fucking with my mind" and "the drugs aren't working." Lockett died forty-three minutes after the lethal injection. Oklahoma decided to delay the execution of Warner, who was scheduled to die later that night.
After an investigation, Oklahoma elected to continue using midazolam in executions. On June 25, 2014, Warner, Glossip, and nineteen other Oklahoma death row inmates sued in the United States District Court for the Western District of Oklahoma, alleging Oklahoma's use of midazolam violated the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution. At the end of a three-day hearing, U.S. District Judge Stephen P. Friot orally denied the condemned prisoners' request for a preliminary injunction prohibiting the use of midazolam in their executions.Warner v. Gross,   On January 12, 2015, Tenth Circuit Judge Mary Beck Briscoe, joined by (future Supreme Court justice) Neil Gorsuch and Scott Matheson Jr., affirmed.Warner v. Gross, 
Supreme Court of the United States
On January 13, 2015, the condemned prisoners petitioned for a writ of certiorari and stays of their executions from the U.S. Supreme Court.  The petitioners argued that the midazolam, intended to be used as sedative, would not render them unable to feel the pain of the other two drugs. On January 15, 2015, the Court denied lead petitioner Warner’s application for a stay of execution, over the written dissent of Justice Sonia Sotomayor, joined by Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen Breyer, and Elena Kagan.Warner v. Gross, 135 S. Ct. 824 (2015) (Sotomayor, J., dissenting from denial of stays of execution). Oklahoma executed Warner later that day.
However, on January 23, the Supreme Court decided to hear the case, staying the surviving petitioners' executions.  The proceeding was then renamed, with Richard Glossip as lead petitioner. One hour of arguments were heard on April 29.  At oral arguments, four conservative justices expressed impatience with obstructionist unavailability caused, Justice Scalia said, "by the abolitionists putting pressure on the companies that manufacture" the drugs. Justice Alito called this "guerrilla war against the death penalty", and Justice Kennedy insisted to have an answer from the petitioners on whether the court should take this element into account. Four liberal justices, conversely, harshly questioned the Oklahoma Solicitor General, with Justice Kagan describing the execution protocol as "burning alive, from the inside."
Opinion of the Court
thumb|Justice Samuel Alito found the prisoners "failed to establish a likelihood of success on the merits of their claim that the use of midazolam violates the Eighth Amendment."
On June 29, 2015, the last day of the term, the Supreme Court ruled against the condemned prisoners in a 5–4 decision.  At the opinion announcement, Justices Sotomayor and Breyer read aloud their dissents from the bench, while Scalia also read aloud a statement criticizing the previous week’s decision in Obergefell v. Hodges."Glossip v. Gross." Oyez. Chicago-Kent College of Law at Illinois Tech, n.d. Dec 13, 2016.
Justice Samuel Alito delivered the opinion of the Court, joined by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justices Antonin Scalia, Anthony Kennedy and Clarence Thomas., 135 S. Ct. 2726 (2015). According to the Court, the Eighth Amendment requires prisoners to show there is a known and available alternative method of execution. The prisoners had failed to do this, the Court found, because the alternative drugs they proposed were unavailable to Oklahoma. The Court explained that Hill v. McDonough (2006) did not apply.Glossip, 135 S. Ct. at 2738.
Secondly, the Court found the Eighth Amendment requires prisoners to show the challenged method of execution poses a demonstrated risk of severe pain, emphasizing the burden of proof was on the prisoners, not the state. Although midazolam is not recommended or approved by the Food and Drug Administration as an anesthetic, the Court explained that a constitutionally adequate method of execution does not need to meet the medical standard of care.
The Court credited the testimony of Dr. Roswell Lee Evans, Oklahoma's expert witness, that there is "a virtual certainty" prisoners will feel no pain during lethal injection, rejecting the prisoners' "speculative evidence" of midazolam's ceiling effect.  Finally, the Court found there was no merit to the prisoners' criticisms that Dr. Evans' report overused unreliable sources, such as drugs.com, and that it contained mathematical errors.
Justice Scalia's concurrence
Justice Scalia, joined by Justice Thomas, concurred.  Scalia attacked Breyer for offering "a white paper devoid of any meaningful legal argument."135 S. Ct. at 2747 (Scalia, J., concurring).  Mocking Breyer's use of statistics, Scalia wrote "if only Aristotle, Aquinas, and Hume knew that moral philosophy could be so neatly distilled into a pocket-sized, vade mecum 'system of metrics'".135 S. Ct. at 2748 (Scalia, J., concurring).  Scalia then cited several studies concluding that the death penalty is more deterrent than life in jail.135 S. Ct. at 2749 (Scalia, J., concurring) citing Zimmerman, State Executions, Deterrence, and the Incidence of Murder, 7 J. Applied Econ. 163, 166 (2004); Dezhbakhsh, Rubin, & Shepherd, Does Capital Punishment Have a Deterrent Effect? New Evidence from Postmoratorium Panel Data, 5 Am. L. & Econ. Rev. 344 (2003) ; Sunstein & Vermeule, Is Capital Punishment Morally Required? Acts, Omissions, and Life-Life Tradeoffs, 58 Stan. L. Rev. 703, 713 (2005).
Given Breyer's call to review precedent, Scalia adds his own call to counsel to brief whether Trop v. Dulles (1958) should be overruled.135 S. Ct. at 2749 (Scalia, J., concurring).  Noting that the capital punishment debate in the United States had been deliberately left open by the Founders, Scalia concluded "by arrogating to himself the power to overturn that decision, Justice Breyer does not just reject the death penalty, he rejects the Enlightenment."135 S. Ct. at 2750 (Scalia, J., concurring).
Justice Thomas's concurrence
Justice Thomas, joined by Justice Scalia, concurred.  Thomas wrote that "the best solution is for the Court to stop making up Eighth Amendment claims in its ceaseless quest to end the death penalty through undemocratic means".  Thomas wrote separately to clarify that he believes the Eighth Amendment only prohibits executions "deliberately designed to inflict pain."135 S. Ct. at 2750 (Thomas, J., concurring).  Calling Breyer's use of statistics "pseudoscientific", Thomas found one study's use of "depravity points" dehumanizing.135 S. Ct. at 2752 (Thomas, J., concurring) citing McCord, Lightning Still Strikes, 71 Brooklyn L. Rev. 797, 833–834 (2005).
Thomas rejected Breyer's example of a double murderer arbitrarily receiving a lighter sentence than a murderer, citing news reports on WRAL-TV as explanation.135 S. Ct. at 2752 fn. 3 (Thomas, J., concurring) citing Charbonneau, Andre Edwards Sentenced to Life in Prison for 2001 Murder, WRAL, Mar. 26, 2004; Charbonneau, Jury Finds Andre Edwards Guilty of First-Degree Murder, WRAL, Mar. 23, 2004.  Noting that, "in my decades on the Court, I have not seen a capital crime that could not be considered sufficiently 'blameworthy' to merit a death sentence", Thomas concluded by spending several pages graphically describing some of those crimes, including several rapes and several murders committed by the mentally retarded and by juveniles.135 S. Ct. at 2752-2755 (Thomas, J., concurring).
Justice Breyer's dissent
thumb|left|Justice Stephen Breyer wrote in dissent "I believe it highly likely that the death penalty violates the Eighth Amendment."
Justice Stephen Breyer, joined by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, dissented.  Explaining that the Constitution did not enshrine the standards of the Bloody Assizes or those found in Blackstone’s Commentaries on the Laws of England, Breyer believed that circumstances have radically changed since the death penalty was restored by the Court in Gregg v. Georgia (1976).135 S. Ct. at 2755 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing 4 W. Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England 369–370 (1769) (listing mutilation and dismembering, among other punishments).  Breyer gives four reasons he believed the death penalty is unconstitutionally cruel and unusual punishment:
1) Serious unreliability: Breyer believed the wrongful execution of innocent men was cruel, listing Carlos DeLuna, Cameron Todd Willingham, Joe Arridy, and William Jackson Marion as examples.135 S. Ct. at 2756 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing e.g., Liebman, Fatal Injustice; Carlos DeLuna’s Execution Shows That a Faster, Cheaper Death Penalty is a Dangerous Idea, L. A. Times, June 1, 2012, p. A19, The Wrong Carlos: Anatomy of a Wrongful Execution (2014) ; Grann, Trial By Fire: Did Texas Execute An Innocent Man? The New Yorker, Sept. 7, 2009, p. 42 (Willingham). See also, e.g., Press Release: Gov. Ritter Grants Posthumous Pardon in Case Dating Back to 1930s, Jan. 7, 2011, p. 1 (Arridy); R. Warden, Wilkie Collins’s The Dead Alive: The Novel, the Case, and Wrongful Convictions 157–158 (2005)  (Marion).  Breyer cited to research that indicates those convicted of capital crimes are more likely to be exonerated.135 S. Ct. at 2757 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing National Registry of Exonerations, Exonerations in the United States, 1989–2012, pp. 6–7 (2012); accord, Death Penalty Information Center (DPIC), Innocence: List of Those Freed from Death Row. Breyer then described the examples of the conviction and exoneration of Glenn Ford,135 S. Ct. at 2757 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing Stroud, Lead Prosecutor Apologizes for Role in Sending Man to Death Row, Shreveport Times, Mar. 27, 2015 Henry Lee McCollum (whom Antonin Scalia had previously cited to support his views on the death penalty),135 S. Ct. at 2757 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing  and Anthony Ray Hinton.135 S. Ct. at 2757 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing Blinder, Alabama Man on Death Row for Three Decades Is Freed as State’s Case Erodes, N. Y. Times, Apr. 4, 2014, p. A11.
From this, Breyer concluded that the "intense community pressure" involved in capital cases increases the likelihood of convicting the wrong person.135 S. Ct. at 2758 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing Gross, Jacoby, Matheson, Montgomery, & Patil, Exonerations in the United States 1989 Through 2003, 95 J. Crim. L. & C. 523, 531– 533 (2005); ; see also B. Garrett, Convicting the Innocent: Where Criminal Prosecutions Go Wrong (2011)  Breyer was also concerned the search for a death-qualified jury might cause bias.135 S. Ct. at 2758 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing ;  Breyer further questioned the reliability of forensic testimony, citing problems with hair analysis.135 S. Ct. at 2758 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing FBI, National Press Releases, FBI Testimony on Microscopic Hair Analysis Contained Errors in at Least 90 Percent of Cases in Ongoing Review, Apr. 20, 2015. See also Hsu, FBI Admits Errors at Trials: False Matches on Crime-Scene Hair, Washington Post, Apr. 19, 2015, p. A1. Breyer cited one study concluding that 4% of those sentenced to death are actually innocent.135 S. Ct. at 2758 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing ; Risinger, Innocents Convicted: An Empirically Justified Factual Wrongful Conviction Rate, 97 J. Crim. L. & C. 761 (2007). Regardless of the actual innocence of the accused, Breyer cited research identifying prejudicial error in 68% of capital cases.135 S. Ct. at 2759 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing  Breyer then included editorials by former Virginia Attorney General Mark Earley rejecting the death penalty.135 S. Ct. at 2759 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing Earley, A Pink Cadillac, An IQ of 63, and A Fourteen-Year-Old from South Carolina: Why I Can No Longer Support the Death Penalty, 49 U. Rich. L. Rev. 811, 813 (2015); Earley, I Oversaw 36 Executions. Even Death Penalty Supporters Can Push for Change, Guardian, May 12, 2014.
2) Arbitrariness in application: Breyer believed it is cruel that the death penalty is imposed without reasonable consistency. To show this, he cited a study that attempted to measure the "egregiousness" of different crimes, finding that most death row inmates had not committed worse crimes than those sentenced to life in prison.135 S. Ct. at 2760 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing  Rather, Breyer believed the race and gender of the victim is much more important.135 S. Ct. at 2761 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing GAO, Report to the Senate and House Committees on the Judiciary: Death Penalty Sentencing 5 (GAO/GGD–90–57, 1990);   Because fewer than 2% of counties account for all death sentences imposed nationwide,135 S. Ct. at 2761 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing ; DPIC, The 2% Death Penalty: How A Minority of Counties Produce Most Death Cases At Enormous Costs to All 9 (Oct. 2013). Breyer postulated that the real driver of inconsistent penalties are the local prosecutors,135 S. Ct. at 2761 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing ; ;  public defender funding,135 S. Ct. at 2761 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing ; see generally .  See also ; American Bar Assn. (ABA) Guidelines for the Appointment and Performance of Defense Counsel in Death Penalty Cases, Guideline 9.1, Commentary (rev. ed. Feb. 2003), in 31 Hofstra L. Rev. 913, 985 (2003) and race distribution.135 S. Ct. at 2762 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing ; cf.  Criticizing the absence of proportionality review,135 S. Ct. at 2763 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing  Breyer goes on to cite several anecdotal examples from news media that he felt were particularly arbitrary.135 S. Ct. at 2763 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing Charbonneau, Andre Edwards Sentenced to Life in Prison for 2001 Murder, WRAL, Mar. 26, 2004; Shea, Judge Gives Consecutive Life Sentences for Triple Murder, Philadelphia Inquirer, June 29, 2004, p. B5.
3) Excessive delays: Breyer believed it is cruel that there is a lengthy delay between sentencing and execution, noting that since 1960, the average delay grew from two years to 18.135 S. Ct. at 2764 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing ; Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), T. Snell, Capital Punishment, 2013—Statistical Tables 14 (Table 10) (rev. Dec. 2014); DPIC, Execution List 2014.  Firstly, Breyer believed longer delays are cruel, noting that solitary confinement had been criticized by the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Torture.135 S. Ct. at 2765 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), A Death Before Dying: Solitary Confinement on Death Row 5 (July 2013); ABA Standards for Criminal Justice: Treatment of Prisoners 6 (3d ed. 2011); ;   Repeatedly issuing and then revoking death warrants is, according to Breyer, also cruel, noting that, before being exonerated, Willie Jerome Manning,135 S. Ct. at 2766 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing Robertson, With Hours to Go, Execution is Postponed, N. Y. Times, Apr. 8, 2015, p. A17; Nave, Why Does the State Still Want to Kill Willie Jerome Manning? Jackson Free Press, Apr. 29, 2015. Randall Dale Adams,135 S. Ct. at 2766 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing Martin, Randall Adams, 61, Dies; Freed With Help of Film, N. Y. Times, June 26, 2011, p. 24. Clarence Brandley,citing N. Davies, White Lies 231, 292, 298, 399 (1991) . and Earl Washington, Jr.135 S. Ct. at 2766 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing M. Edds, An Expendable Man 93 (2003) . had all come within days or hours of being executed, multiple times. In light of the death row phenomenon, Breyer did not find it surprising that many inmates volunteer to be executed.135 S. Ct. at 2766 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing ;   Breyer next noted the hostility foreign common law courts have shown to delays before executions in Pratt v A-G for Jamaica (1993), S v Makwanyane (1995), Soering v United Kingdom (1989), and United States v Burns (2001).135 S. Ct. at 2767 (Breyer, J., dissenting).
Secondly, Breyer believed the only punishment rationales for the death penalty are deterrence and retributive justice.  Breyer believed that the death penalty has no deterrent value.135 S. Ct. at 2767 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing Sorensen, Wrinkle, Brewer, & Marquart, Capital Punishment and Deterrence: Examining the Effect of Executions on Murder in Texas, 45 Crime & Delinquency 481 (1999) ; Bonner & Fessenden, Absence of Executions: A Special Report, States With No Death Penalty Share Lower Homicide Rates, N. Y. Times, Sept. 22, 2000, p. A1; Radelet & Akers, Deterrence and the Death Penalty: The Views of the Experts, 87 J. Crim. L. & C. 1, 8 (1996); Donohue & Wolfers, Uses and Abuses of Empirical Evidence in the Death Penalty Debate, 58 Stan. L. Rev. 791, 794 (2005); National Research Council, Deterrence and the Death Penalty 2 (D. Nagin & J. Pepper eds. 2012) . Likewise, Breyer believed that retribution is almost as well achieved by life in prison without parole.135 S. Ct. at 2769 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing Austin Sarat, Mercy on Trial: What It Means To Stop an Execution 130 (2005) ; ACLU, A Living Death: Life Without Parole for Nonviolent Offenses 11, and n. 10 (2013)).  Breyer did not believe the Founders could have contemplated decades long delays when they wrote the Eighth Amendment.135 S. Ct. at 2769 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing P. Mackey, Hanging in the Balance: The Anti-Capital Punishment Movement in New York State, 1776– 1861, p. 17 (1982) ; Thomas Jefferson, A Bill for Proportioning Crimes and Punishments (1779), reprinted in The Complete Jefferson 90, 95 (S. Padover ed. 1943); 2 Papers of John Marshall 207–209 (C. Cullen & H. Johnson eds. 1977) (describing petition for commutation based in part on 5-month delay).  Breyer highlighted that, after retiring from the Court, Justice Lewis F. Powell Jr. testified to Congress that he had changed his mind and now thought excessive delays made the death penalty unconstitutional.135 S. Ct. at 2764 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing Habeas Corpus Reform, Hearings before the Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 100th Cong., 1st and 2d Sess., 35 (1989 and 1990).
4) Most places within the United States have abandoned its use: Beside being cruel, Breyer believed the death penalty is also unusual because it has become rare. Noting that 41 states had the death penalty before the Court blocked it in 1972,135 S. Ct. at 2773 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing E. Mandery, A Wild Justice: The Death and Resurrection of Capital Punishment in America 145 (2013) . now there are 27, and only three, Texas, Missouri, and Florida, account for 80% of executions.135 S. Ct. at 2773 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing von Drehle, Bungled Executions, Backlogged Courts, and Three More Reasons the Modern Death Penalty Is a Failed Experiment, Time, June 8, 2015, p. 26.  After listing execution statistics, Breyer next considered polling data and an American Law Institute report.135 S. Ct. at 2764 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing Wilson, Support for Death Penalty Still High, But Down, Washington Post, GovBeat, June 5, 2014; see also ALI, Report of the Council to the Membership on the Matter of the Death Penalty 4 (Apr. 15, 2009) (withdrawing Model Penal Code section on capital punishment).  Breyer finally considered the death penalty as even more unusual by looking at a vote by the United Nations General Assembly, reports by the International Commission Against the Death Penalty and Amnesty International statistics.135 S. Ct. at 2775 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing Oakford, "UN Vote Against Death Penalty Highlights Global Abolitionist Trend-and Leaves the U.S. Stranded", Vice News, Dec. 19, 2014,
Breyer appended to his dissent five pages of graphs, tables, and maps.135 S. Ct. at 2777-80 (Breyer, J., dissenting) citing Ford, "The Death Penalty's Last Stand", The Atlantic, Apr. 21, 2015)
Justice Sotomayor's dissent
Justice Sonia Sotomayor filed a dissent, in which Justices Ginsburg, Breyer, and Elena Kagan joined. Sotomayor stated that "under the Court's new rule, it would not matter whether the State intended to use midazolam, or instead to have petitioners drawn and quartered, slowly tortured to death, or actually burned at the stake: because petitioners failed to prove the availability of sodium thiopental or pentobarbital, the State could execute them using whatever means it designates."  Sotomayor attacked the credence the Court gave to Oklahoma's expert witness, writing "Dr. Evans' conclusions were entirely unsupported by any study or third-party source, contradicted by the extrinsic evidence proffered by petitioners, inconsistent with the scientific understanding of midazolam's properties, and apparently premised on basic logical errors."135 S. Ct. at 2788 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting) Sotomayor contended Dr. Evans' testimony that midazolam could "paralyze the brain" was directly refuted by peer-reviewed articles cited by the prisoners' expert witnesses.135 S. Ct. at 2784 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting) citing ; ; .
The majority erred, Sotomayor argued, by "imposing a wholly unprecedented obligation on the condemned inmate to identify an available means for his or her own execution."135 S. Ct. at 2797 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting) Calling the Court's holding "legally indefensible," she argued the Court had failed to distinguish Hill v. McDonough (2006), and went on to criticize the Court for treating the plurality opinion in Baze v. Rees (2008) as precedent, noting that the Court was ignoring the concurring opinions necessary to achieve that judgment.135 S. Ct. at 2793 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting). Condemned prisoners should not be required to meet an additional burden of proof, in Sotomayor's view, simply because they face executions that "States hurriedly devise as they scramble to locate new and untested drugs."135 S. Ct. at 2796 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting) citing ;  Finally, Sotomayor anticipated that, due to the prevalence of botched executions,135 S. Ct. at 2796 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting) citing A. Sarat, Gruesome Spectacles: Botched Executions and America’s Death Penalty, App. A, p. 177 (2014) . those condemned to die will increasingly choose execution by firing squad.135 S. Ct. at 2796 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting) citing Stuart Banner, The Death Penalty 203 (2002) ; Johnson, Double Murderer Executed by Firing Squad in Utah, N. Y. Times, June 19, 2010, p. A12; C. Brandon, The Electric Chair: An Unnatural American History 39 (1999) .
Subsequent developments
Oklahoma Attorney General Scott Pruitt scheduled Glossip to die on September 30, 2015. However, Governor Mary Fallin ordered the sentence halted one hour before the execution, explaining that the state did not have in its possession the correct drugs. An Oklahoma grand jury report in May 2016 revealed that the state had obtained the wrong drugs during the execution of Charles Warner, lethally injecting him with potassium acetate instead of potassium chloride.
Commentators complained that the Court majority had applied the preliminary injunction factors from Winter v. Natural Resources Defense Council (2008) as four separate necessary elements, upsetting the balancing test and sliding scale approaches the circuit and district courts had been using to weigh the factors against each other.
Glossip v. Chandler
Following the end of Oklahoma's moratorium on executions, on February 27, 2020, more than two dozen inmates filed a motion to reopen Glossip v. Gross in the United States District Court for the Western District of Oklahoma, claiming the new lethal injection protocol was incomplete. Although the United States Supreme Court had ruled on the case at the preliminary injunction stage, the ruling had involved an earlier version of Oklahoma's lethal injection protocol. On March 19, 2020, the case was officially reopened and in July 2020 the case was renamed Glossip v. Chandler.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 576
 Baze v. Rees (2008)
 Bucklew v. Precythe (2019)
 Glossip v. Chandler
 Execution of Joseph Wood
 Execution of Clayton Lockett
 Roswell Lee Evans, a noted witness in the case
References
Further reading
External links
 Case page at SCOTUSblog
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:Capital punishment in Oklahoma
Category:Lethal injection
"""

From "Glover v. United States" ==> """
Glover v. United States, 531 U.S. 198 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case decided in 2001. The case dealt with a technical question of law relating to whether a showing of prejudice in incorrect sentencing decisions is required for a correction of that sentence.
Background
Paul Glover was the Vice President and General Counsel of the Chicago Truck Drivers, Helpers, and Warehouse Workers Union. A trial showed that he tried to enrich himself and others through kickbacks. The federal trial court sentenced him to 84 months in prison, denying a request to 'group' consideration of similar offenses on which he was convicted, which would have lowered the sentence range. His attorneys did not raise this issue on his first appeal to the Seventh Circuit, which affirmed his conviction. Glover filed a motion on his own to try to correct his sentence. He argued that the failure of his attorneys to appeal on the grouping question constituted ineffective assistance of counsel. However, because there was no proof that the sentencing alteration was 'significant', the Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit affirmed.531 U.S. 198 at 202 Glover wanted a lower range (which would have a minimum of 63 months) and so he appealed to the United States Supreme Court which granted the case for consideration in 2000.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote the decision of the Court which was unanimous. He stated that the Strickland test's prejudice prong did not require a showing that a wrongful increase in a sentence met 'a standard of significance'. The Seventh Circuit was thus incorrect because "there is no obvious dividing line by which to measure how much longer a sentence must be for the increase to constitute substantial prejudice... although the amount by which a defendant's sentence is increased by a particular decision may be a factor to consider in determining whether counsel's performance in failing to argue the point constitutes ineffective assistance, ...it cannot serve as a bar to a showing of prejudice."531 U.S. 198 at 204-205 Therefore, Glover's sentence had to be recalculated and the case was remanded for further proceedings in lower courts.
See also
 Strickland v. Washington
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment ineffective assistance of counsel case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Gobeille v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Company" ==> """
Gobeille v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Company, 577 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a Vermont state law requiring the disclosure of certain information relating to health care services was preempted by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) to the extent that the state law applied to ERISA plans.Gobeille v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., No. 14–181, 577 U.S. ___, slip op. at 1, 13 (2016). Writing for a majority of the Court, Justice Anthony Kennedy held that the Vermont law "impose[d] duties that are inconsistent with the central design of ERISA, which is to provide a single uniform national scheme for the administration of ERISA plans without interference from laws of the several States".Gobeille, slip op. at 13.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:Liberty Mutual
"""

From "Godfrey v. Georgia" ==> """
Godfrey v. Georgia, 446 U.S. 420 (1980), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a death sentence could not be granted for a murder when the only aggravating factor was that the murder was found to be "outrageously or wantonly vile."
The Court reversed and remanded the Georgia death penalty sentence because, under Furman v. Georgia, such a factor did not help sentencing judges or juries avoid arbitrary and capricious infliction of the death penalty.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Capital punishment in Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:1980 in Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:1980 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States death penalty case law
"""

From "Godinez v. Moran" ==> """
Godinez v. Moran, 509 U.S. 389 (1993), was a landmark decision in which the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that if a defendant was competent to stand trial, they were automatically competent to plead guilty, and thereby waive the panoply of trial rights, including the right to counsel.. 
Circumstances
On August 2, 1984, Richard Allen Moran entered the Red Pearl Saloon in Carson City, Nevada and shot the bartender and a customer before robbing the cash register. Nine days later he shot his ex-wife and then himself, and also unsuccessfully tried to slit his wrists. On August 13 Moran summoned the police to his hospital bedside and confessed to the killings.
He was charged with three counts of first-degree murder, but pleaded not guilty. Two court-ordered psychiatrists concluded that he was competent to stand trial, although both noted he was depressed.
The prosecution sought the death penalty. Two months after the psychiatric evaluations,  Moran stated to the court that he wished to discharge his attorneys and change his plea to guilty. He also waived his right to counsel. After his trial he was sentenced to death. Moran then sought state post conviction relief on the grounds that he was mentally incompetent to represent himself. The trial court held an evidentiary hearing and then it rejected his claim.
Appeals
Moran's appeal to the Nevada Supreme Court was dismissed and a Federal District Court denied his petition for a writ of habeas corpus. However, the Court of Appeals reversed this decision, concluding that due process required the trial court to hold a hearing to "evaluate and determine" Moran's competency before accepting his decisions to waive counsel and plead guilty. It also held that the trial court erred by using the wrong legal standard. It stated that competency to waive constitutional rights requires a higher level of mental functioning than the level of mental functioning required to stand trial. They reasoned that competence to stand trial requires only that the defendant have a rational and factual understanding of the proceedings and is capable of assisting his counsel, while competence to waive counsel or plead guilty requires that the defendant has the capacity for reasoned choice among those choices available.
Moran petitioned the Supreme Court on a writ of certiorari.
Decision
In a split decision (7–2), the Court found that competency to stand trial and competency to plead guilty were equivalent competencies. In other words, if a person was found competent for one, the person was automatically competent for the second. Further, the court held that a person who is competent to stand trial is also competent to waive an attorney and proceed pro se. The court held that it was irrelevant if the individual represented himself inadequately. (The Court later held in Indiana v. Edwards that the competency to stand trial was different from the competency to have self-representation.)
As Justice Kennedy stated in his concurring opinion: "At common law, therefore, no attempt was made to apply different competency standards to different stages of criminal proceedings or to the variety of decisions that a defendant must make during the course of those proceedings."Godinez, 509 U.S. at 407 (Kennedy, J., concurring). Further, the Due Process Clause "does not mandate different standards of competency at various stages of or for different decisions made during the criminal proceedings."
Significance
The court appears to be moving toward a single standard of competency to be applied throughout criminal proceedings. The court finds nothing in case law to the contrary. "[S]etting out varying competency standards for each decision and stage of a criminal proceeding would disrupt the orderly course of trial and, from the standpoint of all parties, prove unworkable both at trial and on appellate review."
As Justice Kennedy notes, this holding in Godinez v. Moran may seem harsh in equating all competencies as essentially equal. However, there are limitations noted in a careful reading of the decision. One is that the Court emphasized that competence to waive legal counsel alone does not make a waiver of counsel valid. The trial judge must determine if the waiver is "voluntary" and "intelligent".
Further, in a decision, McKaskle v. Wiggins (1984), the Court held that even if the defendant successfully waives counsel, the court can provide a "standby counsel" if the pro se defendant has actual control over the presentation of the case to the jury, and the jury retains the belief the defendant is in charge of his own case.
Implications for evaluation
Following this decision, a forensic clinician conducting a competency evaluation for  competency to stand trial, should also include an evaluation of competency to waive counsel.
Subsequent developments
Moran was executed by lethal injection on March 30, 1996.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 509
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 Competency evaluation
 List of criminal competencies
 Indiana v. Edwards
General:
 Capital punishment in Nevada
 Capital punishment in the United States
 List of people executed in Nevada
Footnotes
Further reading
External links
Competency to Stand Trial
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1993 in United States case law
Category:Adjudicative competence case law
"""

From "Goesaert v. Cleary" ==> """
Goesaert v. Cleary, 335 U.S. 464 (1948), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld a Michigan law, which prohibited women from being licensed as a bartender in all cities having a population of 50,000 or more unless their father or husband owned the establishment.. Valentine Goesaert, the plaintiff in the case, challenged the law on the ground that it infringed on the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause. Speaking for the majority, Justice Felix Frankfurter affirmed the judgment of the Detroit district court and upheld the constitutionality of the state law. The state argued that since the profession of bartending could potentially lead to moral and social problems for women, it was within the state's power to bar them from working as bartenders. Only when the owner of the bar was a sufficiently close relative to the women bartender could it be guaranteed that such immorality would not be present.
The decision was subsequently overruled by Craig v. Boren..
 Background 
As part of the Michigan system for controlling the sale of liquor, bartenders were required in all cities having a population of 50,000 or more, but no female would be so licensed unless "the wife or daughter of the male owner" of a licensed liquor establishment, under Section 19a of Act 133 of the Public Acts of Michigan 1945, Mich.Stat.Ann. 18,990(1).
Valentine Goesaert was the owner of a bar in the city of Dearborn, Michigan. According to Michigan law, she was not allowed to be the owner of a bar since the population in Dearborn exceeded 50,000. On November 20, 1947, Goesaert and her daughter challenged the Michigan law at the district court of Detroit before Circuit Judge Simons and District Judges Levin and Picard. The women were represented by attorney Anne R. Davidow. They argued that the law denied them equal protection of the laws and deprived them of their property without due process of law. The main arguments brought forth by Goesaert were as follows:
 An arbitrary standard of 50,000 was set as the population of any city to come under the act.
 Women owners of bars were discriminated against.
 Women bartenders were discriminated against.
 There was a discrimination between daughters of male and female owners.
 There was a discrimination between waitresses and female bartenders.
Judges Levin and Simons ruled in favor of Cleary et al., denying all of the plaintiffs' claims: "the power of the Legislature to make special provisions for the protection of women is not denied." On the other hand, Picard dissented, citing two reasons. First, he thought that the law violated Section 1 of the Fourteenth Amendment because it discriminated between persons similarly situated, denied plaintiffs equal protection of the laws, and was "palpably arbitrary, capricious and unreasonable, and not based on facts that can reasonably be conceived." Second, the plaintiffs should be permitted to present evidence before the court acted on the interlocutory injunction.
 Decision 
After losing in the District Court, Goesaert appealed to the Supreme Court. The women were once again represented by Anne R. Davidow. Edmund E. Shepherd represented the appellees, Cleary et al. Goesaert et al. once again presented their arguments against the law by focusing on the claim that Michigan could not restrict females from being barmaids and at the same time make an exception, in favor of the wives and daughters of the owners of liquor establishments.
Justice Frankfurter delivered the opinion of the court, which upheld the Michigan law. He first cited the historic tradition of the regulation of liquor traffic, which forbid all women from working behind a bar. Although he pointed out that women had begun to "achieve the virtues that men have long claimed as their prerogatives," the Constitution "does not require legislatures to reflect sociological insight, or shifting social standards."Goesaert, 335 U.S. at 466. He went on to explain that the Constitution does not require situations which are different in fact or opinion to be treated in law as if they were the same by citing Tigner v. State of Texas.. Since the ownership of a bar by a barmaid's husband or father minimized hazards of social and moral problems that would otherwise be present for women, the legislature needed not go to the full length of prohibition with the appearance of two distinct groups of women. In the name of protecting women from moral and social dangers in the bar, the law was upheld by the majority.
Justice Rutledge authored a dissenting opinion, which was joined by Justices Douglas and Murphy. They argued that the law arbitrarily discriminated between male and female owners of liquor establishments. Justice Rutledge presented the opinion by saying, "This inevitable result of the classification belies the assumption that the statute was motivated by a legislative solicitude for the moral and physical well-being of women who, but for the law, would be employed as barmaids. Since there could be no other conceivable justification for such discrimination against women owners of liquor establishments, the statute should be held invalid as a denial of equal protection."Goesaert, 335 U.S. at 468 (Rutledge, J., dissenting).
 Aftermath 
Although the Michigan law was deemed discriminatory towards women, the case made a precedent for the Supreme Court to look more closely at legislature with discrimination based on gender. In his argument, Frankfurter relied on the rational basis test for equal protection legislation. With the test, the court asked "whether it is reasonable for state purposes to treat two classes of people differently."
The key was that as long as the court declared that the state had a justifiable reason to enact a law, the law would be held. By applying the rational basis test to the question of equality in gender-based legislation, Frankfurter opened the door to further state legislation that distinguished between the genders. Afterward, there were many cases that used his criteria to uphold laws that made distinctions between gender.
By the 1970s, however, attitudes began to shift. The Supreme Court found an Idaho law to be unconstitutional for on its discrimination against women in Reed v. Reed, when the court struck down a law that preferred men over women for appointments as administrators of estates.. That was a dramatic change to the Supreme Court's approach to the application of equality for men and women.
See also
Gender equality
List of gender equality lawsuits
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 335
References
 Sources 
French, Amy Holtman. "Mixing It Up:Michigan Barmaids Fight for Civil Rights," Michigan Historical Review, vol. 40 (Spring, 2014): 27–48.
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:1948 in United States case law
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:Legal history of Michigan
Category:Bartending
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
Category:United States Twenty-first Amendment case law
Category:History of Detroit
"""

From "Golan v. Holder" ==> """
Golan v. Holder, 565 U.S. 302 (2012), was a Supreme Court case that dealt with copyright and the public domain. It held that the "limited time" language of the United States Constitution's Copyright Clause does not preclude the extension of copyright protections to works previously in the public domain.
In particular, the case challenged the constitutionality of the application of Section 514 of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act of 1994, which implemented the provisions of trade agreements seeking to equalize copyright protection on an international basis. In the United States, the Act newly granted copyright status to foreign works previously in the public domain.
The two main arguments against the application of the Act in the case were that restoring copyright violates the "limited time" language of the United States Constitution's Copyright Clause, and that restoring to copyright works that had passed into the public domain interferes with the peoples' First Amendment right to use, copy and otherwise exploit the works and to freely express themselves through these works, thus also violating the Constitution's Copyright Clause.Denniston, Lyle, (2011-10-04) "Argument preview: Copyright and the public domain", Bloomberg Law, SCOTUSblog
The US Supreme Court held on January 18, 2012 that Section 514 of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act does not exceed Congress's authority under the Copyright Clause, and the court affirmed the judgment of the lower court by 6–2, with the opinion written by Justice Ginsburg.. The practical effect of the decision is to confirm that works that were previously free to use, such as Prokofiev's Peter and the Wolf, are no longer in the public domain and are subject to use only with the permission of the copyright holder, such as through paid licensing, until their copyright term expires again.Totenberg, Nina, High Court Sides With Man Abandoned By Attorneys, 'Separate Decision Upholds Copyright Law', NPR, 2012-1-18.
History
After the Supreme Court of the United States upheld the 1998 Copyright Term Extension Act in Eldred v. Ashcroft (2003), the United States District Court for the District of Colorado dismissed the plaintiffs' challenge to that act in 2004 (Golan v. Ashcroft). The remaining constitutional challenge to the 1994 Uruguay Round Agreements Act was dismissed the following year (Golan v. Gonzales).Golan v. Gonzales, No. 01-B-1854, 2005 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 6800 (D. Colo April 20, 2005).
The case affected the copyright status of potentially millions of works, including:
Metropolis (1927)
The Third Man (1949)
The works of Igor Stravinsky
Several works of H. G. Wells, including the film Things to Come (1936)
The case was heard by District Chief Judge Lewis Babcock and was decided by the United States District Court for the District of Colorado in 2005. It was appealed at the Tenth Circuit.
On September 4, 2007, Judge Robert H. Henry of the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit affirmed the district court's dismissal of the CTEA claim, as foreclosed by Eldred, and the district court's holding that § 514 of the URAA does not exceed the limitations inherent in the Copyright Clause.
However the Appeals Court did find "Based on the Eldred Court’s analysis, we examine the bedrock principle of copyright law that works in the public domain remain there and conclude that § 514 alters the traditional contours of copyright protection by deviating from this principle"Golan, 501 F.3d at 1187-88. and concluded "since § 514 has altered the traditional contours of copyright protection in a manner that implicates plaintiffs' right to free expression, it must be subject to First Amendment review."Golan, 501 F.3d at 1197. It remanded the case to the district court.
U.S. Supreme Court
A related issue was then brought before the court as Golan v. Holder after conductors Lawrence Golan and Richard Kapp filed suit. In a holding published on April 3, 2009, Judge Babcock reversed his earlier finding that the First Amendment was not applicable to resurrecting foreign copyright claims. Judge Babcock found that aspects of the 1994 Uruguay Round Agreements Act, which brought some works whose copyright had lapsed back under copyright, violated First Amendment rights of so-called reliance parties,U.S. Copyright Office: Definition of "reliance party". URL last accessed January 5, 2010. i.e., parties who had been using a work formerly in the public domain before the URAA became effective, relying on the work being in the public domain, and who would now no longer be able to do so.Ochoa, T.: Ochoa on Golan v. Holder and Copyright Restoration, April 6, 2009. URL last accessed January 5, 2010. He wrote, In the United States, that body of law includes the bedrock principle that works in the public domain remain in the public domain. Removing works from the public domain violated Plaintiffs’ vested First Amendment interests. [...] Accordingly—to the extent Section 514 suppresses the right of reliance parties to use works they exploited while the works were in the public domain—Section 514 is substantially broader than necessary to achieve the Government’s interest. He also indicated a possible solution by suggesting that the protection of reliance parties be made not limited in time. However, further appeals by copyright owners were expected.Nate Anderson, "Court: Congress can't put public domain back into copyright", Ars Technica, April 6, 2009. Accessed April 6, 2009.
On June 21, 2010, the Tenth Circuit reversed the judgment of the district court and remanded with instructions to grant summary judgment in favor of the government, thus upholding the constitutionality of the URAA copyright restoration.Stanford Center for Internet and Society: Golan v. Gonzales  Golan filed for certiorari in the Supreme Court of the United States asking for the Court to hear the case.
On March 7, 2011, the Court granted the writ of certiorari.. Oral argument was held October 5, 2011.
On June 12, 2011, the International Music Score Library Project (IMSLP, Petrucci Music Library) announced they would submit an amicus curiae brief in the case; a group of Harvard Law School students, supervised by Professor Charles Nesson,  represented IMSLP."Golan v. Holder: Should Shostakovich be Public Domain?" by Feldmahler, IMSLP journal, June 12, 2011. Accessed June 15, 2011 Other parties that filed amicus curiae briefs include:
 The Electronic Frontier Foundation on behalf of the Internet Archive and the University of Michigan Dean of Libraries. Joining were the Wikimedia Foundation, the American Library Association, the Association of College and Research Libraries, and the Association of Research Libraries.
 H. Tomas Gomez-Arostegui (Lewis & Clark Law School) and Tyler T. Ochoa (Santa Clara University School of Law)
 The Eagle Forum Education & Legal Defense Fund
 Professor Daniel J. Gervais (Professor at Vanderbilt University Law School)
 Public Knowledge
 The Cato Institute
 Peter Decherney
 Heartland Angels
 Creative Commons
 Public Domain Interests
 The Justice and Freedom Fund
 Professors and Fellows from the Information Society Project at Yale Law School
 The American Civil Liberties Union
 The Conductors Guild
 The Music Library Association
 The American Library Association (which also joined the Internet Archive's brief)
 The College Art Association
 Google
 The International Publishers Association
 The International Coalition for Copyright Protection
 The American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers (ASCAP)
 The Intellectual Property Owners Association (IPO)
 The Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA)
 The American Bar Association
 The Franklin Pierce Center for Intellectual Property
 The American Intellectual Property Law Association.
Decision
On January 18, 2012, the Supreme Court affirmed the Tenth Circuit's decision 6–2. The majority opinion was written by Justice Ginsburg and joined by Roberts, Scalia, Kennedy, Thomas, and Sotomayor. The dissent was written by Justice Breyer and joined by Justice Alito. Justice Kagan recused.SCOTUS blog post
The majority held that "The Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (Berne), which took effect in 1886, is the principal accord governing international copyright relations." The court also held that changing the term of copyright for works in such a way that it diminishes or eliminates rights in the work (in this case the right of the public to the works) does not violate the takings clause of the Fifth Amendment.
Dissenting opinion
Breyer, dissenting, wrote:
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 565
List of copyright case law
Notes
References
Further reading
External links
 Complaint in Golan v. Ashcroft at cyber.law.harvard.edu
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:Copyright Clause case law
Category:2012 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Public domain in the United States
"""

From "Golan v. Saada" ==> """
Golan v. Saada, 596 U.S. ___ (2022), was a United States Supreme Court case concerning the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction. The case reviewed if all ameliorative measures must be taken into consideration before denying a Hague Convention petition once it is found that the child could face harm when returned to a foreign country.
 Background 
Isacco Saada and Narkis Golan were a couple that had married in Milan, Italy. During their marriage, Saada was abusive towards Golan and they often argued. Sometimes, during arguments, Saada would "push, slap, and grab Golan and pull her hair." Saada had made threats against Golan's life on an occasion. Much of these acts of abuse happened in front of their son, B.A.S.
In July 2018, Golan flew with her son B.A.S. to the United States to attend her brother's wedding, but instead of returning to Italy afterward, she found refuge in a domestic violence shelter. After he found out, Saada filed a criminal complaint in Italy and filed a petition under the Hague Convention and the International Child Abduction Remedies Act (ICARA) in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York.
Initially, the district court allowed B.A.S to return to Italy by seeking ameliorative measures, which included Saada providing Golan $20,000, dismissing his criminal complaint in Italy and seeking therapy, which was consistent with the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit's precedent at the time. On appeal, however, the Second Circuit found the measures were insufficient in mitigating the risk and vacated the judgment.
On remand, the district court worked with the Italian Authorities to ensure that a protective order was filed against Saada to prevent Saada from approaching Golan and that social services in Italy oversaw Saada's therapy and parenting classes. The Second Circuit now affirmed.
Golan filed a petition for a writ of certiorari.
 Supreme Court 
The court granted certiorari on December 10, 2021, and heard oral arguments on March 22, 2022. On June 15, 2022, the Supreme Court vacated the Second Circuit's judgment in a unanimous opinion written by Justice Sonia Sotomayor.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Child custody
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:United States family case law
Category:Italy–United States relations
"""

From "Gold Clause Cases" ==> """
right|thumb|Bond coupons payable in gold
The Gold Clause Cases were a series of actions brought before the Supreme Court of the United States, in which the court narrowly upheld restrictions on the ownership of gold implemented by the administration of U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt in response to the Great Depression.
Background
Until the 1930s, business contracts in the United States regularly included gold clauses that allowed creditors to demand payment in gold or gold equivalents. The tightening of Federal Reserve policy from 1928 onward prompted a global unwinding of credit later dubbed the Great Contraction. Waves of bank failures occurred, aggravated by reliance on single-location banks (unit banks) that could not survive a run. A final bank panic in February 1933 saw widespread hoarding of gold and currency as well as international drains on gold reserves. Roosevelt started his term with banking suspended in most states and domestic gold reserves seriously depleted. With support from Congress, he enacted a series of banking and currency reforms that effectively nationalized monetary gold. These included the Emergency Banking Act which authorized the President to prohibit international gold payments, Executive Order 6102 which required the surrender of all privately held monetary gold in exchange for currency, and the Gold Clause Resolution (Pub. Res. 73–10) which voided all gold clauses within the United States. The following year, under the Gold Reserve Act, the government took ownership of the Federal Reserve's gold stocks and devalued the dollar. Multiple cases were filed in response and made their way to the Supreme Court.
Cases
Norman v. Baltimore & Ohio Railroad Co. with United States v. Bankers Trust Co. : The bearer of a $22.50 bond coupon of the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad demanded payment of $38.10, the value of the coupon's gold obligation based on the statutory price of gold. Separately, the federal government and the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, as creditors of the Iron Mountain Railway, intervened in a case brought by the Missouri Pacific Railroad for additional payment on Iron Mountain bonds. In both cases the district and appeal courts upheld the Gold Clause Resolution and denied additional payment. The cases came before the Supreme Court together on writs of certiorari.
Nortz v. United States : The owner of $106,300 in federal gold certificates surrendered them as required by Executive Order 6102, receiving only their face value in currency. He sued in the United States Court of Claims for an additional $64,000 representing the loss of the dollar against gold. That court submitted certified questions to the Supreme Court, the first of which asked whether the plaintiff could demand the value of gold given that he had no right to possess the gold itself.
Perry v. United States : The owner of a $10,000 Liberty Bond sued in the Court of Claims for an additional $7,000 representing the dollar's devaluation. Again, the Court of Claims submitted a question of whether it could consider a claim beyond the face value of the bond.
Ruling
While the Roosevelt administration waited for the Court to return its judgment, contingency plans were made for an unfavorable ruling.McKenna, at 56–66. Ideas floated about the White House to withdraw the right to sue the government to enforce gold clauses. Attorney General Homer Cummings opined the court should be immediately packed to ensure a favorable ruling. Roosevelt directed Treasury Secretary Henry Morgenthau to step back from regulating exchange and interest rates to provoke a public outcry for federal action, but Morgenthau refused. Roosevelt also drew up executive orders to close all stock exchanges and prepared a radio address to the public.
All three cases were announced on February 18, 1935, and all in favor of the government's position by a 5–4 majority. Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes wrote the opinion for each case, finding the government's power to regulate money a plenary power. Only in the Perry case did the Court reach the question of the Gold Clause Resolution's constitutionality. It concluded that Congress acted unconstitutionally in voiding the government's prior obligations, but not in restricting transactions in gold. As a result, it held that the bond holder had no cause of action because he could not show any value for gold that he might have received, other than the government's dollar-for-dollar offer.
Justice McReynolds wrote the dissenting opinion. He protested that gold clauses were binding contracts, and that allowing the administration's policies to stand would permanently damage faith in the government to uphold its own contracts and those of private parties. McReynolds distinguished the cases at hand from the Legal Tender Cases, arguing that in the earlier cases the government sought to continue operating until it could meet its obligations, while the Roosevelt administration apparently sought to nullify them.
Subsequent events
Congress responded to the ambiguous Perry ruling with an additional resolution (Pub. Res. 74–63) that provided sovereign immunity of the federal government against claims for damage resulting from the devaluation of currency or other federal obligations. The future of gold as a basis for money remained unsettled for nearly the entire Roosevelt presidency. In 1944 the Allies of World War II developed the Bretton Woods system that pegged the dollar to gold and other currencies to the dollar. This system continued until 1971 when President Richard Nixon, in what came to be known as the "Nixon Shock," announced that the United States would no longer convert dollars to gold at a fixed value even for foreign exchange purposes, thus abandoning the gold standard. As part of the subsequent reforms to Bretton Woods institutions, President Gerald Ford signed an act that terminated legal prohibitions on private gold transactions as of December 31, 1974.
The Gold Clause Resolution was amended in 1977 to again permit enforcement of gold clauses in private obligations issued after the date of the amendment. This amendment has been held to apply even to lease contracts that originated earlier and were transferred. However, in cases involving railroad bonds that spanned the entire gold ownership ban, courts have rejected the argument that the amendment reactivated the obligation to pay in gold, on the grounds that bonds are "issued" only to their original holders. In 1986 the federal government introduced the American Gold Eagle coin series, the first gold money produced by the United States since the Great Depression. These coins are legal tender at their face value, but the Mint offers them only as collectibles at their much higher bullion value, not as a form of payment by the government.
References
Further reading
External links
Category:Gold standard
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:1935 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:Constitutional challenges to the New Deal
"""

From "Goldberg v. Kelly" ==> """
Goldberg v. Kelly, 397 U.S. 254 (1970), is a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution requires an evidentiary hearing before a recipient of certain government welfare benefits can be deprived of such benefits..https://www.casebriefs.com/blog/law/administrative-law/administrative-law-keyed-to-lawson/constitutional-constraints-on-agency-procedure/goldberg-v-kelly/ RET. Oct. 30, 2017, 09:27 CST
The individual losing benefits is entitled to an oral hearing before an impartial decision-maker as well as the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses and the right to a written statement setting out the evidence relied upon and the legal basis for the decision.  There is no right to a formal trial. The case was decided 5–3. (There was a vacancy on the Court because of the resignation of Abe Fortas.)
 Issues
left|200px|thumb|Federal welfare was administered by the new Department of Health Education and Welfare.
 Does the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution demand a hearing before the termination of statutorily defined welfare benefits?
 Does a pre-termination "informal hearing" in a welfare case satisfy the requirements of the Fourteenth Amendment?
 Does the Fourteenth Amendment require a full "evidentiary hearing" prior to termination of welfare benefits?
 Does the welfare recipient have the right to counsel or an attorney at an evidentiary hearing?
 To what extent does the welfare administrative decision maker need to be impartial?
Holdings 
1. Welfare benefits are a matter of statutory entitlement for persons qualified to receive them and so procedural due process is applicable to their termination.
2. The interest of the eligible recipient in the uninterrupted receipt of public assistance, which provides him with essential food, clothing, housing, and medical care and the State's interest that his payments not be erroneously terminated clearly outweigh the State's competing concern to prevent any increase in its fiscal and administrative burdens. 
3. A pre-termination evidentiary hearing is necessary to provide the welfare recipient with procedural due process.
(a) Such hearing need not take the form of a judicial or quasi-judicial trial, but the recipient must be provided with timely and adequate notice detailing the reasons for termination and an effective opportunity to defend by confronting adverse witnesses and by presenting his own arguments and evidence orally before the decision maker.
(b) Counsel need not be furnished at the pre-termination hearing, but the recipient must be allowed to retain an attorney. 
(c) A decision must rest "solely on the legal rules and evidence adduced at the hearing."Mathews v. Eldridge, , opinion of the court, footnote 4. Text of footnote: In Goldberg the Court held that the pretermination hearing must include the following elements: (1) "timely and adequate notice detailing the reasons for a proposed termination"; (2) "an effective opportunity [for the recipient] to defend by confronting any adverse witnesses and by presenting his own arguments and evidence orally"; (3) retained counsel, if desired; (4) an "impartial" decisionmaker; (5) a decision resting "solely on the legal rules and evidence adduced at the hearing"; (6) a statement of reasons for the decision and the evidence relied on. 397 U.S., at 266 -271. In this opinion the term "evidentiary hearing" refers to a hearing generally of the type required in Goldberg.
(d) The decision maker need not file a full opinion or make formal findings of fact or conclusions of law but should state the reasons for his determination and indicate the evidence he relied on.P. 271
(e) The decision maker must be impartial, and although prior involvement in some aspects of a case will not necessarily bar a welfare official from acting as decision maker, he should not have participated in making the determination under review.294 F. Supp. 893, affirmed
 Discussion 
right|thumb|200px|Federal involvement in welfare was designed to end the poverty of big city tenements, among other places.
The Goldberg decision set the parameters for procedural due process when dealing with the deprivation of a government benefit or entitlement. The Court held that a person has a property interest in certain government entitlements, which require notice and a hearing before a governmental entity (either state or federal) takes them away. Government-provided entitlements from the modern welfare state increased substantially in the United States during the 20th century. The Goldberg court decided that such entitlements (like welfare payments, government pensions, professional licenses), are a form of "new property" that require pre-deprivation procedural protection and so did away with the traditional distinction between rights and privileges.
left|250px|thumb|Growth of federal involvement in funding and administrating welfare began under President John F. Kennedy.
The majority stated that welfare benefits are propertyCompare Justice Black's dissenting opinion: "The Court, however, relies upon the Fourteenth Amendment and in effect says that failure of the government to pay a promised charitable installment to an individual deprives that individual of his own property, in violation of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. It somewhat strains credulity to say that the government's promise of charity to an individual is property belonging to that individual when the government denies that the individual is honestly entitled to receive such a payment." Goldberg, 397 U.S. at 275 (Black, J., dissenting). and articulated the general proposition that welfare enjoys the same legal protection as other property. Justice Brennan noted that welfare benefits are "a matter of statutory entitlement for persons qualified to receive them" and added that "it may be realistic today to regard welfare entitlements as more like 'property' than a 'gratuity.'"Goldberg, 397 U.S. at 262. Here Brennan cited Charles A. Reich's article "The New Property". The prohibition against deprivation of property without due process of law in the Fourteenth Amendment therefore applies to benefits termination.
This specific case dealt with 20 individuals who had been suspected of welfare fraud by New York City officials and were then denied municipal benefits. The opinion of the Court was delivered by Justice William Brennan, while dissenting opinions were filed by Justices Hugo Black and Potter Stewart and Chief Justice Warren Burger. Brennan said at his retirement that he considered it the most important case he had ever decided; conservative columnist David Frum once claimed that the case was a major factor in New York City's 1975 budget meltdown.
John Kelly, acting on behalf of New York residents receiving financial assistance either under the federally assisted program for Families with Dependent Children or under New York State's home relief program, challenged the constitutionality of procedures for notice and termination of such aid. Although originally offering no official notice or opportunity for hearings to those whose aid was scheduled for termination, the State of New York implemented a hearing procedure after commencement of Kelly's litigation.
250px|left|thumb|Welfare expanded under the Great Society programs of Lyndon B. Johnson in the 1960s.
The decision answered questions that had been unresolved in the previous Supreme Court cases of Rudder v. United States96 U.S. App. D. C. 329, 226 F.2d 51 (1955) and Thorpe v. Housing Authority of Durham... The cases involved questions of denial of tenancy or eviction in governmental housing projects.
It has been noted that the precarious financial status of those in poverty may preclude an extensive litigation process despite the decision. The abstention doctrine presupposes the adequacy of state process to protect constitutional rights. Poor people may lack the funds to pursue a court hearing process.LaFrance, ibid., pp. 514 et seq., rehearing denied, . One solution has been the use of a preliminary injunction, which preserves the status quo while the litigation proceeds.LaFrance, ibid. p. 511
See also
Administrative Procedure Act (United States)
Due Process
Redistributive change
Perry v. Sindermann, 408 U.S. 593 (1972)
Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. 319 (1976)
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States civil due process case law
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:1970 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Social Security lawsuits
"""

From "Goldblatt v. Town of Hempstead" ==> """
Goldblatt v. Hempstead, 369 U.S. 590 (1962), was a United States Supreme Court case concerning whether a town ordinance regulating a use of a property was unconstitutional under the Fourteenth Amendment, finding the law in question was constitutional as an exercise of the town's police powers.
Summary
In 1962, Herbert W. Goldblatt filed a complaint against the town of Hempstead, New York claiming that a town ordinance regulating dredging and pit excavating on his property prevented him from continuing his business and therefore takes his property without due process of law in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment. The Supreme Court conceded that the law completely prohibited a prior use by Mr. Goldblatt who had operated a gravel pit for 30 years. But the Court held that depriving the property of its most profitable use does not make the law unconstitutional.
Background
Herbert Goldblatt owned a 38-acre tract within the town of Hempstead, New York. His business, Builders Sand and Gravel Corporation, had been mining sand and gravel at this site continuously since 1927. During the first year the excavation depth reached the water table causing the excavated area to fill with water. This process continued from 1927 through 1962 so that the original crater became a 20-acre lake with an average depth of 25 feet.
The town of Hempstead grew and expanded around this excavation until within a radius of 3500 feet there were 2200 homes and four public schools. In 1945 the town enacted Ordinance No. 16 in an attempt to regulate mining excavations within its limits.  This ordinance provided that such pits must be enclosed by a wire fence and must comply with berm and slope requirements. Goldblatt complied with this ordinance but in 1956 the town sought an injunction against further excavation as being in violation of a zoning ordinance. The town's zoning case failed because Goldblatt was found to be conducting prior non-conforming use on the premises.  In 1958 the town amended Ordinance No.16 to prohibit any excavating below the water table and to require back filling of any excavation below that level. This amendment also made the berm, slope and fence requirements more stringent.
In 1959 the Town of Hempstead filed an action to prohibit Goldblatt from further mining on the grounds that he had not complied with amended Ordinance 16. Goldblatt argued that the ordinance was unconstitutional because it was not regulatory of his business but was completely prohibitory and confiscated his property without compensation, that it deprived him of the benefit of the favorable judgment arising from the previous zoning litigation, and that it constituted ex post facto legislation. The trial court decided against Goldblatt and he was enjoined from conducting further excavations on the lot until he had complied with the new provisions of Ordinance 16.
Though the ordinance completely prohibits a beneficial use to which the property has previously been used, the question regarding unconstitutionality was resolved by the fact that if the ordinance was considered a valid exercise of the town's police powers, depriving the property of its most beneficial use does not render it unconstitutional. The ordinance was in fact found to be a valid example of the town's police powers.
Opinion of the Court
Mr. Goldblatt argued that the ordinance was unconstitutional because it '1) was not regulatory of his business but completely prohibitory and confiscated his property without compensation, 2) it deprived him of the benefit of the favorable judgement arising from the previous zoning litigation, and 3) it constituted ex post facto legislation.' While Justice Clark conceded that the ordinance did prohibit a beneficial use that the property had provided previously, he stated that this fact in itself did not determine whether or not the ordinance was unconstitutional. If the ordinance is otherwise a valid use of the town's police powers, the fact that it deprives the property of its most beneficial use does not mean it is unconstitutional.  Justice Clark wrote that the real question was whether or not it fell within the town's police power to prohibit further excavation below the water table. He defined police power as 'public encroachment upon private interests'. The guiding principles about police power that Justice Clark took from Lawton v. Steele,  were: Does the public require this interference and are the remedies reasonably necessary for the accomplishment of the purpose and not unduly oppressive upon individuals?
Justice Clark addressed the question of whether the ordinance was a reasonable one by pointing out that the ordinance was passed as a safety measure. There was concern about children burrowing under the fence but there was no indication as to whether deepening the lake would increase the danger to them. There was not any information brought in the case to show that the ordinance would be costly to Mr. Goldblatt. Justice Clark pointed out that the onus was on Mr. Goldblatt to show that the ordinance was unreasonable. Justice Clark referenced past cases of Bibb v. Navajo Freight Lines, , Salsburg v. Maryland, , and United States v. Carolene Products Co., , all of which were decided that similar situations regarding reasonableness had not been disproved, so he concluded that this must stand as a valid policing regulation.
On Goldblatt's claim that he was subjected to ex post facto legislation, Justice Clark responded that the regulation of excavating in this case did not undermine a previous decision in favor of Mr. Goldblatt regarding zoning issues. The making of a new ordinance regarding safety was unconnected to the old ordinance regarding zoning.
Justice Clark addressed Goldblatt's further claim that the ordinance was unconstitutional because it imposed upon him to re-fill the excavation and to erect a new fence or to face penalties or imprisonment. This claim was based on the constitutional prohibition against bills of attainder and ex post facto legislation. Justice Clark found that these were not the issues being addressed in this case; the issue was regarding further excavation, and Mr. Goldblatt would need to bring a specific suit to address these issues at another time.
Influence on other cases
Penn Central Transportation Co. v. New York City,  - The case involves a city placing restrictions on the development of individual historic landmarks in addition to those imposed by applicable zoning ordinances without effecting a "taking" that would require the payment of just compensation.
Andrus v. Allard  - This case involves the confiscation of and halting the sale of protected eagle parts. The court found that this prohibition on commerce in eagle artifacts does not constitute an unconstitutional taking because the ability to sell the property is but one strand in the owner's bundle of property rights.  The denial of one property right does not automatically equate a taking.
Abraham Moskow vs. Commissioner of Environmental Management & others 384 Mass. 530 (1981) - A restrictive order of the Commissioner of Environmental Management under the Inland Wetlands Act, forbidding the dredging, filling, or other alteration of an area of wetland comprising approximately 55% of a parcel of undeveloped land, was not such an extensive interference with the use of the parcel as a whole that it constituted a taking.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Fourteenth Amendment case law
Category:1962 in United States case law
"""

From "Golden State Transit Corp. v. City of Los Angeles" ==> """
Golden State Transit Corp v City of Los Angeles, 475 U.S. 608 (1986), is a US labor law case, concerning the scope of federal preemption against state law for labor rights.
Facts
Golden State Transit Corp claimed that the City of Los Angeles was preempted by the National Labor Relations Act of 1935 from refusing to renew its franchise license to operate taxicabs in the city. During its application, its cab drivers went on strike for higher wages and better working conditions. The Teamsters Union put pressure on the City to not renew the license. Because the dispute was not settled, the franchise expired. The Federal District Court held that the City was entitled to not renew the license. The Court of Appeals affirmed this judgment. Golden State Transit Corp appealed.
Judgment
A majority of the Supreme Court held that Los Angeles was not entitled to refuse to renew a taxi company's franchise license because the Teamsters Union had pressured it not to until a dispute was resolved. Blackmun J gave the judgment.
Rehnquist J dissented, saying the following.
See also
United States labor law
References
External links
Category:United States labor case law
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Goldfarb v. Virginia State Bar" ==> """
Goldfarb v. Virginia State Bar, 421 U.S. 773 (1975), was a U.S. Supreme Court decision. It stated that lawyers engage in "trade or commerce" and hence ended the legal profession's exemption from antitrust laws..
Facts
In 1971, Ruth and Lewis Goldfarb decided to buy a house in Fairfax County, Virginia. To get a mortgage, they needed to perform a title search on the house, which can only be performed by a lawyer i.e. a member of the Virginia State Bar. Goldfarb contacted a lawyer, who quoted him a price suggested in a minimum-fee schedule published by the Fairfax County Bar Association, which was 1% of the property's value. Goldfarb attempted to find a cheaper quote. He sent 36 letters to other lawyers and received 19 responses, all declining to quote a fee lower than the minimum-fee schedule suggests. Some said that they did not know of any attorney who would do so. Unable to find a lower price, Goldfarb agreed to the 1% quote and subsequently sued both the State Bar and the County Bar alleging that the fee schedule amounted to price-fixing and a violation of Section 1 of the Sherman Antitrust Act, seeking both injunctive relief and damages.
The minimum-fee schedule was a list of prices, suggested by the county bar for various basic legal services, such as wills, marriage contracts, and title searches. The enforcement power lay in the hands of the State Bar, which was the administrative agency used by the Supreme Court of Virginia to regulate the legal profession. Without a license from the State Bar, no one can practice law in Virginia. The State Bar did not compel adherence to this fee schedule, but it had published several reports condoning the practice and had opined that habitual violation of the minimum-fee schedule suggests misconduct on the part of the lawyer.
Petitioners' arguments
The plaintiffs argued that the minimum-fee schedule created an artificial price floor for title searches in Fairfax County and that, in the absence of this fee schedule, they would have been able to procure a quote lower than the one listed in the schedule. They pointed to the history of Section 1, Sherman Act enforcement. In Addyston Pipe and Steel Company v. United States, Judge Taft created the distinction between naked and ancillary restraints of trade, and the Virginia State Bar's restraints are naked. In United States v. Trenton Potteries,. the Supreme Court first established per se illegality of price-fixing because a reasonable price today may become unreasonable tomorrow and the courts cannot be expected to re-confirm every price. The reasonableness of the fees on the minimum-fee schedule is, then, immaterial. And finally, in United States v. Socony-Vacuum Oil Co, Inc.,. the Court proclaimed, in a famous footnote, that price-fixing need be neither intentional or feasible to be found per se illegal. Hence, the fact that the State Bar's power of compulsion was not absolute does not mean the fee schedule is legal.
Respondents' arguments
The defendants posed four separate arguments.
 The minimum-fee schedule is purely advisory and is only intended to provide information to members. No attorney is compelled to follow it. Furthermore, while membership in the State Bar is a prerequisite to practice law in Virginia, membership in the County Bar is voluntary, and hence, any guidelines, such as the fee schedule, adopted by a local bar association, are also voluntary.
 This was to be a transaction between a resident of Virginia and a lawyer residing in Virginia, influenced by his County Bar and the Virginia State Bar. Since interstate commerce is not affected, federal law in general and the Sherman Act in particular do not apply.
 Law is a "learned profession." Lawyers do not engage in trade and commerce and hence any restrictions on the pricing schemes they use are not restraints of trade, prohibited under the Sherman Act.
 Because the Virginia State Bar is licensed by the Virginia Supreme Court to regulate the profession in the state, policies promulgated by it and its subsidiaries are "state action" and are thus subject to the Parker v. Brown. state action exemption from federal antitrust law.
Judgment
The Supreme Court held that since prices were fixed, since price-fixing is per se illegal under the Sherman Act, and since no valid exemption from the Sherman Act could be shown, the minimum-fee schedule violates Section 1 of the Sherman Act. The Circuit Court judgment was reversed, and the case was remanded to District court to determine the proper remedy. The court rejected each defense attempted by the respondents as follows.
 It found the fee schedule to be effectively compulsory. The prospect of disciplinary action from the State Bar, regardless of whether the County Bar was a voluntary organization or had enforcement capabilities, was sufficient to dissuade all attorneys from quoting a price below the one listed on the schedule. The attorneys were furthermore assured that their competitors would not undercut them because they would face the same disciplinary action. This effectively created a price floor.
 The source of financing for the house, which was what originally required Goldfarb to seek a title search, would come from across state lines, making this a matter of interstate commerce.
 Lawyers provide services in exchange for money, and thus engage in commerce. There is nothing to suggest that the Sherman Act was meant to provide a sweeping exemption to an entire profession regardless of what other not-for-profit purposes the profession may have.
 While the operation of the Virginia State Bar was proscribed by state action i.e. authority granted by statute to the Virginia Supreme Court, the specific anticompetitive behavior in question—the minimum-fee schedule—was not directly authorized by the State acting as a sovereign. "It is not enough that, as the County Bar puts it, anticompetitive conduct is "prompted" by state action; rather, anticompetitive activities must be compelled by direction of the State acting as a sovereign."Breit, W; Elzinga, K. The Antitrust Casebook: Milestones in Antitrust Regulation, page 49. The Dryden Press, 1996.
See also
US antitrust law
Wouters v Algemene Raad van de Nederlandse Orde van Advocaten (2002) C-309/99, a case of the European Court of Justice, holding that the self-regulation by lawyers of standards was permissible.
Notes
References
 Breit, W; Elzinga, K. The Antitrust Casebook: Milestones in Antitrust Regulation
 External links 
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:American Bar Association
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States professional responsibility case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Legal history of Virginia
"""

From "Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. v. Arkansas Teacher Retirement System" ==> """
Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. v. Arkansas Teacher Retirement System, 594 U.S. ___ (2021), was a 2021 decision of the Supreme Court of the United States related to securities fraud class actions.
 Background 
A group of investors sued Goldman Sachs after the financial crisis of 2007–2008 to recover up to $13 billion in losses. In 2020, a panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit allowed the class action to proceed, by a 2–1 vote. Judge Richard J. Sullivan dissented.
 Decision 
The Supreme Court issued its decision in June 2021, vacating the court of appeals' judgment and remanding for further proceedings. A unanimous court found that the presumption of classwide reliance established in Basic Inc. v. Levinson required the defendant's statements to be more than just generic guarantees. An 8–1 court, with Justice Sonia Sotomayor dissenting, found that the lower court had not adequately followed this framework, and remanded for further proceedings. A 6–3 court, with Justice Neil Gorsuch dissenting, joined by Justices Clarence Thomas and Samuel Alito, held that defendants have the burden of proof in rebutting the presumption of reliance.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States securities case law
Category:United States class action case law
Category:Goldman Sachs
Category:Great Recession in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Goldman v. Weinberger" ==> """
Goldman v. Weinberger, 475 U.S. 503 (1986), was a United States Supreme Court case in which a Jewish Air Force officer was denied the right to wear a yarmulke when in uniform on the grounds that the Free Exercise Clause applies less strictly to the military than to ordinary citizens.
 Background 
Goldman joined the United States Air Force as an inactive reservist in 1973. He received a Health Professions scholarship to work towards a PhD in Psychology at the Loyola University of Chicago. Subsequently, Goldman entered service at March Air Force Base in Riverside, California as a commissioned officer and clinical psychologist at the on-base mental health clinic. As an Orthodox Jew and rabbi, Goldman's faith required him to wear a yarmulke to show that he is aware that God is a higher power and above him.
For years, Goldman wore his yarmulke without controversy by staying near his station at the clinic and wearing his service cap above the yarmulke while outdoors. In 1981, however, he was required to testify as a defense witness at a court-martial.  His testimony discredited the prosecution witness. Subsequently, a government attorney lodged a complaint about Goldman's wearing of the yarmulke. Subsequently, his commanding officer at the hospital, Colonel Joseph Gregory, informed him that he was violating Air Force Regulation 35-10, which states that "headgear will not be worn... while indoors except by armed security police in the performance of their duties." The officer then ordered him to not wear the yarmulke while in uniform outside the hospital.
Goldman refused this order, and instead his attorney filed a complaint to the Air Force General Counsel. Gregory then ordered that Goldman cease wearing his yarmulke even when within the hospital. Goldman requested to be allowed to report for duty in civilian clothes until the issue was settled in court, but he was denied this and was threatened with court-martial. It was at this point that Goldman sued the Secretary of Defense, Caspar Weinberger, who was himself of Jewish descent, for Free Exercise Clause violations. He was favored at the District Court of Washington, D.C., but that decision was reversed in the Court of Appeals. The Supreme Court granted the writ of certiorari.
 Supreme Court decision 
Because Goldman alleged that this was a Free Exercise violation, he indicated that the defense had to pass the Sherbert test: by demonstrating a "compelling interest" for the violation. He then submitted evidence that there was not a compelling interest for preventing the display of religious apparel, because it presented no danger to military discipline. However, the Court decided against him on a 5–4 decision. The majority opinion, written by Rehnquist, held that this was of no consequence—it contended that the Sherbert test did not  apply because the Free Exercise Clause and even the First Amendment in general did not apply to the military in the same way that it did to civilian society. The justification for this was a need to "foster instinctive obedience, unity, commitment, and esprit de corps." The dissenters argued that the decision gave too much deference to the military's judgment and that some judicial scrutiny of military necessity claims should be required..
Congressional response
In the Court's ruling it was only decided that the Constitution failed to protect the freedom to wear religious apparel in uniform—it did not outright bar it. This distinction gave Congress the power to enact legislation that would reverse the policy. Allowing "neat and conservative" religious apparel accommodations had been in consideration since 1985, following the case's ruling in the Court of Appeals.Sullivan, Dwight H. (1988), "The Congressional Response to Goldman v. Weinberg". Military Law Review, Volume 121, pp. 125–152. Proposals to do so failed during the case's trial period, but finally succeeded in 1988 through a provision to the annual National Defense Authorization Act. It provides for a general rule that "a member of the armed forces may wear an item of religious apparel while wearing the uniform of the member's armed force." The bill containing the provision was passed by both houses of Congress and signed into law by President Ronald Reagan.
 See also 
 Eweida v British Airways plc
 References 
External links
Category:1986 in Judaism
Category:1986 in military history
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:20th-century history of the United States Air Force
Category:Jewish-American military history
Category:Jewish religious clothing
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:United States military case law
Category:United States military uniforms
Category:Air force uniforms
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Religious headgear
"""

From "Goldstein v. California" ==> """
Goldstein v. California, 412 U.S. 546 (1973), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the high court ruled that California's state statutes criminalizing record piracy did not violate the Copyright Clause of the United States Constitution..
 Background 
Between April 1970 and March 1971, Goldstein purchased recordings (vinyl or tape) and reproduced them, without any contractual permission from or payment to the rights holders, onto blank tapes, which he then distributed for sale. He was charged under a California statute that made it a criminal offense to duplicate and sell records or tapes without permission from the owners of the master recording. At the time of the infringement, there was no federal copyright law covering sound recordings ( sound recordings fixed before February 15, 1972 remain outside the purview of federal copyright law). Goldstein argued that California lacked authority to enact state copyright law that conflicted with federal law under the Supremacy Clause of the Constitution, and that its unlimited duration conflicted with the provision of the Copyright Clause which states that "exclusive Right[s]" of copyright be for "limited Times".
 Holding 
Justice Warren Burger, writing for the 5-4 majority, held that the Copyright Clause did not exclusively invest Congress with the power to enact copyright law, and thus state copyright was in principle valid. If states choose to protect more copyrightable works than the federal government does, they are not prohibited from doing so by the Supremacy Clause. He also held that state laws are not subject to the durational limitation the Copyright Clause enforces on federal copyright.
Justice William O. Douglas filed a dissent asserting that the Supremacy Clause was implicated in state extension of copyright to materials not protected federally, just as it would for a state extension of duration beyond the term of a federally granted copyright. 
Justice Thurgood Marshall filed a separate dissent, arguing that Congressional copyright decisions reflected a balance between free competition and the promotion of invention (as stated in the Copyright Clause), and that, piracy's unsavoriness notwithstanding, unless Congressional action indicated that copyright was needed to promote invention in this case, no copyright protection could be afforded by states in lieu. (By the time this case had been decided, Congress had passed the Sound Recordings Act of 1971, which extended federal protection to newly created recordings.)
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:1973 in United States case law
"""

From "Goldwater v. Carter" ==> """
Goldwater v. Carter, 444 U.S. 996 (1979), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court dismissed a lawsuit filed by Senator Barry Goldwater and other members of the United States Congress challenging the right of President Jimmy Carter to unilaterally nullify the Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty, which the United States had signed with the Republic of China, so that relations could instead be established with the People's Republic of China. Goldwater and his co-filers claimed that the President required Senate approval to take such an action, under Article II, Section II of the U.S. Constitution, and that, by not doing so, President Carter had acted beyond the powers of his office.  While dismissing the case the Court left open the question of the constitutionality of President Carter's actions.
Granting a petition for certiorari but without hearing oral arguments, the court vacated a court of appeals ruling on December 13, 1979, and remanded the case to a federal district court with directions to dismiss the complaint.. A majority of six Justices ruled that the case should be dismissed without hearing an oral argument. Justices Lewis Powell and William Rehnquist issued two separate concurring opinions on the case. Rehnquist claimed that the issue concerned how foreign affairs were conducted between Congress and the President, and was essentially political, not judicial; therefore, it was not eligible to be heard by the court. Powell, while agreeing that the case did not merit judicial review, believed that the issue itself, the powers of the President to break treaties without congressional approval, would have been arguable had Congress issued a formal opposition through a resolution to the termination of the treaty. (The Senate had drafted such a resolution, but not voted upon it.Powell's opinion, Section III, Paragraph 1) This would have turned the case into a constitutional debate between the executive powers granted to the President and the legislative powers granted to Congress. As the case stood, however, it was simply a dispute among unsettled, competing political forces within the legislative and executive branches of government, and hence still political in nature due to the lack of majority or supermajority vote in the Senate speaking officially as a constitutional institution. Today, the case is considered a textbook example of the political question doctrine in U.S. constitutional law.
U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
In 1978, Senator Goldwater filed with the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.
The plaintiffs included Senators Barry Goldwater, Strom Thurmond, Carl Curtis, Jake Garn, Orrin Hatch, Jesse A. Helms; Senator-Elect Gordon Humphrey; and Congressmen Robert Bauman, Steve Symms, Larry McDonald, Robert Daniel Jr., Bob Stump, Eldon Rudd, John Ashbrook, and George Hansen.
The defendants of the appeals court include President Jimmy Carter and Secretary of State Cyrus Vance.
Cause of the Plaintiff's Appeal
The cause of the court of appeals by the plaintiffs was what the plaintiffs saw, and alleged, as the president's "unconstitutional" termination of the 1954 Defense Treaty with Republic of China, violation of Article II and Article VI of the U.S. Constitution and Public Law 95-384.Barry GOLDWATER et al. v. James Earl CARTER, President of the United States, et al. No 79-2246, 100 S.Ct. (1979). 3.
Order on Goldwater v. Carter by Judge Gasch
Judge Oliver Gasch upon consideration of the plaintiff's motion to alter or amend the Court's judgment on the case on June 6, 1979, gave the following orders:
 That the plaintiff's motion to alter or mend the judgement of June 6, 1979 be granted
 That the defendants' motion to dismiss is denied
 That the plaintiff's cross-motion for summary judgment be granted
 The judgment of the Court that defendant President Carter's notice of termination of the 1954 Mutual Defense Treaty Between the United States and the Republic of China must receive the approval of two-thirds of the United States Senate or a majority of both houses of Congress
 That defendant Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance and his subordinate officers be enjoined from taking any action to implement the President's notice of termination.Barry GOLDWATER et al. v. James Earl CARTER, President of the United States, et al. No 78-2412, 100 S.Ct. (1979). 897-898.
Notice of the appeal was entered on October 17, 1979, and written by Alice Daniel, Acting Assistant Attorney General and signed by Attorney David J. Anderson.Barry GOLDWATER et al. v. James Earl CARTER, President of the United States, et al. No 78-2412, 100 S.Ct. (1979). 899.
Quotes
Conclusion
While dismissing the case of Goldwater v. Carter, the Supreme Court left open the question of the constitutionality of President Carter's actions. In their concurrences Powell and Rehnquist merely questioned the judicial merit of the case itself; they did not explicitly approve Carter's action.Powell's opinion, Section I, Paragraph 1; Rehnquist's opinion, Section I, Paragraph 1 Moreover, Powell even stated that this could be a valid constitutional issue. Article II, Section II of the Constitution merely states that the President cannot make treaties without a Senate majority two-thirds vote. As it stands now, there is no official ruling on whether the President has the power to break a treaty without the approval of Congress.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 444
References
External links
 Arizona State University Archives Online: Personal and Political Papers of Senator Barry M. Goldwater 1880s-2008
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States political question doctrine case law
Category:1979 in United States case law
Category:Barry Goldwater
Category:China–United States relations
Category:Taiwan–United States relations
Category:Presidency of Jimmy Carter
Category:Carter administration controversies
Category:United States Constitution Article Two case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Gomez-Perez v. Potter" ==> """
Gomez-Perez v. Potter, 553 U.S. 474 (2008), is a labor law case of the United States Supreme Court holding that federal employees can assert claims for retaliation resulting from filing an age discrimination complaint. The case continued the Court's long-standing position that cause for action following retaliation can be inferred in civil rights legislation, even though the law does not explicitly provide protection against victimization.
The case is important because it signaled a willingness by recently appointed Justice Samuel Alito to continue the Court's expansive interpretation of civil rights laws.
Background
Myrna Gómez-Pérez worked for the United States Postal Service as a part-time window distribution clerk in Puerto Rico. Ms. Gómez-Pérez sought a transfer to a full-time position; however, her supervisor denied her request.  Ms. Gómez-Pérez alleged that the supervisor denied the request based on her age and filed an EEO complaint on the basis of age discrimination. Subsequently, Ms. Gómez-Pérez alleged that, as a result of filing her complaint, in retaliation she was subjected to a series of reprisals that included groundless charges of sexual harassment, substantial reductions in her hours, and being harassed and mocked by her co-workers. As a result, she filed a retaliation complaint.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court held that federal employees can assert claims for retaliation resulting from filing an age discrimination complaint.
Even though it is not explicitly in the Civil Rights Act, the existence of the right can be inferred from the Act's scheme, as necessary to make the rights effective.
See also
US labor law
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 553
External links
 Supreme Court Oral Argument Transcript
 New York Times editorial on the ruling
  AARP: Supreme Court Agrees that Older Federal Workers are Protected from Retaliation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States labor case law
Category:2008 in United States case law
"""

From "Gomillion v. Lightfoot" ==> """
Gomillion v. Lightfoot, 364 U.S. 339 (1960), was a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States that found an electoral district with boundaries created to disenfranchise African Americans violated the Fifteenth Amendment..
Background
After passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1957, activists in the city of Tuskegee, Alabama had been slowly making progress in registering African-American voters, whose numbers on the rolls began to approach those of registered white voters. The city was the location of the Tuskegee Institute, a historically black college, and a large Veterans Administration hospital, both staffed entirely by African Americans.
In terms of total population, African Americans outnumbered whites in the city by a four-to-one margin, and whites wanted to block the likelihood of being governed by the black majority. Local white residents lobbied the Alabama legislature to redefine the boundaries of the city. In 1957, without debate, and ignoring African-American protests, the legislature enacted Local Law 140, which created a 28-sided city boundary that excluded nearly all black voters from the redefined city, but no whites. The act was written by state senator Samuel Martin Engelhardt Jr., who was executive secretary of the White Citizens' Council of Alabama and a white supremacist.Allen Mendenhall, "Gomillion v. Lightfoot", Encyclopedia of Alabama, 2011/2014 African Americans protested, led by Charles G. Gomillion, a professor at Tuskegee, and community activists mounted a boycott against white-owned businesses in the city.Samuel A. Stern, "Reviewed Work: Gomillion versus Lightfoot: The Tuskegee Gerrymander Case by Bernard Taper", The Journal of Southern History Vol. 29, No. 1 (Feb., 1963), pp. 141-143 Gomillion and others filed suit against the city mayor and other officials, claiming that the act was discriminatory in purpose under the Fourteenth Amendment's due process and equal protection clause.
The U.S. District Court for the Middle District of Alabama, located in the capital of Montgomery and headed by Judge Frank M. Johnson, dismissed the case, ruling that the state had the right to draw boundaries of election districts and jurisdictions. That ruling was upheld by the Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit in New Orleans.
As head of Tuskegee, Booker T. Washington had promoted blacks advancing by education and self-improvement, with the expectation of being accepted by whites when they showed they were "deserving." At the time of the U.S. Supreme Court hearing of this case, journalist Bernard Taper wrote, 
Since the gerrymander was designed to defeat municipal suffrage rights of the highly "deserving" members of the Institute and the hospital staff, Session Law 140 has demonstrated, perhaps more than other symbols of Southern prejudice, the invalidity of Booker T. Washington's advice.Richard B. Sobol, "Reviewed Work: Gomillion versus Lightfoot: The Tuskegee Gerrymander Case by Bernard Taper", Columbia Law Review Vol. 62, No. 4 (Apr., 1962), pp. 748-751 
The redrawing of the city boundaries had the "unintended effect of uniting Tuskegee Institute's African-American intellectuals with the less educated blacks living outside the sphere of the school. Some members of the school's faculty realized that possessing advanced degrees ultimately provided them no different status among the city's white establishment".
Gomillion and his attorneys appealed the case to the US Supreme Court. The case was argued by Fred Gray, an experienced Alabama civil rights attorney, and Robert L. Carter, lead counsel for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), with assistance from Arthur D. Shores, who provided additional legal counsel. The defendant team was led by James J. Carter (no relation).
 Decision 
In this landmark voting rights case, the Supreme Court ruled on whether Act 140 of the Alabama legislature violated the Fifteenth Amendment.  Alabama passed Act 140 in 1957, which changed the boundaries of the city of Tuskegee, Alabama. It had previously been a square but the legislature redrew it as a 28-sided figure, excluding all but a handful of potential African-American voters and no white voters. Among those excluded were the entire educated, professional faculty of the Tuskegee University and doctors and staff of the Tuskegee Veterans Administration Hospital.
Justice Frankfurter issued the opinion of the Court, which held that the Act did violate the provision of the 15th Amendment prohibiting states from denying anyone their right to vote "on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude".
Justice Whittaker concurred but he said in his opinion that he believed the law should have been struck down under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, not the 15th Amendment. According to Wittaker, just because someone has been redistricted to vote in another district does not automatically mean his rights have been denied; it is not a right to vote in a particular jurisdiction. But in this case, completely fencing African-American citizens out of a district is an unlawful segregation of black citizens and a clear violation of the Equal Protection Clause.
This case was cited in the Court's ruling in the Tennessee malapportionment case of Baker v. Carr (1962), which required state legislatures (including both houses of bicameral legislatures) to redistrict based on population, in order to reflect demographic changes and enable representation of urban populations. It established the principle of "one man, one vote" under the Equal Protection Clause.
Subsequent history
"The case showed that all state powers were subject to limitations imposed by the U.S. Constitution; therefore, states were not insulated from federal judicial review when they jeopardized federally protected rights." The case was returned to the lower court; in 1961, under the direction of Judge Johnson, the gerrymandering was reversed and the original map of the city was reinstituted.
In the 1980 case Mobile v. Bolden, the court limited its holding in Gomillion, ruling that racially discriminatory effect and intent would be necessary to prompt intervention by federal courts for violations of Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act.
Congress effectively negated Bolden in 1982 when it amended Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act, 42 U.S.C. § 1973. Congress' amendments returned the law to the pre-Bolden interpretation, under which violations of Section 2 did not require a showing of racially discriminatory intent, but it was sufficient to show discriminatory effect. This legislation was important for the many subsequent cases challenging political and electoral systems that resulted in dilution of voting or other effects that deprived citizens of their ability to elect a candidate of their choice.
See also
Gerrymandering
Hunt v. Cromartie 526 U.S. 541 (1999)
Baker v. Carr 369 U.S. 186 (1962)
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 364
Civil Rights Cases
Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka ()
 Timeline of the civil rights movement
References
Further reading
Elwood, William A. "An Interview with Charles G. Gomillion." Callaloo 40 (Summer 1989): 576-99.
Gomillion, C. G. "The Negro Voter in the South." Journal of Negro Education 26(3): 281-86.
Gomillion v. Lightfoot, 364 U.S. 339 (1960).
Norrell, Robert J. Reaping the Whirlwind: The Civil Rights Movement in Tuskegee, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1985.
Taper, Bernard.  'Gomillion versus Lightfoot:' The Tuskegee Gerrymander Case, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1962.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fifteenth Amendment case law
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
Category:1960 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:African-American history of Alabama
Category:Legal history of Alabama
Category:Macon County, Alabama
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Gompers v. Buck's Stove & Range Co." ==> """
Gompers v. Buck's Stove and Range Co., 221 U.S. 418 (1911), was a ruling by the United States Supreme Court involving a case of contempt for violating the terms of an injunction restraining labor union leaders from a boycott or from publishing any statement that there was or had been a boycott..
Facts
In 1907 the metal polishers in the Buck Stove and Range Company in St. Louis, Missouri, struck for a nine-hour day. After the American Federation of Labor put the company on its "unfair list," the company obtained a sweeping injunction forbidding this boycott. For their refusal to obey, Samuel Gompers, John Mitchell and Frank Morrison were sentenced to prison for contempt.
Judgment
The Supreme Court dismissed the case, in part, as moot. Buck's Stove president James Van Cleave had died in 1910 and his successor resolved his dispute with the workers. The court also reversed the contempt decision on the grounds that the proceedings should have been instituted by the court rather than the plaintiff (the Buck's Stove company).
In the second contempt trial held in 1912, the defendants were again found guilty and sentenced to prison. The Supreme Court overturned the convictions in Gompers v. United States,. because the proceedings had not been instituted within the three-year statute of limitations imposed by the Clayton Antitrust Act.
See also
History of labor law in the United States
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 221
Notes
References
Adams, James Truslow. Dictionary of American History. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1940.
Foner, Philip S. History of the Labor Movement in the United States. Vol. 5: The AFL in the Progressive Era, 1910-1915. New York: International Publishers, 1980. Cloth ; Paperback 
Rayback, Joseph G. A History of American Labor. Rev. and exp. ed. New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 1974. 
External links
Category:1911 in United States case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:American Federation of Labor
Category:Consumer boycotts
Category:Samuel Gompers
"""

From "Gompers v. United States" ==> """
Gompers v. United States, 233 U.S. 604 (1914), was a contempt of court case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States.
 Background 
Before 1932, the courts attempted to control the activities of labor unions by issuing injunctions that forbade strikes and picketing. Around the turn of the century labor unions began increasingly to use boycotts against individual employers to force them to provide improved working conditions and higher wages. The courts attempted to stop the boycotts by using antilabor injunctions.
Samuel Gompers was the first president of the American Federation of Labor (AFL), holding the office from 1886 to 1924. Gompers and two other labor leaders were convicted of violating an antiboycott injunction for running a notice in its magazine listing Buck's Stove & Range Company along with other companies under the heading "We Don't Patronize." On May 25, 1911, the Supreme Court ruled on the case Gompers v. Buck's Stove & Range Company.. The Court refused to reexamine the validity of the injunction issued by the lower court and rejected Gompers' claim that the First Amendment protected his activities. However, the convictions were reversed on the ground that the contempts were civil but the lower court had treated them as criminal in nature. The aim of civil contempt is remediation while the purpose of criminal contempt is punitive.
Although the Court had dismissed the charges in Gompers v. Buck's Stove & Range Company, the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia retained the power to punish contempt, if any had been committed against it. The day after the decision, this court appointed a committee to see if there was reasonable cause to believe that Gompers was guilty of willfully violating an injunction issued by the court on 18 December 1907.
On June 26, 1911, the committee reported that Gompers was guilty of violating the injunction. Rules to show cause were issued that day requiring each of the defendants to show why they should not be adjudged to be in contempt and be punished for it. Gompers pleaded the statute of limitations and not guilty to most of the charges. A trial took place, the statute of limitations was held inapplicable, and Gompers was found guilty and sentenced to prison for 12 months. The court of appeals reduced the sentence to imprisonment for 30 days.
Gompers appealed to the Supreme Court, arguing that the alleged contempt took place more than three years before the proceedings began and was therefore beyond the statute of limitations.
 Decision 
The Court reversed the decision of the lower court based on its holding that criminal contempt was a crime to which the statute of limitations applies.
 Significance 
The Court settled whether contempt was actually a crime by the affirmative. It also resolved the issue of a statute of limitations for punishing contempt, settling on a term of three years.
See also
 Gompers v. Buck's Stove & Range Co.
 References 
 External links 
 Great Court Cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:American Federation of Labor
Category:1914 in United States case law
Category:Samuel Gompers
"""

From "Gonzaga University v. Doe" ==> """
Gonzaga University v. Doe, 536 U.S. 273 (2002), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, which prohibits the federal government from funding educational institutions that release education records to unauthorized persons, does not create a right which is enforceable under 42 U.S.C. § 1983..
Background
A Gonzaga University undergraduate sued the school and teacher Roberta League under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, alleging a violation of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974. The student was planning to become an elementary teacher upon graduation, and under Washington State Law, all new teachers required an affidavit of good moral character from their graduating college. The teacher in charge of certifying such affidavits, League, overheard a student conversation discussing sexual misconduct by the undergraduate student. Subsequently, League launched an investigation into the matter, and refused to certify the student's necessary affidavit of good moral character. The student sued, claiming a violation of his confidentiality rights.
Decision of The United States Supreme Court
In a 7–2 decision for Gonzaga University, Chief Justice Rehnquist wrote the majority opinion for the court. The Supreme Court held that Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act's nondisclosure provisions created no personal rights to enforce under 42 U.S.C. § 1983. The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act prohibits "the federal funding of educational institutions that have a policy or practice of releasing education records to unauthorized persons". 536 U.S. at 276. The court reasoned that this does not grant any personal rights to enforce under the civil rights provisions of § 1983, since the statute only addresses federal funding.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 536
List of United States Supreme Court cases
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Gonzaga University
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Second Enforcement Act of 1871 case law
Category:2002 in United States case law
Category:United States education case law
Category:Higher education case law
"""

From "Gonzales v. Carhart" ==> """
Gonzales v. Carhart, 550 U.S. 124 (2007), was a landmark decision of the U.S. Supreme Court that upheld the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act of 2003.Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act of 2003 (Enrolled as Agreed to or Passed by Both House and Senate)  The case reached the high court after U.S. Attorney General, Alberto Gonzales, appealed a ruling of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit in favor of LeRoy Carhart that struck down the Act. Also before the Supreme Court was the consolidated appeal of Gonzales v. Planned Parenthood from the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, whose ruling had the same effect as that of the Eighth Circuit.
The Supreme Court's decision upheld Congress's ban and held that it did not impose an undue burden on the due process right of women to obtain an abortion, "under precedents we here assume to be controlling",. such as the Court's prior decisions in Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood v. Casey. In a legal sense, the case distinguished but did not overrule Stenberg v. Carhart (2000), in which the Court dealt with related issues. Gonzales was widely interpreted as signaling a shift in Supreme Court jurisprudence toward a restriction of abortion rights, occasioned in part by the retirement of Sandra Day O'Connor and her replacement by Samuel Alito.
The Court found that there is "uncertainty [in the medical community] over whether the barred procedure is ever necessary to preserve a woman's health", and in the past the Court "has given state and federal legislatures wide discretion to pass legislation in areas where there is medical and scientific uncertainty."
History of case
The Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act was signed into law by President George W. Bush on November 5, 2003. It was found unconstitutional in the U.S. District Courts for the Northern District of California, the Southern District of New York, and the District of Nebraska.Planned Parenthood v. Ashcroft, Order Granting Permanent Injunction, Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law in Support Thereof, United States District Court for the Northern District of California (June 1, 2004)National Abortion Federation v. Ashcroft, Opinion and Order , United States District Court for the Southern District of New York (August 26, 2004)Carhart v. Ashcroft, Memorandum and Order , United States District Court for the District of Nebraska (September 8, 2004)
The federal government appealed the district court rulings, first bringing Carhart v. Gonzales before a three-judge panel of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit. The panel unanimously affirmed the ruling of the Nebraska court on July 8, 2005. Finding that the government offered no "new evidence which would serve to distinguish this record from the record reviewed by the Supreme Court in Stenberg," they held that the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act was unconstitutional because it lacked an exception for the health of the woman.Gonzales v. Carhart, United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit (July 8, 2005)
Attorney General Gonzales petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court to review the Eighth Circuit decision on September 25, 2005. Meanwhile, the Ninth Circuit also found the law unconstitutional,Planned Parenthood Federation v. Gonzalez, United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit (January 31, 2006) as did the Second Circuit (with a dissent),National Abortion Federation v. Gonzalez , United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit (January 31, 2006) issuing their opinions on January 31, 2006. The Supreme Court agreed to hear the Carhart case on February 21, 2006,Supreme Court Docket, Gonzales v. Carhart (No. 05-380), providing copies of briefs, courtesy of Findlaw.com. and agreed to hear the companion Planned Parenthood case on June 19, 2006.Supreme Court Docket, Gonzales v. Planned Parenthood (No. 05-1382), providing copies of briefs, courtesy of Findlaw.com.
Oral arguments
Oral arguments in this case (as well as its companion case) occurred on November 7, 2006. U.S. Solicitor General Paul Clement, presented arguments for the United States, and Priscilla J. Smith presented arguments for Dr. Carhart et al.Transcript of Oral Arguments, Gonzales v. Carhart (November 8, 2006), via U.S. Supreme Court web site. Solicitor General Clement also presented arguments for the United States in the companion case of Gonzales v. Planned Parenthood. Eve Gartner presented arguments for Planned Parenthood.Transcript of Oral Arguments, Gonzales v. Planned Parenthood (November 8, 2006), via U.S. Supreme Court web site. The Supreme Court has made available audio of the oral arguments, in both CarhartAudio of Oral Arguments, Gonzales v. Carhart (November 8, 2006) via pbs web site and Planned Parenthood.Audio and Transcript of Oral Arguments, Gonzales v. Planned Parenthood (November 8, 2006) via Oyez web site
Decision
Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote for the Court that the respondents had failed to prove that Congress lacked authority to ban this abortion procedure. Chief Justice John Roberts, Justice Samuel Alito, Justice Clarence Thomas, and Justice Antonin Scalia agreed with the Court's judgment, joining Kennedy's opinion.
The Court left the door open for as-applied challenges, citing its recent precedent in Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood of New England. According to Washington Post reporter Benjamin Wittes, "The Court majority, following the path it sketched out last year in the New Hampshire case, decided to let the law stand as a facial matter and let the parties fight later about what, if any, applications need to be blocked."
The Court decided to "assume ... for the purposes of this opinion" the principles of Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood v. Casey.
The Court said that the lower courts had repudiated a central premise of Casey—that the state has an interest in preserving fetal life—and the Court held that the ban fit that interest so as not to create an undue burden. The opinion did not rely deferentially on Congress's findings that this intact dilation and extraction procedure is never needed to protect the health of a pregnant woman; in fact the Court found that "evidence presented in the District Courts contradicts that conclusion." However, Kennedy wrote that a health exception was unnecessary where medical testimony disputes Congress's findings, that Congress is still entitled to regulate in an area where the medical community has not reached a consensus.
In addition, the Court distinguished this case from the Stenberg case (in which the Court struck down Nebraska's partial-birth abortion law) by holding that the state statute at issue in Stenberg was more ambiguous than the later federal statute at issue in Carhart.
The majority opinion's statement that it "seems unexceptionable to conclude some women come to regret their choice to abort the infant life they once created and sustained" supported its conclusion that "the State has an interest in ensuring so grave a choice is well informed" because doctors might not tell patients graphic details about what goes on during the abortion. This also acknowledges a state interest for informed consent laws dealing with abortion.
Without discussing the constitutional rationale of the Court's prior abortion cases (i.e. "due process"), the majority opinion stated it disagreed with the Eighth Circuit's determination that the federal statute conflicted with "the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment, [which] is textually identical to the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment."
Concurrence
Justice Thomas filed a concurring opinion, joined by Justice Scalia, which mentions saving for another day the issue of whether Congress had sufficient power under the Commerce Clause to enact this ban. The Commerce Clause (the only Constitutional clause mentioned explicitly in any of the decision's three opinions) was also mentioned in the majority opinion.
The concurrence also stated that Justices Thomas and Scalia joined the Court's opinion "because it accurately applies current jurisprudence." In addition, the concurrence reiterated the justices' view that current abortion jurisprudence "has no basis in the Constitution." Nadine Strossen, president of the ACLU at the time, pointed out that "no less an anti-abortion proponent than Justice Scalia joined by Justice Thomas, in his separate opinion, chided the majority for not coming out and explicitly saying that they had overturned not Roe v. Wade, but the prior partial-birth abortion ban case."Interview with Nadine Strossen, David Shankbone, Wikinews, October 30, 2007.
Dissent
Joined by justices David Souter, John Paul Stevens, and Stephen Breyer, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg dissented,Gonzales v. Carhart, Ginsburg, J., dissenting, U.S. Supreme Court (April 18, 2007)  contending that the ruling was an "alarming" one that ignored Supreme Court abortion precedent and "refuse[d] to take Casey and Stenberg seriously." Referring in particular to Planned Parenthood v. Casey, Ginsburg sought to ground the Court's abortion jurisprudence based on concepts of personal autonomy and equal citizenship rather than the Court's previous privacy approach: "Thus, legal challenges to undue restrictions on abortion procedures do not seek to vindicate some generalized notion of privacy; rather, they center on a woman's autonomy to determine her life's course, and thus to enjoy equal citizenship stature."
Ginsburg also took issue with the lack of a health exception, writing that "the absence of a health exception burdens all women for whom it is relevant—women who, in the judgment of their doctors, require an intact D&E because other procedures would place their health at risk." In general, the dissent criticized the usurpation of medical decision-making by legislators and the minimization of "the reasoned medical judgments of highly trained doctors ... as 'preferences' motivated by 'mere convenience'."
Observing that the majority opinion in Carhart did not touch upon the question of whether the Court's prior decisions in Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood v. Casey were valid, Justice Ginsburg wrote, "Casey principles, confirming the continuing vitality of 'the essential holding of Roe,' are merely 'assume[d]' for the moment ... rather than 'retained' or 'reaffirmed.'" She concluded by criticizing the majority for abandoning the principle of stare decisis, writing that "a decision so at odds with our jurisprudence should not have staying power."
Reactions
thumb|Pro-choice and pro-life activists demonstrate on the steps of the Court in November 2006.
According to an ABC News poll, the majority of Americans (69%) oppose the legality of D&X or what opponents call "partial-birth" abortion.
Some medical groups expressed concern that the Court, in supporting the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act, endorsed the substitution of congressional legislation for medical judgment. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, which had submitted an amicus brief opposing the Act, described the Court's decision as "shameful and incomprehensible", ignorant of medical consensus, and chilling for the medical profession. The New England Journal of Medicine criticized the intrusion of politicians into medical decision-making, writing:
Until this opinion, the Court recognized the importance of not interfering with medical judgments made by physicians to protect a patient's interest. For the first time, the Court permits congressional judgment to replace medical judgment.
Professor and academic Geoffrey R. Stone has argued that the religion of Supreme Court judges played an important role in the decision, given that the five judges in the majority were Catholic.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 550
References
Further reading
External links
Alexi Wright and Ingrid T. Katz "Roe versus Reality — Abortion and Women's Health", New England Journal of Medicine, Volume 355, pp. 1–9 (July 6, 2006) (perspective from opponents of the PBA statute).
American Center for Law and Justice (group defending PBA statute provides info including links to media coverage).
Analysis of Gonzales v. Carhart, Colorado Right to Life analysis of Partial Birth Abortion Ban ruling (Gonzales v. Carhart)
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:Alliance Defending Freedom litigation
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Medical lawsuits
Category:Planned Parenthood litigation
Category:Privacy in the United States
Category:Right to abortion under the United States Constitution
Category:Right to privacy under the United States Constitution
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Void for vagueness case law
Category:2007 in women's history
"""

From "Gonzales v. O Centro Espírita Beneficente União do Vegetal" ==> """
Gonzales v. O Centro Espírita Beneficente União do Vegetal, 546 U.S. 418 (2006), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that, under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993, the government had failed to show a compelling interest in prosecuting religious adherents for drinking a sacramental tea containing a Schedule I controlled substance..  After the federal government seized its sacramental tea, the União do Vegetal (UDV), the New Mexican branch of a Brazilian church that imbibes ayahuasca in its services, sued, claiming the seizure was illegal, and sought to ensure future importation of the tea for religious use. The church won a preliminary injunction from the United States District Court for the District of New Mexico, which was affirmed on appeal.
The Supreme Court affirmed. The Court also disagreed with the government's central argument that the uniform application of the Controlled Substances Act (CSA) does not allow for exceptions for the substance in this case, as Native Americans are given exceptions to use peyote, another Schedule I substance.
 Background 
On May 21, 1999, U. S. Customs agents seized over  of hoasca (ayahuasca) tea which was shipped to the Santa Fe, New Mexico branch of the Brazil-based UDV; ayahuasca contains dimethyltryptamine, which is outlawed for most purposes under the Controlled Substances Act. While no charges were filed, the United States chapter, led by Seagram heir Jeffrey Bronfman, filed suit claiming that the seizure was an illegal violation of the church members' rights. They claimed their usage was permitted under the 1993 Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA), , a law passed by Congress in direct response to Employment Division v. Smith (1990), in which the Supreme Court held that unemployment benefits could be denied to two Native Americans fired for using Peyote.
In filing suit, the UDV sought a preliminary injunction preventing the federal government from barring their usage of hoasca.  In August 2002, U.S. District Chief Judge James Aubrey Parker granted the church's motion, finding it was likely to succeed on the merits of its claim under RFRA.
In September 2003, United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit Senior Judge John Carbone Porfilio, joined by Judge Stephanie Kulp Seymour, affirmed, over the dissent of Judge Michael R. Murphy.  In November 2004, a divided majority of the en banc 10th Circuit again affirmed in a per curiam decision, by a vote of 8-5.  Judge Murphy, joined fully by Judges David M. Ebel, Paul Joseph Kelly Jr., and Terrence L. O'Brien, wrote separately to argue that the district court used the correct standard but should not have granted the preliminary injunction. Judge Seymour, joined by Judges Deanell Reece Tacha, Porfilio, Robert Harlan Henry, Mary Beck Briscoe, and Carlos F. Lucero, wrote separately to argue that the district court used the wrong standard but reached the correct result.  Judge Michael W. McConnell, joined in full by Judge Timothy Tymkovich, argued that the district court used the correct standard to reach the correct result, and partially joined those parts of the other opinions that said so.
As it worked its way through the appellate courts, the Supreme Court lifted a stay in December 2004 thereby permitting the church to use hoasca for their Christmas services.  One-hour of oral arguments were heard on November 1, 2005, where Edwin Kneedler, the Deputy Solicitor General of the United States, appeared for the government.
 Opinion of the Court 
On February 21, 2006, the Supreme Court unanimously delivered judgment in favor of the church, affirming and remanding to the lower court.  Chief Justice John Roberts wrote the opinion for a unanimous Court of eight justices. Justice Samuel Alito took no part in the consideration or decision of the case because he was not on the Court when the case was argued. The Court found that the government was unable to detail the government's compelling interest in barring religious usage of Hoasca when applying strict scrutiny as required by the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA).
The Court first found that the standard under RFRA for a preliminary injunction is the same as at trial, just as it would be for a constitutional claim.  Disagreeing with the District Court, the Supreme Court found that ayahuasca is covered under the 1971 United Nations Convention on Psychotropic Substances, which is implemented by the Controlled Substances Act (CSA). The Court rejected the District Court's reliance on the official commentary to the convention, reasoning that the United Nations had incorrectly interpreted the treaty when it found that tea made from plants is a naturally occurring material.Gonzales v. O Centro Espírita Beneficente União do Vegetal, 546 U.S. 418, 437 (2006) citing U. N. Commentary on the Convention on Psychotropic Substances 387, 385 (1976).  However, because the government had failed to submit any evidence on the international consequences of granting an exemption to CSA enforcement by allowing UDV to practice its religion, the Court ruled that it had failed to meet its burden on this point. The Supreme Court ruled that the government failed to demonstrate a compelling interest in applying the Controlled Substances Act to the UDV's sacramental use of the tea.
The ruling upheld a preliminary injunction allowing the church to use the tea pending a lower court trial on a permanent injunction, during which the government would have had the opportunity to present further evidence consistent with the Supreme Court's ruling.
 Subsequent developments 
The ruling is not binding on states. The Act was amended in 2003 to only include the federal government and its entities, such as Puerto Rico and the District of Columbia.Sullivan, Winnifred. 2005. The impossibility of religious freedom. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. . A number of states have passed their own version of the RFRA, but the Smith case remains the authority in these matters in many states.Canby, William C. Jr. (2004). American Indian Law. P. 344. West Publishing Co. St. Paul. .
Bronfman next sought to move the church's services from the yurt outside his home to a new building in Arroyo Hondo, Santa Fe County, New Mexico, prompting opposition from neighbors.  When the county refused to grant the church a building permit, Bronfman sued under the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act, and Assistant 
Attorney General Tom Perez of the United States Department of Justice Civil Rights Division filed a statement of interest in support of the church.  In late 2012, a settlement was reached in which the county agreed to allow the church to be built.
References
External links
Court upholds church use of hallucinogenic tea (NBC, February 21, 2006)
"Religious Freedom and United States Drug Laws: Notes on the UDV-USA"
UDV USA official website
Court documents
District Court memorandum opinion and order (February 2002)
District Court memorandum opinion and order (November 2002)
10th Circuit opinion (2002) – Emergency motion for stay pending appeal
10th Circuit opinion (2003) – Appeal from the United States District Court for the District of New Mexico
10th Circuit opinion (2004) – On rehearing en banc: Appeal from the United States District Court for the District of New Mexico
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Drugs in the United States
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:2006 in religion
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:Psychedelics and religion
Category:Ayahuasca
Category:Brazilian-American culture
Category:Religion in New Mexico
Category:Santa Fe, New Mexico
"""

From "Gonzales v. Oregon" ==> """
Gonzales v. Oregon, 546 U.S. 243 (2006), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court which ruled that the United States Attorney General cannot enforce the federal Controlled Substances Act against physicians who prescribed drugs, in compliance with Oregon state law, to terminally ill patients seeking to end their lives, commonly referred to as assisted suicide.. It was the first major case heard by the Roberts Court under the new Chief Justice of the United States.
Background
In November 1994, voters in the state of Oregon approved Measure 16, a ballot initiative that established the Oregon Death with Dignity Act, with 51.3% of voters supporting it and 48.7% opposing it. The Act legalized assisted suicide in the state of Oregon. The law permits physicians to prescribe a lethal dose of medication to a competent adult, agreed by two doctors to be within six months of dying from an incurable condition.ORS 127.800 - 127.897
As of February 29, 2012, the Oregon Public Health Division reported that since "the law was passed in 1997, a total of 935 people have had DWDA prescriptions written and 596 patients (64% of prescriptions) have died from ingesting medications prescribed under the DWDA."
Opponents of the measure sued, and on December 27, 1994, U.S. District Judge Michael Robert Hogan issued a preliminary injunction forbidding the state from enforcing the statute,Lee v. Oregon, 869 F. Supp. 1491 (D. Or. 1994). then, on August 3, 1995, declared the law unconstitutional under the Equal Protection Clause.Lee v. Oregon, 891 F. Supp. 1429 (D. Or. 1995).  However, after the Supreme Court of the United States rejected that reasoning in Washington v. Glucksberg (1997), the measure was allowed to take effect.Note, Emily P. Hughes, The Oregon Death with Dignity Act: Relief of Suffering at the End of Medicine’s Ability to Heal, 95 Geo. L.J. 207 (2006).  A 1997 referral to voters by the Oregon Legislative Assembly aimed to repeal the Death with Dignity Act but was defeated by a 60% margin.
Members of Congress next sought to have the federal government prosecute physicians obeying the new Oregon law, and DEA Administrator Thomas A. Constantine told them that he had authority to do so under the Controlled Substances Act (CSA).Jacob E. Gersen, "Overlapping and Underlapping Jurisdiction in Administrative Law, 2006 Sup. Ct. Rev. 201.   However, Attorney General Janet Reno rejected that interpretation of the law and determined the federal government had no power to interfere with physicians obeying the Oregon law.  Senator John Ashcroft then supported legislation explicitly granting the Attorney General that authority, but the bills failed to pass., 105th Cong. (1998); , 105th Cong. (1999); , 106th Cong. (2000).
After Senator Ashcroft became United States Attorney General in 2001, he secured a memorandum from the Office of Legal Counsel concluding that physician-assisted suicide violates the CSA.Whether Physician-Assisted Suicide Serves a “Legitimate Medical Purpose” Under DEA Regulations, 25 Op. O.L.C. 135 (June 27, 2001). Id. relying, inter alia, on Neil Gorsuch, The Right to Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia, 23 Harv. J. L. & Pub. Pol’y 599 (2000).  On November 9, 2001, Attorney General Ashcroft published an "Interpretive Rule" that physician-assisted suicide was not a legitimate medical purpose and that any physician administering federally controlled drugs for that purpose would be in violation of the Controlled Substances Act.66 Fed. Reg. 56608 (Nov. 9, 2001).
Oregon Attorney General Hardy Myers, joined by a physician, a pharmacist, and a group of terminally ill patients, all from Oregon, filed a challenge to Attorney General Ashcroft's interpretation in the United States District Court for the District of Oregon. On April 17, 2002, U.S. District Judge Robert E. Jones granted summary judgment to Oregon and issued a permanent injunction against the enforcement of the Interpretive Rule.The Supreme Court, 2005 Term — Leading Cases, 120 Harv. L. Rev. 125 (2006). Oregon v. Ashcroft, 192 F. Supp. 2d 1077 (D. Or. 2002).  On May 26, 2004, that ruling was affirmed by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, with Judge Richard C. Tallman joined by Senior Circuit Judge Donald P. Lay, over the dissent of Senior Circuit Judge John Clifford Wallace.Oregon v. Ashcroft, 368 F.3d 1118 (9th Cir. 2004).  The circuit panel majority invoked a clear statement rule regarding federalism in the United States to reject Attorney General Ashcroft's interpretation.Recent Case, 118 Harv. L. Rev. 1371 (2005).
The federal government's petition for a writ for certiorari was granted and one hour of oral arguments were heard on October 5, 2005, with Paul Clement, the Solicitor General of the United States, personally appearing.
Opinion of the Court
On January 17, 2006, the Court delivered judgment in favor of Oregon, affirming the lower court by a vote of 6–3.  Justice Anthony Kennedy, joined by Justices John Paul Stevens, Sandra Day O'Connor, David Souter, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, and Stephen Breyer determined that the Controlled Substances Act (CSA) did not give the Attorney General the power to interfere with physicians obeying the state law.  The Court did not dispute the power of the federal government to regulate drugs, but it disagreed that the statute in place empowered the attorney general to overrule state laws on the appropriate use of medications allowed.
The Court first determined it did not need to grant substantial deference to the Justice Department's interpretation of its own regulation under Auer v. Robbins (1997) because the regulation merely restated the terms of the CSA.  Likewise, the Court found that, although the phrase "legitimate medical purpose" in the statute is ambiguous, the Attorney General's interpretation was not entitled to Chevron deference because the CSA delegated medical judgments to the expertise of the United States Secretary of Health and Human Services, not to the Attorney General.  Finally, the Court found the Attorney General's conclusions regarding the phrase unpersuasive under Skidmore v. Swift & Co. (1944) because Congress would have been more explicit if it had intended to empower the Attorney General to unilaterally create new crimes through regulation.
Dissents
Justice Scalia
Justice Antonin Scalia, joined by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Clarence Thomas, dissented. Scalia believed that agency deference should be given to the Attorney General under both Auer and Chevron.  Even without granting any agency deference, the Attorney General's interpretation was reasonable because, Scalia argued: "If the term 'legitimate medical purpose' has any meaning, it surely excludes the prescription of drugs to produce death."546 U.S. 243 (2006) (Scalia, J., dissenting).
Justice Thomas
Justice Thomas also filed a brief dissent, alone.  Thomas made clear that, although he still believes the CSA is not empowered by the Constitution's Interstate Commerce Clause to regulate purely intrastate conduct, if it were, the Attorney General's interpretation of the statute would be reasonable. Thomas argued that the opinion of the Court was inconsistent with the reasoning in Gonzales v. Raich (2005). He also dissented in that decision in which five of the six justices in the majority in Oregon found broad federal authority under the CSA for Congress to forbid the growth of medical marijuana.
Thomas had argued for a more limited congressional power under the Commerce Clause in Raich, which focused on intrastate and interstate commerce. In Oregon, by contrast, the case was a matter of the validity of an executive interpretation of that statute.546 U.S. 243 (2006) (Thomas, J., dissenting).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 546
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
Notes
External links
 Supreme Court Upholds Oregon Suicide Law, Washington Post, January 17, 2006.
 Legal analysis of the case
 Transcript of oral arguments
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Assisted suicide
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Assisted suicide in the United States
Category:Legal history of Oregon
Category:Euthanasia law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Pharmaceutical regulation in the United States
"""

From "Gonzales v. Raich" ==> """
Gonzales v. Raich (previously Ashcroft v. Raich), 545 U.S. 1 (2005), was a decision by the U.S. Supreme Court ruling that under the Commerce Clause of the U.S. Constitution, Congress may criminalize the production and use of homegrown cannabis even if state law allows its use for medicinal purposes.. 
Background
California voters passed Proposition 215 in 1996, legalizing the use of medical marijuana. The Federal government of the United States has limited the use of marijuana since the Marijuana Tax Act of 1937 was enacted. 
Defendant Angel Raich used homegrown medical marijuana, which was legal under California law but illegal under federal law. On August 15, 2002, Butte County Sheriff's Department officers and agents from the federal Drug Enforcement Administration destroyed all six of California resident Diane Monson's marijuana plants, facing light resistance. The marijuana plants were illegal Schedule I drugs under the federal Controlled Substances Act (CSA), which is Title II of the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970. Monson and Raich sued, claiming that enforcing Federal law against them would violate the Commerce Clause, the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment, the Ninth Amendment, the Tenth Amendment, and the doctrine of medical necessity.
Raich's physician stated that without marijuana, Raich is threatened by excruciating pain. California was one of 14 states at the time (36 as of 2021) that allowed medicinal use of marijuana. California's Compassionate Use Act allows limited use of marijuana for medicinal purposes.
Raich and Monson's case
Raich of Oakland, California, Monson of Oroville, California, and two anonymous caregivers sued the government for injunctive and declaratory relief on October 9, 2002, to stop the government from interfering with their right to produce and use medical marijuana claiming that the CSA was not constitutional, as applied to their conduct. Raich and Monson were represented by Randy Barnett.
Raich claimed she used marijuana to keep herself alive. She and her doctor also claimed to have tried dozens of prescription medicines for her numerous medical conditions and that she was allergic to most of them. Her doctor  declared under oath that Raich's life was at stake if she could not continue to use marijuana.
Monson suffered from chronic pain from a car accident a decade before the case. She used marijuana to relieve the pain and muscle spasms around her spine.
Government's case
The Controlled Substances Act does not recognize the medical use of marijuana. Agents from the federal Drug Enforcement Administration were assigned to break up California's medical marijuana co-ops and to seize their assets. That was result of the fact that federal law pre-empted, under the Supremacy Clause, the law of California.  The government argued that if a single exception were made to the Controlled Substances Act, it would become unenforceable in practice. The government also contended that consuming one's locally grown marijuana for medical purposes affects the interstate market of marijuana and the federal government may thus regulate and prohibit such consumption.
That argument stems from the landmark New Deal case Wickard v. Filburn, which held that the government may regulate personal cultivation and consumption of crops because of the aggregate effect of individual consumption on the government's legitimate statutory framework governing the interstate wheat market.
Litigation
On December 16, 2003, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals granted a preliminary injunction to prevent the federal government from interfering with Raich and Monson: "We find that the appellants have demonstrated a strong likelihood of success on their claim that, as applied to them, the Controlled Substances Act is an unconstitutional exercise of Congress' Commerce Clause authority."
Organizations involved
Partnership for a Drug-Free America, several other antidrug organizations, and an alliance of seven Representatives, including Mark Souder and Katherine Harris, all filed amicus briefs for the side of federal government. An environmentalist group, Community Rights Council, also filed a brief for the government for fear that limitation of federal power would undermine its agenda.Court to Hear Marijuana Case Legality of Cultivating Plant for Medical Use Is at Issue  Charles Lane, The Washington Post, November 29, 2004
The Cato Institute,Cato Institute Amicus Brief  from cato.org Institute for Justice,  many libertarian organizations, and the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws, along with other groups opposing the War on Drugs, filed briefs for Raich and Monson. The governments of California, Maryland, and Washington also filed briefs supporting Raich. The attorneys general of Alabama, Louisiana, and Mississippi, three strongly antidrug states from the conservative South, filed a brief supporting Raich, on the grounds of states' rights.Raich v. Ashcroft – A Guide to the Supreme Court Case  DrugWarRant.com
Decision
The ruling was 6–3 with Justice Stevens writing the opinion of the court, joined by Justices Kennedy, Ginsburg, Souter and Breyer. A concurring opinion was filed by Justice Scalia.
The opinion began by pointing out that the respondents did not dispute that Congress had the power to control or ban marijuana for non-medical uses:
Banning the growing of marijuana for medical use, the Court reasoned, was a permissible way of preventing or limiting access to marijuana for other uses:
The relevant precedents for the Court's analysis are Wickard v. Filburn (1942), United States v. Lopez (1995), and United States v. Morrison (2000).
Scalia's opinion
Justice Scalia wrote a separate concurrence that had the effect of differentiating the decision from the previous results of United States v. Lopez and United States v. Morrison. In a departure from his Originalisthttps://tannerlectures.utah.edu/_resources/documents/a-to-z/s/scalia97.pdf  Common-Law Courts In A Civil Law System interpretation of the Constitution (he voted for limits on the Commerce Clause in the Lopez and Morrison decisions), Scalia said his understanding of the Necessary and Proper Clause caused him to vote for the Commerce Clause with Raich for the following reason:
Dissenting opinions
Justice O'Connor dissented joined by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, who authored the majority opinions in United States v. Lopez and United States v. Morrison. O'Connor began her opinion by citing Lopez, which she followed with a reference to Justice Louis Brandeis's dissenting opinion in New State Ice Co. v. Liebmann:
She concluded:
Justice Thomas also wrote a separate dissent, stating in part:
Subsequent events
Both Raich and Monson have indicated their intention to continue using marijuana for medical use, in spite of the ruling and federal law on the subject.
Two days after the ruling, the International Narcotics Control Board issued a statement indicating that the Board "welcomes the decision of the United States Supreme Court, made on 6 June, reaffirming that the cultivation and use of cannabis, even if it is for 'medical' use, should be prohibited."
Its president, Hamid Ghodse, noted, "Cannabis is classified under international conventions as a drug with a number of personal and public health problems" and referred to the drug's Schedule I status, under the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs.
Soon after the decision in Raich, the Supreme Court vacated a lower court decision in United States v. Stewart and remanded it to the court of appeals for reconsideration in light of Raich. On remand, the Ninth Circuit held that Congress had the Commerce Clause power to criminalize the possession of homemade machine guns, just as it had the power to criminalize homegrown marijuana.
In 2007, the Ninth Circuit decided against Raich, when she renewed her litigation on substantive due process grounds. Judge Harry Pregerson, the author of the opinion, noted that a minority of states had legalized medical marijuana but that under federal law, it is not a recognized "fundamental right" under the due process clause:
In 2009, the Department of Justice under Attorney General Eric Holder issued new guidelines allowing for no longer enforcing of the federal ban in some situations:
When C-SPAN's Brian Lamb interviewed former Justice John Paul Stevens about Stevens' book, Five Chiefs, Stevens cited Gonzales as a case in which he upheld the law even if he deplored the policy.http://www.c-spanvideo.org/program/301441-1   Q&A with John Paul Stevens, Sep 14, 2011.
In Congress, to counter the effect of this ruling, Representative Maurice Hinchey (D-NY) and Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) annually introduced legislation to stop the Department of Justice from arresting and prosecuting medical marijuana patients. This effort succeeded for the first time as the Rohrabacher–Farr amendment to the omnibus federal spending bill for the 2015 fiscal year (section 538), which was enacted on December 16, 2014.
In 2021, Justice Thomas revisited Gonzalez in a statement in Standing Akimbo, LLC v. United States. The case was brought by a Denver, CO dispensary by -  Thorburn Law Group, LLC with respect to 280E.  He noted that the reasoning in Gonzalez was predicated upon the need to prohibit intrastate trafficking of marijuana to "avoid a 'gaping hole' in Congress' 'closed regulatory system'" prohibiting interstate trafficking of marijuana.  Justice Thomas observed that the federal government's modern practice of turning a blind eye toward marijuana possession in the 36 states that have legalized it therefore undercut the reasoning in Gonzalez, suggesting that Gonzalez should be revisited.
See also
Separate sovereigns
 Wickard v. Filburn (1942)
 South Dakota v. Dole (1987)
Legal history of marijuana in the United States
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 545
Marijuana Control, Regulation, and Education Act
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links 
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:Medicinal use of cannabis
Category:Cannabis law in the United States
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
category:2005 in cannabis
Category:Cannabis in California
Category:History of Butte County, California
"""

From "Gonzales v. United States" ==> """
Gonzales v. United States, 348 U.S. 407 (1955), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a Jehovah's Witness was denied fair hearing because of failure to supply him with materials in his record..
Facts of the case
Gonzales, a member of Jehovah's Witnesses who had claimed and had been denied conscientious objector exemption, was convicted under the Universal Military Training and Service Act for refusal to submit to induction into the armed forces.
Decision of the court
The 6-3 opinion of the court was written by Justice Clark, holding that the petitioner was entitled to receive a copy of the recommendation made by the Department of Justice to the Appeal Board under the provisions of 6 (j) of the Universal Military Training and Service Act. Justice Reed, joined by Justice Burton, and Justice Minton each filed a dissenting opinion.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 348
References
External links
Category:1955 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1955 in religion
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
"""

From "Gonzalez v. Google LLC" ==> """
Gonzalez v. Google LLC (Docket 21–1333) is a pending case at the Supreme Court of the United States which deals with the question of whether or not recommender systems are covered by liability exemptions under Section 230 of the Communications Act of 1934—which was established by the Telecommunications Act of 1996—for Internet service providers, in dealing with terrorism-related content posted by users and hosted on their servers. The case was granted certiorari alongside another Section 230 and terrorism-related case, Twitter, Inc. v. Taamneh.
Background
In November 2015, a series of coordinated terrorism attacks occurred in Paris. At least 130 were killed by the terrorists, and the Islamic State took responsibility for the attack.
Among those killed was a single American, 23-year-old student Nohemi Gonzalez, on an exchange program with California State University, Long Beach. Her family began to seek legal remedies against Google, the parent company of YouTube. Their suit argued that through its recommendation system that tailors content based on user profiles, YouTube led users towards recruitment videos for the Islamic State, and were partially responsible for Nohemi's death. Google defended itself by relying on Section 230, passed as part of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, which provides immunity from content published on an Internet service provider's platform by third-party users. A lower court ruled in favor of Google, and the decision was upheld by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals.
In their appeal to the Supreme Court, the family focused more on the YouTube algorithm that has been tailored to deliver content believed to be of interest to the end user, arguing that while this was automatically done, it was a form of moderation that Section 230 does not fully cover. They wrote in their petition to the Supreme Court, "Whether Section 230 applies to these algorithm-generated recommendations is of enormous practical importance. Interactive computer services constantly direct such recommendations, in one form or another, at virtually every adult and child in the United States who uses social media."
Both major U.S. political parties want the law changed, but for different reasons. Democrats point to concerns about the proliferation of content that is harmful to children, while Republicans are worried about conservative viewpoints being blocked on certain sites.
Supreme Court
The Supreme Court granted certiorari to the case in October 2022, along with a related case Twitter, Inc. v. Taamneh also dealing with Section 230 and terrorism-related content. They will be the first cases that the Court will hear over Section 230, which since around 2015 has come under increasing partisan criticism towards Big Tech. Justice Clarence Thomas had spoken to a need to review Section 230 in previous dissenting statements to court orders, arguing that social media companies should be regulated like "common carriers", which would prohibit content-based discrimination.
Many of the Big Tech companies provided their own amicus curiae to support Google's recommender system as part of the case, as well as smaller sites including Reddit and the Wikimedia Foundation which rely on moderation systems that partially incorporate user moderation as part of their systems. While there is general support for updating Section 230 to reflect modern concerns, these briefs broadly stressed the need to let Congress pass legislation rather than having the Supreme Court issue its own judgement. This position was also upheld by Ron Wyden and Christopher Cox, the lawmakers behind Section 230, and law professor Eric Goldman who has written extensively about Section 230, in addition to mobile app platforms like Yelp and Craigslist and free speech advocacy groups like the ACLU 
and the Electronic Frontier Foundation.
Briefs in support of Gonzalez' position include several Republican Congresspeople including Ted Cruz, Mike Johnson, and Josh Hawley, and other advocacy groups like the Anti-Defamation League, which argue that Google and other Big Tech groups have used Section 230 to remain immune to harmful content posted on their sites. Groups that support child protections on the Internet also provided briefs for Gonzalez.
Oral arguments in Gonzalez were held February 21, 2023. Observers to the Court found the Justices from both liberal and conservative sides questioning the issues around algorithms, stating that most Internet services are based on algorithms. The Justices had also questioned whether YouTube's algorithm was specifically tailored to promote terrorism-related content. The Justices were not sure it would be possible to delineate content further, and the potential for a mass of lawsuits and economic impact should Section 230 be changed. Justice Amy Coney Barrett suggested that the result of the related Twitter case may help resolve the case against Google.
 See also 
 Force v. Facebook Inc.
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Product liability case law
Category:Google litigation
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act
Category:United States Internet case law
"""

From "Good News Club v. Milford Central School" ==> """
Good News Club v. Milford Central School, 533 U.S. 98 (2001), was a decision of the U.S. Supreme Court that held that when a government operates a "limited public forum," it may not discriminate against speech that takes place within that forum on the basis of the viewpoint it expresses—in this case, against religious speech engaged in by an evangelical Christian club for children..
Facts
Under New York law, public schools may adopt regulations under which they open their facilities to public use during non-school hours.  In 1992, Milford Central School adopted regulations under this law, allowing district residents to use the school for "instruction in any branch of education, learning, or the arts," and making the school available for "social, civic, and recreational meetings and entertainment events, and other uses pertaining to the welfare of the community, provided that such uses shall be nonexclusive and shall be opened to the general public."
The Fourniers, who reside in the district, applied to use the Milford Central School for meetings of a Good News Club.  Their proposed use—to have "a fun time of singing songs, hearing a Bible lesson and memorizing scripture"—was deemed to be the equivalent of religious worship, and the Fourniers' application was denied on that basis; the school also claimed that its community use policy forbade use "by any individual or organization for religious purposes."  The Fourniers contacted the school superintendent stating that they did not believe it was lawful for the school to allow other groups to use the school building, yet because they were religious in nature, teaching morals and values from a Christian perspective, they were denied access.  The school concluded that "the kinds of activities proposed to be engaged in by the Good News Club were not a discussion of secular subjects such as child rearing, development of character and development of morals from a religious perspective, but were in fact the equivalent of religious instruction itself."  The full school board rejected the club's application to use Milford's facilities.
The Fourniers and the Good News Club filed suit in the United States District Court for the Northern District of New York under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 against the school.  The club alleged that the school's denial of its application violated its free speech rights under the First Amendment, as well as its right to religious freedom under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act.  The club won a preliminary injunction allowing it to conduct its meetings at the school from April 1997 to August 1998.  In August 1998, however, the district court ruled against the club, finding that the club's "subject matter is decidedly religious in nature, and not merely a discussion of secular matters from a religious perspective that is otherwise permitted" by the school.  Because the school forbade all religious instruction under its policy, the court ruled that it was not engaging in unconstitutional viewpoint discrimination.
The club appealed to the Second Circuit.  The Second Circuit affirmed, holding that the school's restriction was not unreasonable.  In light of the "quintessentially religious" nature of the club's activities, the court further held that the school district was engaging in "constitutional subject discrimination" rather than "unconstitutional viewpoint discrimination" when it excluded the club from meeting on its premises.  In light of a split among the federal appeals courts regarding whether speech may be excluded from a limited public forum by reason of its religious content, the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to review the Second Circuit's ruling in this case. Thomas Marcelle represented the Good News Club at oral argument, and Frank Miller represented Milford Central School.
Majority opinion
When the government establishes a "limited public forum," it is not required to permit any and all speech within that forum.  It may "reserve its forum for certain groups or for the discussion of certain topics".  However, the government may not discriminate against speech on the basis of its viewpoint, and any restriction it imposes must be reasonable in light of the purpose served by the forum.
The Court saw no distinction between the viewpoint discrimination in this case and the viewpoint discrimination in two of its earlier cases:  Lamb's Chapel v. Center Moriches Union Free School District, ,. and Rosenberger v. University of Virginia, ..  In Lamb's Chapel, the Court held that a school district violated the First Amendment's Free Speech Clause when it excluded a private group from presenting films at the school solely on the basis of the religious perspective of the films on family values. And in Rosenberger, the Court held that a university's refusal to fund a student publication because of that publication's religious perspective violated the Free Speech Clause. Milford's exclusion is indistinguishable from the exclusions at issue in Lamb's Chapel and Rosenberger, and so the Court did not need to decide "whether it is unreasonable in light of the purposes served by the forum."
"Milford has opened its limited public forum to activities that serve a variety of purposes, including events pertaining to the welfare of the community."  Milford had asserted before the Second Circuit that it would have allowed a public group to use Aesop's fables to impart moral values to children.  Milford also allowed the Boy Scouts to "influence a boy's character, development, and spiritual growth".  Likewise, the Good News Club also sought to teach moral values to children, albeit from an explicitly Christian viewpoint.
According to the majority, the Court's prior decisions in Lamb's Chapel and Rosenberger determined the outcome of the Good News Club's free speech claim.  In Lamb's Chapel, the Court had ruled that a different New York public school had engaged in unconstitutional viewpoint discrimination when it forbade a religious group from using its facilities to show films that taught "family values from a Christian perspective".  It saw no difference between the films that the religious group in Lamb's Chapel proposed to show and the songs and lessons the Good News Club used in this case.  And in Rosenberger, the fact that a state university subsidized the publication of some student newspapers but refused to subsidize a student newspaper with a religious viewpoint was also unconstitutional viewpoint discrimination.
In spite of these decisions, the Second Circuit had ruled in this case that the religious nature of the Good News Club's message meant that it "fell outside the bounds of" speech related to "pure moral and character development", and hence was not entitled to First Amendment protection.  The majority on the Supreme Court "disagreed that something that is 'quintessentially religious' or 'decidedly religious in nature' cannot also be characterized properly as the teaching of morals and character development from a particular viewpoint.  What matters for purposes of the Free Speech Clause is that we can see no logical difference in kind between the invocation of Christianity by the Club and the invocation of teamwork, loyalty, or patriotism by other associations to provide a foundation for their lessons."  Instruction related to morals and values from a religious perspective does not somehow "taint" that instruction so as to alter the viewpoint such instruction takes.  Accordingly, Milford's exclusion of the Good News Club constituted unconstitutional viewpoint discrimination.
The Establishment Clause claim
Milford also argued that its interest in not violating the Establishment Clause justified its excluding the Good News Club from its facilities.  In Widmar v. Vincent, , the Court held that "a state interest in avoiding an Establishment Clause violation may be characterized as compelling, and therefore may justify content-based discrimination" on the part of the state entity..  But in Lamb's Chapel, the Court left open the question of whether such a concern could also justify viewpoint discrimination.  The Court ruled that it could not, and gave four reasons for distinguishing content-based discrimination from viewpoint discrimination on this score.
First, the exception created in Widmar rested on the fact that the government program was neutral toward religion.  "The Good News Club seeks nothing more than to be treated neutrally and given access to speak about the same topics as are other groups."  Milford's policy was not neutral with respect to religious speech—it allowed some speech that took a particular viewpoint, but forbade speech that took the same viewpoint on the basis of the religious nature of the speech.
Second, to the extent the Club's speech would be perceived as coercive, that coercion would be felt by the parents rather than the children.  After all, parents must give their children permission to attend the Club's activities.  Milford did not suggest that the parents would be confused about the religious nature of the Club's message.
Third, and relatedly, the Court's Establishment Clause jurisprudence never "extended ... to foreclose private religious conduct during nonschool hours merely because it takes place on school premises where elementary school children may be present."  In Lee v. Weisman, , the religious speech involved was a prayer at a mandatory high school graduation function.. In Santa Fe Independent School District v. Doe, , the religious speech involved was a student-led prayer before a high school football game which, of course, is a school-sponsored event.. In Edwards v. Aguillard, , the religious speech involved was a prohibition on teaching evolution in public school science classes.. Unlike these three cases, the religious speech at issue in this case took place after school and not during a school-sponsored event.
Fourth, the children required their parents permission to attend the Club's activities; they were not permitted to "loiter outside classrooms after the schoolday has ended".  The Club was using space on the school grounds into which elementary school children did not typically venture during school hours, and elementary school students of all grade levels attended the Club's activities.  The instructors are not schoolteachers.  The Court doubted that even small children would perceive that the school was endorsing religion in these circumstances, and that doubt was even more attenuated by the fact that the children were just as likely to perceive official condemnation of religion from the school's excluding the Club from its facilities.
All these considerations suggested that there was no Establishment Clause violation involved in Milford's permitting the Club to meet on its premises after school hours.  Accordingly, Milford's fear of an Establishment Clause violation did not justify forbidding the Club from using its facilities.
Scalia's concurring opinion
Justice Scalia concurred in the Court's opinion, but wrote separately to express his own views.  He did not believe that the Club's activities were coercive at all.  "As to endorsement, I have previously written that religious expression cannot violate the Establishment Clause where it (1) is purely private and (2) occurs in a traditional or designated public forum, publicly announced and open to all on equal terms.  The same is true of private speech that occurs in a limited public forum, publicly announced, whose boundaries are not drawn in favor of religious groups but instead permit a cross-section of uses."  Milford could not justify excluding the Club simply because its speech was religious in nature, and so Scalia did not worry whether the discrimination was content-based or viewpoint-based.  In any event, Scalia stressed that Milford was engaging in viewpoint discrimination.
Breyer's concurring opinion
Justice Breyer disputed the majority's assumption that the perception of the children was irrelevant.  Even in Lamb's Chapel, the Court had relied in part on the perception of the children in determining whether there had been an Establishment Clause violation.  "The critical Establishment Clause question here may well prove to be whether a child, participating in the Good News Club's activities, could reasonably perceive the endorsement of religion" on the part of the school.  Breyer pointed out that the Court's decision merely overturned a grant of summary judgment in favor of Milford, and denying summary judgment to one party was not the same as granting it to the other party.  Denials of summary judgment simply mean that there are "genuine issues of material fact" that require a trial.  The extent of the coercion perceived by the children was, in Breyer's view, one such issue.
Dissenting opinions
For Justice Stevens, speech that embodied a religious purpose fell into three categories.  One category included speech that approached a particular topic from a religious perspective.  Another category included speech that "amounts to worship, or its equivalent."  Between these two categories, Stevens posited a third category—religious proselytizing.  This case, then, involved a government entity attempting to open its facilities to allow the first category of religious speech on its property but not the other two categories.  
Distinguishing speech from a religious viewpoint, on the one hand, from religious proselytizing, on the other, is comparable to distinguishing meetings to discuss political issues from meetings whose principal purpose is to recruit new members to join a political organization.  If a school decides to authorize afterschool discussions of current events in its classrooms, it may not exclude people from expressing their views simply because it dislikes their particular political opinions.  But must it therefore allow organized political groups—for example, the Democratic Party, the Libertarian Party, or the Ku Klux Klan—to hold meetings, the principal purpose of which is not to discuss the current-events topic from their own unique point of view but rather to recruit others to join their respective groups?  I think not.  Such recruiting meetings may introduce divisiveness and tend to separate young children into cliques that undermine the school's educational mission.  School officials may reasonably believe that evangelical meetings designed to convert children to a particular religious faith may pose the same risk.  
Even if the Club's speech was not properly classified as religious worship, it certainly was religious proselytism, and the school was within its rights to exclude the Club from campus.
Justice Souter was more direct.
It is beyond question that Good News intends to use the public school premises not for the mere discussion of a subject from a particular, Christian point of view, but for an evangelical service of worship calling children to commit themselves in an act of Christian conversion.  The majority avoids this reality only by resorting to the bland and general characterization of Good News's activity as 'teaching of morals and character, from a religious standpoint'.  If the majority's statement ignores reality, as it surely does, then today's holding may be understood only in equally generic terms.  Otherwise, indeed, this case would stand for the remarkable proposition that any public school opened for civic meetings must be opened for use as a church, synagogue, or mosque. 
Souter also disputed that it was proper for the Court to reach the Establishment Clause claim.  Neither the district court nor the Second Circuit had based their rulings on the Establishment Clause, because they had found no First Amendment violation stemming from Milford's actions.  Consequently, the facts relating to the Establishment Clause claim were not as well developed as they otherwise might have been.  Furthermore, Souter disagreed that this case was so similar to Widmar and Lamb's Chapel as the majority claimed.  Widmar involved a university student group, one of over a hundred on campus, that used university space for religious worship.  In that case, Souter pointed out, the risk of the university being seen as endorsing the worship was low in light of the number of student groups on campus and the level of maturity of the students.  The film in Lamb's Chapel was open to the general public and aimed at adults, not children, and the school facilities had been used by a wide variety of private organizations, just as there were a large number of student groups in Widmar.  The Good News Club, by contrast, began setting up its meetings almost half an hour before the school day ended and in a classroom adjacent to the third- and fourth-grade classroom, so that those students, at least, would see the Club every time it came to campus.  In view of the state of the record, the "facts we know (or think we know) point away from the majority's conclusion, and while the consolation may be that nothing really gets resolved when the judicial process is so truncated, that is not much to recommend today's result."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 533
 Support Our Scouts Act (2005)
References
External links
  Amicus brief of the ACLU
  Transcript of symposium held by Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life
 Good News Clubs
  Milford Central School
 The Good News Club: The Christian Right's Stealth Assault on America's Children by Katherine Stewart 
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:2001 in religion
Category:Education in Otsego County, New York
Category:2001 in education
Category:Alliance Defending Freedom litigation
"""

From "Goodyear Dunlop Tires Operations, S.A. v. Brown" ==> """
Goodyear Dunlop Tires Operations, S. A. v. Brown, 564 U.S. 915 (2011), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the connection between Goodyear and its subsidiaries with the state of North Carolina was not strong enough to establish general personal jurisdiction over the companies.Goodyear Dunlop Tires Operations, S. A. v. Brown United States Supreme Court, Opinion p. 3, "A connection so limited between the forum and the foreign corporation, we hold, is  an inadequate  basis for the exercise of general jurisdiction.   Such a connection does not establish the “continuous and systematic” affiliation necessary to empower North  Carolina courts  to entertain claims unrelated to the foreign corporation’s contacts with the State." 
 Fact and Procedural History 
Two 13-year-old boys from North Carolina died as a result of a bus accident outside of Paris.Brown v. Meter  North Carolina Court of Appeals, Opinion p. 3, "Matthew Helms and Julian Brown (Decedents), two thirteen-year-old soccer players who resided in North Carolina, died from injuries suffered in a bus wreck on 18 April 2004 outside Paris, France.  Decedents were traveling to Charles de Gaulle Airport in preparation for returning to North Carolina at the time of the accident." The parents of the boys believed the accident was due to a defective tire manufactured by a foreign subsidiary of Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company and sued for damages in a North Carolina state court.Brown v. Meter  North Carolina Court of Appeals, Opinion p. 3, "Plaintiffs sought relief from a series of Goodyear affiliates, including Goodyear France, Goodyear Luxembourg, and Goodyear Turkey on a number of theories arising from an alleged negligent “design, construction, testing, and inspection” of and a failure to warn about alleged latent defects in the Goodyear Regional tire in question." The foreign subsidiaries asserted that the North Carolina courts lacked jurisdiction over them and moved to dismiss. The North Carolina trial court denied the motion and the North Carolina Court of Appeals affirmed.Brown v. Meter  North Carolina Court of Appeals, Opinion p. 4, "On 1 May 2008, the trial court entered an order denying Defendants’ dismissal motions." Opinion, p. 29, "The trial court did not err in exercising general jurisdiction over Defendants and denying their dismissal motion... the trial
court’s order should be, and hereby is, affirmed."  
 Opinion 
As the claim did not arise in the forum state of North Carolina and none of the type of tires that caused the accident made it to North Carolina, the court cannot exercise specific jurisdiction over the defendants. Additionally, as only a small proportion of the subsidiaries’ products were distributed in North Carolina, and the subsidiaries did not systematically or persistently conduct business there as to be essentially at home there, the court cannot exercise general jurisdiction over all claims against the defendant.
 Result 
The Supreme Court reversed, holding that the foreign subsidiaries lacked a significant connection to North Carolina to warrant general personal jurisdiction.
 References 
External links
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company
Category:United States personal jurisdiction case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Google LLC v. Oracle America, Inc." ==> """
Google LLC v. Oracle America, Inc., 593 U.S. ___ (2021),Google LLC v. Oracle America, Inc. was a U.S. Supreme Court decision related to the nature of computer code and copyright law. The dispute centered on the use of parts of the Java programming language's application programming interfaces (APIs) and about 11,000 lines of source code, which are owned by Oracle (through subsidiary, Oracle America, Inc., originating from Sun Microsystems), within early versions of the Android operating system by Google. Google has since transitioned Android to a copyright-unburdened engine without the source code, and has admitted to using the APIs but claimed this was within fair use.
Oracle initiated the suit arguing that the APIs were copyrightable, seeking  in damages from Google's sales and licensing of the earlier infringing versions of Android. While two District Court-level jury trials found in favor of Google, the Federal Circuit court reversed both decisions, asserting APIs are copyrightable and Google's use does not fall under fair use. Google successfully petitioned to the Supreme Court to hear the case in the 2019 term, focusing on the copyrightability of APIs and subsequent fair use; the case was delayed to the 2020 term due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In April 2021, the Supreme Court ruled in a 6–2 decision that Google's use of the Java APIs fell within the four factors of fair use, bypassing the question on the copyrightability of the APIs. The decision reversed the Federal Circuit ruling and remanded the case for further review.
The case has been of significant interest within the tech and software industries, as numerous computer programs and software libraries, particularly in open source, are developed by recreating the functionality of APIs from commercial or competing products to aid developers in interoperability between different systems or platforms.
 Background 
 Java development 
Java was originally developed at Sun Microsystems starting in December 1990. It included a new programming language, a virtual machine, and a set of libraries for use with the language. These libraries are documented for programmers via application programming interfaces (APIs), which tell programmers what information to provide to library functions and what results to expect back, eliminating any need for the programmer to know how the library they are using does what it does.  These libraries together provide the "Java virtual machine" which programmers write programs to use (run upon). The common way in which a common set of libraries are used across all "Java virtual machines" allows for interoperability, or as marketed by Sun, "Write once, run anywhere"; a programmer need only create one version of their software which, because of the single group of APIs common to all Java virtual machines, can thus be run on any computing platform that supports Java.
The Java language was released to the public in 1995, under the Sun Community Source License, making the source code freely available but requiring that products using the code were maintained to the Java standard, and that any commercial derivative works were licensed by Sun. While anyone could program in the language itself, Sun maintained the Java Platform, Standard Edition (Java SE) and Mobile Edition (Java ME) libraries, provided to users as pre-compiled Java bytecode, and their respective APIs, as well as the Technology Compatibility Kits (TCKs) that tested an implementation against the Java standard. Over 2006 and 2007, due to pressure from developers, Sun changed the license of the various Java packages to use the GNU General Public License with a "classpath exception", allowing developers the access necessary to make derivative works and the ability to release applications under a different license. This led to the OpenJDK (Open Java Development Kit), first released in 2007. Sun retained strong control over the language and standards itself, licensing the necessary elements like TCKs for commercial users. At this time, Sun's business model changed to focusing on licensing of the Java platform to embedded devices, particularly mobile phones, and had already made licensing deals with Nokia, Motorola, and Research In Motion.
 Android development 
Android, Inc. was founded in 2003 by Andy Rubin, Rich Miner, Nick Sears, and Chris White to develop a mobile phone platform.  Google purchased Android in 2005 and continued developing the Android operating system. During the development of Android, Google wanted to incorporate the Java SE libraries. Google's executive chairman Eric Schmidt had approached Sun's president Jonathan I. Schwartz about licensing the Java libraries for use in Android. Sun offered a licensing deal of between . Schmidt said Google would have paid for that license, but they were concerned that Sun had also requested some shared control of Android along with the fee. Google states that they wanted more control in order to open source the language and allow third parties to take better advantage of its code; Oracle states that Sun refused because Google's intention was essentially to fork Java to a Google version of the language, and to prevent it being inter-operable with other versions, an idea which was "anathema" to the "write once run anywhere" basis of the language.Ruling, para 34: " The point of contention between the parties was Google's refusal to make the implementation of its programs compatible with the Java virtual machine or interoperable with other Java programs. Because Sun/Oracle found that position to be anathema to the "write once, run anywhere" philosophy, it did not grant Google a license to use the Java API packages." Because of these differences of view, the negotiations failed to reach a deal and Sun refused Google a license for Java.
At this point in time, the OpenJDK implementation offered by Sun was not as mature or complete as the Java Standard Edition. Instead of licensing Java, Google chose to develop a cleanroom version of the Java Standard Edition libraries, developing the libraries from a completely fresh start without any access to Sun's code. This became the engine behind Android's Dalvik virtual machine, a core part of the new system. Part of the virtual machine included 37 API calls and around 11,500 lines of code deemed central to Java, which were taken from Apache Harmony, an open-source cleanroom Java implementation developed by the Apache Software Foundation (ASF). Prior to this, the ASF had tried to obtain necessary licenses from Sun to support the Apache Harmony project as to call it an official Java implementation, but could not, in part due to incompatible licensing with Java's GNU General Public License and ASF's Apache License, nor could it gain access to the Java TCKs to validate the Harmony project against Sun's implementation. Though Google stated they used this code to ensure interoperability with the Java Standard Edition for other programmers, during the second appeal hearing, Google stated that it had used this code for commercial reasons to rapidly complete Android and to avoid the "drudgery" of recreating the code. ASF ceased maintaining the Apache Harmony in 2011, leading Google to take over maintenance of these libraries.
Google released a beta of the Android platform on November 5, 2007 then, one week later, the software development kit (SDK) which they noted included some Java technologies. Sun's president Schwartz congratulated Google the same day, saying they had "strapped another set of rockets to the community's momentum and to the vision defining opportunity across our (and other) planets." During the trial, Schwartz said that at that time of Android's release, despite knowing Google may have bypassed their licensing requirements, "We decided to grit our teeth and support it so anyone supporting it would see us as part of the value chain".
Oracle announced it would purchase Sun in April 2009 for , and completed the acquisition in January 2010. Besides allowing them to enter the hardware business, Oracle's CEO Larry Ellison called the Java language "the single most important software asset we have ever acquired". Oracle continued to develop Java and pursue licensing opportunities following its acquisition of Sun.
By the release of Android KitKat (v4.4) in 2013, Google removed the Dalvik virtual machine and replaced it with the Android Runtime, which had been built within Google without any of the Java source code. However, Android continued to use the JavaSE APIs through the extent of the case's litigation up until Android Nougat when it was fully replaced by OpenJDK.
 First phase: API copyrightability and patents 
The first phase of the case lasted from 2010 to 2015. Oracle successfully established that APIs are copyrightable, but their claims of patent infringement were rejected. 
 First District Court trial 
right|thumb|upright|Judge William Alsup, who presided over both trials at the District Court level 
On August 13, 2010, Oracle sued Google for copyright and patent infringement in the District Court for the Northern District of California. Oracle asserted Google was aware that they had developed Android without a Java license and copied its APIs, and that Google therefore infringed Oracle's copyright. Oracle also cited seven prior patents related to the Java technology created by Sun and now owned by Oracle that Google should have been aware of as they had hired former Sun developers that worked on Java. Oracle sought both monetary damages and an injunction to stop Google from using the allegedly infringing materials.
The case was assigned to Judge William Alsup, who split the case into three phases: copyright, patent, and damages.
The copyright phase started on April 16, 2012, and consisted of several distinct claims of infringement: a nine-line rangeCheck function, several test files, the structure, sequence and organization (SSO) of the Java (API), and the API documentation.
Oracle alleged infringement of 37 separate Java APIs which had derived from the Apache Harmony project. After two weeks of testimony, the jury found on May 7, 2012, that Google had infringed on the copyright related to the code, SSO, and documentation of the APIs as well as the rangeCheck function, but were deadlocked on whether these uses fell within fair use. The jury also found that Google had sufficient reason to believe based on Sun's and Oracle's conduct that they did not need to license Java from Sun or Oracle, but did not rely on this when developing Android. Oracle requested a judgement as a matter of law (JMOL) that the case dismiss any fair use defense since the jury was split, as well as to overturn the jury's decision on eight security-related files that they had reviewed and found non-infringing but which Google had stated they copied verbatim; Alsup concurred. Google asked for a similar JMOL related to rangeCheck, but Alsup denied this request.
The patent phase began on May 7, 2012, with the same jury.  By the time of trial, Oracle's patent case comprised claims from two patents, 6,061,520 (Method and system for performing static initialization), (the '520 patent) and RE38104 (Method and apparatus for resolving data references in generated code)., Gosling, James, "Method and apparatus for resolving data references in generated code", issued 2003-04-29, assigned to Sun Microsystems and Oracle (the '104 patent).  Google pursued a non-infringement defense.  For the '520 patent, they argued that they were using parsing for optimizing static initialization, rather than "simulating execution" as the claim required.  For the '104 patent, they argued that the instruction did not include a symbolic reference. On May 23, 2012, the jury found non-infringement on all patent claims.
Judge Alsup issued the final verdict for both these phases on May 31, 2012. While the jury had found for Oracle regarding copyright infringement of the APIs, Alsup determined that the APIs were not copyrightable in the first place:
Alsup did agree with the jury that the rangeCheck function and eight security files were a copyright infringement, but the only relief available was statutory damages up to a maximum of 
As a result of these rulings and a stipulation, there was no jury damages phase. The parties agreed to zero dollars in statutory damages for the small amount of copied code by June 2012.
 First appellate ruling 
Shortly following the conclusion of the District Court case, both parties attempted to file additional JMOLs on elements of the ruling which Alsup dismissed, leading to Oracle appealing the decision and Google filing a cross-appeal on the literal copying claim. Because the case involved claims related to patents, the appeal was automatically assigned to the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit. The hearing was held on December 4, 2013, and the judgment was released on May 9, 2014.
The court noted that Copyright Act provides protection to "original works of authorship fixed in any tangible medium of expression" (p. 17). The legislative history explains that literary works include "computer programs to the extent that they incorporate authorship in the programmer's expression of original ideas, as distinguished from the ideas themselves" (p. 18). To qualify for copyright protection a work must be original. 17 U.S.C. § 102(a). The court was therefore "first to assess whether the expression is original to the programmer" (p. 24), something that Google had already conceded (p. 21). This led the court to conclude "that the overall structure of Oracle's API packages is creative, original, and resembles a taxonomy" (p. 14). It therefore reversed the district court's decision on the central issue, holding that the "structure, sequence and organization" of an API is copyrightable. It also ruled for Oracle regarding the small amount of literal copying, holding that it was not de minimis. The case was remanded to the District Court for a second trial, to consider whether Google's use was acceptable anyway, under the doctrine of fair use, since the original case had not brought out the facts related to fair use sufficiently for the Appeal Court to rule on that point.
In October 2014, Google petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court to hear the case; this request was denied in June 2015.135 S. Ct. 2887 (2015), 
 Second phase: fair use 
 Second District Court trial 
As ordered by the Appeals Court, a new district court trial began on May 9, 2016, on the question of whether Google's actions were fair use given the prior ruling that the APIs were copyrightable. Closing arguments were completed on May 23, 2016 and the jury began deliberations. Oracle was seeking damages of up to US$9 billion.  On May 26, 2016, the jury found that Android did not infringe Oracle-owned copyrights because its re-implementation of 37 Java APIs was protected by fair use. Oracle announced its intention to appeal, but before doing so, it attempted unsuccessful motions to disregard the jury verdict, and then to hold a re-trial. Oracle officially filed its appeal on October 26, 2016.
 Second appellate ruling 
Oracle's appeal was heard by the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in 2017. On March 27, 2018, the Court ruled in favor of Oracle. The ruling analyzed the aspects of a "fair use" claim which were to be decided by a judge and jury, respectively. It then looked at the factual matters which, it had to be assumed, the jury had reached, and their implications in law. It noted that in a "mixed" case of fact and law, such as the present dispute, the trial jury's role is to decide on the facts. Judge O'Malley quoted the Supreme Court case Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc.  in his opinion, noting that:
The Court of Appeals' role is to assess whether a reasonable jury could have reached the conclusions it did, and whether the judge's decision could be correct and reasonable in law. The standard review of mixed questions of law and fact concerned three components: "(1) determining the legal standard governing the question posed and what types of historical facts are relevant to that standard; (2) finding what the historical facts in the case at hand are; and (3) assessing whether the historical facts found satisfy the legal test governing the question to be answered" (Decision p. 19). Except clear error, the role of the jury is limited to determining disputed 'historical facts' (2). The facts are not discussed. "It is undisputed that Google copied verbatim the declaring code of the 37 Java API packages 11,500 lines of Oracle’s copyrighted code. It also copied the SSO of the Java API packages. (Decision p. 10)" It is also established and Google recognizes that the software copied is creative and original.
The Court found that as a matter of law, Google's use of Java could not have fallen within fair use, even if all factual matters decided by the jury had been in Google's favor. The Appeals Court found that Google's use of API code declarations had not met any of the four current criteria for fair use, but was merely untransformed reuse. It had not been transformative, since it was used for the same purposes without even minimal changes or rewrites. It was not minimal, since it was agreed that only 170 lines of the 11,500 lines copied were needed for Google's purposes. It was not within any example of transformation, nor intended to permit third party interoperability, since Google had made no substantial efforts to use them for the purpose of third party interoperability. (In fact it found that Google had tried to prevent interoperability with other Java and had previously been refused a license by Sun for that reason.) It was not transformative in the sense of a new platform either, since other Java smartphones predated Android. It was plausible that the use had harmed Sun/Oracle – perhaps to a great extent if Oracle were to be believed – since as a result, vendors began expecting Oracle to compete on price with a freely available derivative of its own language, and to require very steep discounts and undesired contractual terms. Therefore, Google's use of the Java code and APIs failed to meet all four of the currently accepted criteria under which fair use would be possible.
Instead, the Court found that Google's purpose had been to enhance its nascent Android platform's attractiveness to existing developers, who were often familiar with Java, and to avoid the "drudgery" of rewriting the code (which they could have done) needed to implement the 170 lines of API detail which were indeed required. "Making it easy for oneself", the court noted, is well established to not fall within valid grounds for fair use. The Court found that "The fact that Android is free of charge does not make Google's use of the Java API packages noncommercial". Oracle
The purpose was commercial, the established historical facts by the jury did not satisfy any of the criteria for fair use, and the Court remanded the case back to the District Court of the Northern District of California to determine the amount of damage that Google should pay Oracle.
 Supreme Court 
thumb|Seat of the Supreme Court
Google filed a petition for writ of certiorari with the Supreme Court of the United States in January 2019 to challenge the two rulings that were made by the appeals court in Oracle's favor. In its petition, Google centered its case on whether copyright extends to a software interface like an API, and whether the use of the Java API by Google fell within fair use as found at the jury trials. In orders issued in April 2019, the Court asked the Solicitor General of the United States to file an amicus brief to outline the government's stance on the case. The Trump administration backed Oracle and urged the Court to deny certiorari. Microsoft, Mozilla Corporation, Red Hat Inc., and others filed amicus briefs in support of Google's position. IBM, the Computer & Communications Industry Association, the Internet Association, the Auto Care Association, and a collective group of over 150 academics and computer professionals also filed briefs supporting Google's stance, cautioning that a decision in favor of Oracle would hurt the computing world as a whole.
The Supreme Court granted certiorari on November 15, 2019, and was expected to hear the case on March 24, 2020. However, the Supreme Court postponed its March argument session on March 16 in light of concerns surrounding COVID-19, and later announced that Google v. Oracle was one of several cases from the 2019–20 term to be postponed until the first week of the 2020–21 term. Following the delay, the Court asked parties to submit additional briefs related to the Seventh Amendment, given that the Federal District court had overridden some of the findings of facts that the jury had concluded in their case at the District level.
Oral arguments were heard via teleconference due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on October 7, 2020. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg had died the prior month, and her replacement, Justice Amy Coney Barrett, had not yet been confirmed, so Barrett took no part in the proceedings. Court observers found that while the Justices seemed to side with Oracle on the copyright arguments, they also took deference to the arguments presented by Microsoft, who had taken Google's side on the case. Microsoft argued in an amicus brief that ruling in Oracle's favor could upend the software industry. Several questions focused on how APIs fell within the idea–expression distinction of copyright and if the merger doctrine would apply. Justice Gorsuch was also seen to focus heavily on the Seventh Amendment arguments and whether the Federal Circuit's ruling to overturn the trial court's jury verdict was proper.
 Decision 
The Court issued its decision on April 5, 2021. In a 6–2 majority, the Court ruled that Google's use of the Java APIs was within the bounds of fair use, reversing the Federal Circuit Appeals Court ruling and remanding the case for further hearing. Justice Stephen Breyer wrote the majority opinion. Breyer's opinion began with the assumption that the APIs may be copyrightable, and thus proceeded with a review of the four factors that contributed to fair use:
 The nature of the copyrighted work: Breyer's analysis identified that APIs served as declaring code rather than implementation, and that in context of copyright, it served an "organization function" similar to the Dewey Decimal System, in which fair use is more applicable.
 The purpose and character of the use: Breyer stated that Google took and transformed the Java APIs "to expand the use and usefulness of Android-based smartphones" which "creat[ed] a new platform that could be readily used by programmers". Breyer also wrote that Google limited to using the Java APIs "as needed to include tasks that would be useful in smartphone programs".
 The amount and substantiality of the copyrighted material: Breyer said that Google only used about 0.4% of the total Java source code and was minimal. On the question of substantiality, Breyer wrote that Google did not copy the code that was at the heart of how Java was implemented, and that "Google copied those lines not because of their creativity, their beauty, or even (in a sense) because of their purpose. It copied them because programmers had already learned to work with [Java SE], and it would have been difficult … to attract programmers to … Android … without them."
 The market effect of the copyright-taking. Breyer said that at the time that Google copied the Java APIs, it was not clear if Android would become successful, and should not be considered as a replacement for Java but as a product operating on a different platform. Breyer further stated that if they had found for Oracle, it "would risk harm to the public", as "Oracle alone would hold the key. The result could well prove highly profitable to Oracle (or other firms holding a copyright in computer interfaces) ... [but] the lock would interfere with, not further, copyright's basic creativity objectives."
Breyer determined that Google's use of the APIs had met all four factors, and that Google used "only what was needed to allow users to put their accrued talents to work in a new and transformative program".   Breyer concluded that "we hold that the copying here at issue nonetheless constituted a fair use. Hence, Google's copying did not violate the copyright law." This conclusion rendered the need to evaluate the copyright of the API unnecessary.
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion that was joined by Justice Samuel Alito. Thomas wrote that the majority opinion created a new distinction between implementing code and declaring code that Congress had rejected, and thus, "the result of this distorting analysis is an opinion that makes it difficult to imagine any circumstance in which declaring code will remain protected by copyright." Thomas further stated that in his own fair use analysis that "Google's use of that copyrighted code was anything but fair".
Impact
Google v. Oracle was a closely watched case by the tech industry. A ruling favoring Oracle could have had significant effects on past and future software development given the prolific use of APIs. Opponents of the Federal Circuit's ruling, including Google and other developers of Android-based software, had raised several concerns including the impact on interoperability, software innovation, and the potential for bad actors to pick up the rights to old software and file claims against companies who built their software on what were assumed to be open standards. If APIs became subject to copyright protection, it is believed that companies would need to implement deliberately incompatible standards to protect themselves from the risk of complex litigation. This scenario would mean moving away from the current trends in software development which have focused on improving interoperability between different services, allowing apps to communicate with one another, and creating more integrated platforms for end users. 
Industry and legal experts stated an Oracle victory could have created a chilling effect in software development, with copyright holders using the copyright on APIs to prevent their use in developing interoperable alternatives through reverse engineering, as common in open source software development. At the same time, experts cautioned that a judgment favoring Google's position may weaken protection for copyright for software code developers, allowing competitors with better resources to develop improved products from smaller firms and reduce the motive for innovation within the industry.
One example identified by Wired is the Linux operating system. While Linux is fully open source, it is based on POSIX, a set of APIs that mimic those of the commercial Unix operating system that enable high levels of interoperability for developers; a programmer would only need to write one set of code which then can be compiled on any system that has the same API, even if the computing architecture of the systems are different. If case law favored Oracle, the current owners of Unix, Micro Focus, could have sought damages from any POSIX-based operating system developer intending to use the operating system for commercial use.
 See also 
 Oracle Corporation v. SAP AG
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit cases
Category:United States District Court for the Northern District of California cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Google litigation
Category:Oracle Corporation litigation
Category:Java APIs
Category:Smartphone patent wars
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:2021 in United States case law
"""

From "Gorham Co. v. White" ==> """
Gorham Co. v. White, 81 U.S. (14 Wall.) 511 (1872), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held it is not essential to identity of design that the appearance should be the same to the eye of an expert. If, to an ordinary observer, the resemblance is sufficiently deceptive as to induce him to purchase one, supposing it to be the other, then the one first patented is infringed by the other..
 References 
External links
Category:1872 in United States case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
"""

From "Gorin v. United States" ==> """
Gorin v. United States, 312 U.S. 19 (1941), was a United States Supreme Court case. It involved the Espionage Act of 1917 and its use against Mihail Gorin, an intelligence agent from the Soviet Union, and Hafis Salich, a United States Navy employee who sold to Gorin information on Japanese activity in the U.S.
 Background 
Hafis Salich was a Georgian immigrant who had worked in the Berkeley Police Department and knew some Japanese. In 1936, he became a civilian employee of the Office of Naval Intelligence (ONI) working in ONI's branch office in San Pedro, California.
Mihail Gorin came to the US in 1936, and operated the Los Angeles office of the Soviet tourist agency Intourist. He was also an intelligence agent of the Soviet Union. Gorin met Salich in 1937. Salich had access to ONI's files on pro-Japan activities among Japanese-Americans and the covert activities of Japanese consular officials. He was also short of money because of gambling losses.
By 1938, Gorin persuaded Salich to sell him classified information from ONI covering US monitoring of Japanese officials and also private persons (Japanese-American citizens and resident aliens). Salich agreed by justifying his action on the theory that Japan was a 'common enemy' of the Soviet Union and the United States.
Gorin and Salich were caught in late 1938, when Gorin left a spy note and cash in clothes sent for dry cleaning. The dry cleaners checked the pockets of all clothes before cleaning and found the money and note. They immediately contacted police, who contacted Ralph Van Deman, a former head of Army intelligence. Van Deman in turn informed the FBI, which investigated Salich and Gorin and obtained a confession from Salich.
 Indictment and prosecution 
In January 1939, Gorin and his wife, Natasha, as well as Salich, were indicted under the Espionage Act of 1917.  The Act was then under Title 50 of the US Code. There were three counts against each defendant:
Count One: USC 50 §31 Copying, taking, making and obtaining documents, writings and notes of matters connected with the national defense (§1 of the Act).
Count Two: USC 50 §32 Communicating, delivering and transmitting to Gorin as a representative of the Soviet Union writings, notes, instruments and information relating to the national defense (§2 of the Act).
Count Three: USC 50 §34 Conspiring to communicate, deliver, transmit, and attempt to communicate, deliver and transmit to the Soviet Union and to a representative thereof, documents, writings, plans, notes, instruments and information relating to the national defense (§4 of the Act).
All defendants pleaded not guilty. The defense had several main arguments:
The Espionage Act of 1917 was too vague in its description of what information was considered illegal and so violated the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment and "the right... to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation" provided in the Sixth Amendment.
The "innocuous" nature of the documents meant there was no intent to harm the US or to aid a foreign nation.
The information trafficked in by the defendant was not related to the national defense.
Courts, not juries, should decide whether information is "connected or related" to national defense
Some of the information was later published in a periodical and so not secret.
The jury rejected the arguments and convicted Gorin and Salich on all three counts. Gorin got six years and Salich got four years. The Court instructed the jury to find Natasha not guilty of the first two counts, and the jury also found her not guilty of the third count.
The case was appealed in the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in April 1940. The case was heard by Judges Garrecht, Haney, and Healy, who rejected all of defense counsel's arguments.
The case then went to the Supreme Court. It was argued in December 1940 and decided in January 1941. The Supreme Court agreed with the Court of Appeals and rejected all of defense counsel's arguments.
 Legal principles considered
Several important legal principles involving the Espionage Act were discussed in Justice Stanley Forman Reed's opinion for the Court:
The act covers "obtaining" as well as "delivery" of information.
The act covers information "connected or related" to national defense, not only specific items listed (ships, aircraft, forts, etc.).
The definition of "national defense'" is that of the Defense Secrets Act of 1911, "a generic concept of broad connotations, referring to the military and naval establishments and the related activities of national preparedness."
The jury, not the court, is to decide whether or not information was "connected or related" to national defense.
The vagueness and uncertainty of the law does not violate the Fifth or Sixth Amendments.
Sections 1(b) and 2 require "bad faith" (scienter). The defendant must have "intent or reason to believe that the information to be obtained is to be used to the injury of the United States, or to the advantage of any foreign nation."
Congress meant any foreign nation: "No distinction is made between friend or enemy."
If there is no "occasion for secrecy" as with public Congressional reports, there can be no "reasonable intent to give advantage to a foreign government."
Gorin was cited in the 1971 case New York Times v. United States. The government also used Gorin in its arguments in the case of Stephen Jin-Woo Kim in 2010.
 References 
 Further reading 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:Espionage scandals and incidents
Category:Soviet Union–United States relations
Category:Void for vagueness case law
Category:1941 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court criminal cases
Category:Office of Naval Intelligence
Category:Japanese-American history
"""

From "Goss v. Lopez" ==> """
Goss v. Lopez, 419 U.S. 565 (1975), was a US Supreme Court case. It held that a public school must conduct a hearing before subjecting a student to suspension. Also, a suspension without a hearing violates the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the US Constitution.
Background
Nine students, including a student named Dwight Lopez, were suspended from Central High School in Columbus, Ohio for 10 days for destroying school property and disrupting the learning environment.
Ohio Law § 3313.66 empowered the school principal to suspend students for 10 days or expel them.
The law required students' parents to be notified of the action within 24 hours to be given the reason.
If students were expelled, they could appeal to the Board of Education, but §3313.66 gave no such allowances if they were suspended.
A three-judge District Court struck down the law as a violation of students' right to due process of law. The United States District Court for the Southern District of Ohio held:
The District Court reprimanded the school for its violation of the 14th Amendment, as there were "minimum requirements of notice and a hearing prior to suspension, except in emergency situations." The case was appealed by the school to the Supreme Court.
.
Majority opinion
Justice Byron R. White delivered the opinion of the Court, on behalf of a narrow 5-4 majority. It held that the state had violated due process by suspending the students without a hearing. The state had made education a fundamental right by providing for free public education for all residents between 5 and 21. The Court stated that protected interests are created not  by the Constitution but by its institutions (Board of Regents v. Roth).
The Court held that a 10-day suspension was not a de minimis deprivation of property. It also stated that suspending students had the potential of seriously harming their reputation and affecting their future employment and education. The Court also held that the state had no authority to deprive students of their property interest in educational benefits or their liberty interest in reputation, without due process of law.
The Court reiterated the principle, first clearly formulated in Tinker v. Des Moines School Dist. but established in a long line of decisions before that case, students "do not shed their constitutional rights at the schoolhouse door."
Dissenting opinion
Lewis Powell wrote the dissent that argued that the Ohio statute had granted the right to education, not the right to education without discipline. He challenged the court's finding that the suspension was severe enough to bring the Due Process Clause into play.
Powell also argued that the safeguards provided by the Ohio statute were sufficient. The statute required the student's parents and the Board of Education to be given written notice of the suspension and "reasons therefor" within 24 hours. Powell also argued that the informal hearing proposed by the majority would not provide significantly more protection.
Powell criticized at length the Court's interference with the operation of schools. He argued that minors should be and are treated differently under the law and that the Court was turning its back on precedent. Powell concluded that the majority's decision would allow students to claim due process violations when they were excluded from extracurricular activities, failed from a course, promoted, required to take certain subjects, transferred from one school to another, or bused to a distant school.
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States education case law
Category:United States civil due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:1975 in education
Category:Education in Columbus, Ohio
"""

From "Gottschalk v. Benson" ==> """
Gottschalk v. Benson, 409 U.S. 63 (1972), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that a process claim directed to a numerical algorithm, as such, was not patentable because "the patent would wholly pre-empt the mathematical formula and in practical effect would be a patent on the algorithm itself.". That would be tantamount to allowing a patent on an abstract idea, contrary to precedent dating back to the middle of the 19th century.  The ruling stated "Direct attempts to patent programs have been rejected [and] indirect attempts to obtain patents and avoid the rejection ... have confused the issue further and should not be permitted."Gottschalk, 409 U.S. at 72 (citing "To Promote the Progress of . . . Useful Arts," Report of the President's Commission on the Patent System (1966)). The case was argued on October 16, 1972, and was decided November 20, 1972.
Prior history
The case revolves around a patent application filed by inventors Gary Benson and Arthur Tabbot, for a method for converting binary-coded decimal (BCD) numerals into pure binary numerals on a general-purpose digital computer. The patent examiner at the United States Patent Office, now called the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office or PTO, rejected the patent application as being directed to a mathematical expression.  Pure mathematical expressions had been held to be unpatentable under earlier patent laws in Mackay Co. v. Radio Corp.. The applicant appealed to the Board of Patent Appeals and Interferences, which affirmed the examiner's rejection.  The applicant further appealed to the Court of Customs and Patent Appeals.  The Court reversed the Board.  Finally, Commissioner of Patents Robert Gottschalk filed a petition for a writ of certiorari to the Supreme Court.
The case
The law which is applicable to this case is section 101 of the Patent Act of 1952. The question was whether or not the claimed invention was a "process" under the law.  The Court held that because the claim was not limited to any particular type of programmable digital computer and neither involved special purpose implementing machinery nor a transformation of substances, as in all prior cases holding processes patentable, the claim would effectively preclude use of the method for any currently known or future invention in any field.  Thus the claim was directed to an algorithm alone and therefore was not patentable.
In its brief to the Supreme Court, the government asked the Court to hold that no process could be patented unless it claimed either a transformation of substances or was implemented with a newly devised machine.  The Court held that those criteria were "clues" to patent eligibility but declined to hold that they were necessary conditions for patent-eligibility in all cases, even though every case in which the Supreme Court had approved a process patent thus far had involved such a process.
Impact
This decision was widely seen as confirming that software by itself was not directly patentable.  What patent attorneys/agents had been doing in the meantime, however, was to get patent protection on software inventions by claiming the algorithm in combination with the general purpose digital computer programmed to carry out the algorithm.  Thus they technically purported to be claiming a new machine and this, the lower patent court held, was patentable.
The boundary between when a computer implemented process is purely an abstract idea (and thus not patentable) and when it is a process implementing the idea in a practical way (and thus is patentable) is still a matter of debate within the U.S. patent office. ("The Supreme Court has not been clear...as to whether such subject matter is excluded from the scope of 101 because it represents laws of nature, natural phenomena, or abstract ideas.")2106.02 Mathematical Algorithms - 2100 Patentability Manual of Patent Examining Procedure 8th ed. It also remains a contested issue whether process patent claims must be directed to a transformation of substances or else embody a nontrivial, novel implementing machine or device.  The PTO has taken this position in its arguments to the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit. See USPTO brief in In re Bilski.Supplemental Brief of Appellee Director of the USPTO in In re Bilski, Fed. Cir. App. No. 2007-1130 , at pp. 6-14. The Government also so argued in briefing the Benson case.See Petitioner’s Reply Brief on writ of certiorari in Benson, at 9 ("we submit that the cases follow such a rule—implicitly or explicitly—and that they cannot be rationalized otherwise"). The majority opinion in the Federal Circuit's opinion in In re Bilski adopts this position.
Notes
35 U.S.C. 101 says, "Whoever invents or discovers any new and useful process, machine, manufacture, or composition of matter, or any new and useful improvement thereof may obtain a patent therefor, subject to the conditions and requirements of this title." 35 U.S.C. 100(b) gives the definition for process, "The term ‘process’ means process, art or method, and includes a new use of a known process, machine, manufacture, composition of matter, or material."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 409
 Software patent
 CyberSource Corp. v. Retail Decisions, Inc.
 Bilski v. Kappos
 Alice Corp. v. CLS Bank International
References
Further reading
External links
Category:Software patent case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Grable & Sons Metal Products, Inc. v. Darue Engineering & Mfg." ==> """
Grable & Sons Metal Products, Inc. v. Darue Engineering & Mfg., 545 U.S. 308 (2005), was a United States Supreme Court decision. involving the jurisdiction of the federal district courts under 28 U.S.C. § 1331 (federal question jurisdiction)..
Background
In 1994, the Internal Revenue Service seized real property belonging to Grable & Sons Metal Products, Inc., to satisfy Grable's federal tax delinquency. The IRS sent notice of the tax sale by certified mail. At the tax sale the IRS sold the property to Darue Engineering and Manufacturing. Grable later brought a quiet title action in state court, alleging that the IRS sale was invalid. Grable argued that, under 26 U.S.C. § 6335, the IRS was required to give notice to Grable by personal service, not certified mail. Darue attempted to remove the case to Federal District Court. Darue argued that the federal district court had jurisdiction, because the claim of title depended on the interpretation of the notice statute in the federal tax law.
Issue
The question raised was whether the federal district courts have original federal question jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1331 when a claim arises out of a federal statute that has not specifically granted a private right to a cause of action.
Majority opinion
The Court affirmed the Sixth Circuit and ruled that there was federal question jurisdiction.
Justice Souter, writing for a unanimous court, held that the federal court had jurisdiction for the following reasons:
Whether Grable was given notice within the meaning of the federal statute was an essential element of the claim. This was the only legal or factual issue contested in the case.
The federal government had a strong interest in the prompt and certain collection of delinquent taxes.
The ability of the IRS to satisfy its claims from the property of delinquents required clear terms of notice to allow buyers like Darue to satisfy themselves that the IRS has touched the bases necessary for good title.
The Government thus had a direct interest in the availability of a federal forum to vindicate its own administrative action.
Because it will be the rare quiet title action that raises a contested matter of federal law, federal jurisdiction to resolve genuine disagreement over federal tax title provisions will portend only a microscopic effect on the federal-state division of labor.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 545
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States federal question jurisdiction case law
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Grady v. Corbin" ==> """
Grady v. Corbin, 495 U.S. 508 (1990), was a United States Supreme Court decision holding that: "the Double Jeopardy Clause bars a subsequent prosecution if, to establish an essential element of an offense charged in that prosecution, the government will prove conduct that constitutes an offense for which the defendant has already been prosecuted.".
Background
In the fall of 1987, Thomas Corbin was driving under the influence as he drove his automobile across the center line of a New York highway and collided with two oncoming vehicles. Brenda Dirago, the driver of the second vehicle, died in this accident while her husband was seriously injured. Later that same day, Corbin was charged with DUI and pleaded guilty.
Opinion of the Court
In an opinion by Justice Brennan, the Supreme Court ruled that to subsequently try him for homicide would constitute double jeopardy.
Aftermath
Grady was only valid law for three years. It was overturned by United States v. Dixon,. which rejected the same conduct test in favor of the longstanding same element test. The same element test had been the law since Blockburger v. United States..
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 495
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
United States v. Felix (1993)
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:1990 in United States case law
"""

From "Graham v. Connor" ==> """
Graham v. Connor, 490 U.S. 386 (1989), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court determined that an objective reasonableness standard should apply to a civilian's claim that law enforcement officials used excessive force in the course of making an arrest, investigatory stop, or other "seizure" of his or her person.
 Background 
Dethorne Graham traveled with a friend to a convenience store to buy orange juice to counteract an insulin reaction that Graham was experiencing. Graham entered the store but quickly left because the line was too long. He returned to his friend's vehicle, and they then drove away from the store. Connor, a nearby police officer, observed Graham's behavior and became suspicious. Connor then pulled them over for an investigative stop.
Although Graham's friend told police that Graham was simply suffering from a "sugar reaction," the officer ordered Graham to wait while he found out what, if anything, had happened at the convenience store. When Connor returned to his patrol car to call for backup assistance, Graham got out of the car, ran around it twice, and finally sat down on the curb, where he passed out briefly.
In the ensuing confusion, a number of other Charlotte police officers arrived on the scene in response to Connor's request for backup. One of the officers rolled Graham over on the sidewalk, cuffed his hands tightly behind his back, and ignored Berry's pleas to get him some sugar. Another officer said, "I've seen a lot of people with sugar diabetes that never acted like this. Ain't nothing wrong with the M.F. but drunk. Lock the S.B. up."
During the police encounter, Graham suffered a broken foot, cuts on his wrists, a bruised forehead, and an injured shoulder. He filed a federal lawsuit against Officer Connor and other officers and alleged that the officers' use of force during the investigative stop had been excessive and violated Graham's civil rights.
The outcome of the case was the creation of an "objective reasonableness test" in examining an officer's actions. That test, over time via case law, would evolve to something that could be summed up as "given the facts known at the time, would a similarly trained and experienced officer respond in a similar fashion."
Decision
The Supreme Court held that determining the "reasonableness" of a seizure "requires a careful balancing of the nature and quality of the intrusion on the individual's Fourth Amendment interests against the countervailing governmental interests at stake." It acknowledged, "Our Fourth Amendment jurisprudence has long recognized that the right to make an arrest or investigatory stop necessarily carries with it the right to use some degree of physical coercion or threat thereof to effect it." "Because the test of reasonableness under the Fourth Amendment is not capable of precise definition or mechanical application," it then noted, however, the test's "proper application requires careful attention to the facts and circumstances of each particular case.
The Court rejected the notion that the judiciary could use the Due Process Clause, instead of the Fourth Amendment, in analyzing an excessive force claim: "Because the Fourth Amendment provides an explicit textual source of constitutional protection against this sort of physically intrusive governmental conduct, that Amendment, not the more generalized notion of 'substantive due process', must be the guide for analyzing these claims."
The Court then explained, "As in other Fourth Amendment contexts... the "reasonableness" inquiry in an excessive force case is an objective one: the question is whether the officers' actions are 'objectively reasonable' in light of the facts and circumstances confronting them, without regard to their underlying intent or motivation." The Court also cautioned, "The "reasonableness" of a particular use of force must be judged from the perspective of a reasonable officer on the scene, rather than with the 20/20 vision of hindsight."
The Court then outlined a non-exhaustive list of factors to determine when an officer's use of force is objectively reasonable: "the severity of the crime at issue," "whether the suspect poses an immediate threat to the safety of the officers or others," and "whether he is actively resisting arrest or attempting to evade arrest by flightm"
Having established the proper framework for excessive force claims, the Court explained that the Court of Appeals had applied a test that focused on an officer's subjective motivations, rather than on whether he had used an objectively unreasonable amount of force. The Court then reversed the Court of Appeals' judgement and remanded the case for reconsideration that used the proper Fourth Amendment standard.
 Impact 
Many high-profile cases of alleged use of excessive force by a law enforcement officer have been decided based on the framework set out by Graham v. Connor, including those in which a civilian was killed by an officer: shooting of Michael Brown, shooting of Jonathan Ferrell, shooting of John Crawford III, shooting of Samuel DuBose, shooting of Jamar Clark, shooting of Keith Lamont Scott, shooting of Terence Crutcher, shooting of Alton Sterling, shooting of Philando Castile. In most of those cases, the officer's actions were deemed to pass the reasonableness test. Graham v. Connorwas also repeatedly cited by both the prosecution and defense in State v. Chauvin regarding the murder of George Floyd, including by University of South Carolina professor Seth Stoughton, who compiled a 100-page report on the case as a prosecution expert.
Some media praise the precedent set by Graham v. Connor for enforcing police officers' rights to perform their duties without suffering injury and recognizing the dangers inherent to their work. Critics view the framework that it created as unjust based on the large number of high-profile acquittals that it has allowed by not permitting hindsight knowledge to be considered in a case for and allowing for racial biases to weigh on the verdict.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 490
 Tennessee v. Garner
 Mullenix v. Luna
 Davis v. City of Las Vegas
 References 
 Further reading 
 Graham v. Connor and objective reasonableness standard, available at The Lex-Warrier: Online Law Journal, ISSN (O): 2319-8338
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1989 in United States case law
Category:Law enforcement use of force
"""

From "Graham v. Florida" ==> """
Graham v. Florida, 560 U.S. 48 (2010), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States holding that juvenile offenders cannot be sentenced to life imprisonment without parole for non-homicide offenses... 
In June 2012, in the related Miller v. Alabama, the Court ruled that mandatory sentences for life without parole for juvenile offenders, even in cases of murder, was cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
 The case 
Terrance Jamar Graham (born January 6, 1987), along with two accomplices, attempted to rob a barbecue restaurant in Jacksonville, Florida in July 2003. Aged 16 at the time, Graham was arrested for the robbery attempt and was charged as an adult for armed burglary with assault and battery, as well as attempted armed robbery. The first charge was a first-degree felony that is punishable by life. He pleaded guilty and his plea was accepted.
Six months later, on December 2, 2004, Graham was arrested again for home invasion robbery. Though Graham denied involvement, he acknowledged that he was in violation of his plea agreement. In 2006, the presiding judge sentenced Graham to life in prison. Because Florida abolished parole, it became effectively a life sentence without parole..
 Majority opinion 
Justice Kennedy delivered the opinion of the Court:
 Implications 
According to a May 2010 Catholic News Service article, thirty-seven states, the District of Columbia, and the federal government have statutes that allow for a possible sentence of life in prison without parole for non-homicide crimes. However, only some of those jurisdictions have persons serving those sentences for non-homicide crimes, and most of those are adults. According to Justice Anthony M. Kennedy in May 2010, 129 people are serving non-parole life sentences for non-homicide crimes which they committed as juveniles, 77 in Florida and the rest held in 10 different states.
The ruling was declared retroactive to cases on collateral review as a "new rule of substantive constitutional law" by the 7th Judicial District Court in Scott County, Iowa, in the case of State v. Jason Means. Means was aged 17 when he was involved in a 1993 kidnapping and homicide. Following a jury trial, Means was convicted of kidnapping and second degree murder. Thereafter, Means was sentenced to life without parole on the kidnapping charge and 90 years consecutive on the second-degree murder and other related charges.
Means challenged his life sentence under Iowa Rule of Criminal Procedure 2.24(5) with the assistance of attorney Angela Fritz Reyes. On September 30, 2010, the district court issued an opinion declaring Graham retroactive. The court re-sentenced Means in absentia to life imprisonment and severed the non-parole portion of Iowa law, thereby granting Means the opportunity for parole.
In at least two cases, state high courts have ruled that life without parole is still appropriate for homicides, no matter what age the defendant. On December 21, 2010, the Supreme Court of Missouri delivered its opinion in the case of State v. Anthony Andrews, affirming a sentence of life imprisonment without parole in a case in which the defendant, Andrews, was a juvenile convicted of first-degree murder. The Wisconsin Supreme Court on May 20, 2011, ruled similarly in State v. Omer Ninham, in a case in which Ninham was convicted as an adult of intentional homicide for a crime committed at the age of 14.
Further developments
In February 2012, Terrance Jamar Graham was re-sentenced by the original trial judge to a 25-year sentence and set to be released on August 16, 2025.
In March 2012, the Court heard arguments in the case of Miller v. Alabama, concerning the constitutionality of mandatory life without parole sentences for juvenile offenders in cases including murder. The Court issued its ruling on June 25, 2012, striking down the mandatory sentences as cruel and unusual punishments in violation of the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
Graham is currently incarcerated in the Charlotte Correctional Institution.
References
Further reading
.
.
.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:Life imprisonment
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause case law
Category:United States children's rights case law
"""

From "Graham v. John Deere Co." ==> """
Graham v. John Deere Co., 383 U.S. 1 (1966), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court clarified the nonobviousness requirement in United States patent law,. set forth 14 years earlier in Patent Act of 1952 and codified as  35 U.S.C. § 103..
Although the Court confirmed that non-obviousness is a question of law, it held that §103 required a determination of the following questions of fact to resolve the issue of obviousness:
 Scope and content of the prior art
 Differences between the claimed invention and the prior art 
 Level of ordinary skill in the art
In addition, the Court mentioned "secondary considerations" which could serve as evidence of nonobviousness. These are known as "Graham's factors":
 Commercial success
 Long felt but unsolved needs
 Failure of others
 Unexpected results
The Court stated, that the purpose of these factors is to "guard against slipping into use of hindsight" when making a determination of obviousness.
The SCOTUS also proposed the inducement standard, suggesting that patent law's nonobviousness doctrine is meant to restrict the award of patents to only "those inventions which would not be disclosed or devised but for the inducement of a patent." Although, the Graham's factors have been cited numerous times by patent examiners and courts, the inducement standard has been largely ignored. Abramowicz, M. and J. F. Duffy (2011). "The Inducement Standard of Patentability." Yale Law Journal 120(7): 1590-1680. http://www.jstor.org/stable/41149576;
Despite providing these useful guidelines, the Court also recognized that these questions would likely need to be answered on a case-by-case basis, first by the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), then by the courts. The "non-obviousness criteria" laid out in Graham, were complimented in 2007 by "obviousness criteria" in another another US Supreme Court case (see KSR v. Teleflex).
Facts and procedural history
The case was actually a set of consolidated appeals of two cases, originating in the same court and dealing with similar issues.  The named petitioner, William T. Graham, had sued the John Deere Co. for patent infringement.  The invention in question was a combination of old mechanical elements:   a device designed to absorb shock from the shanks of chisel plows as they plow through rocky soil and thus to prevent damage to the plow.  Graham sought to solve this problem by attaching the plow shanks to spring clamps, to allow them to flex freely underneath the frame of the plow.  He applied for a patent on this clamp, and in 1950, obtained   (referred to by the Court as the '811 patent).  Shortly thereafter, he made some improvements to the clamp design by placing the hinge plate beneath the plow shank rather than above it, in order to minimize the outward motion of the shank away from the plate.  He applied for a patent on this improvement, which was granted in 1953 as  (referred to by the court as the '798 patent).  While Graham's patent had been upheld in a previous case before the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit reversed the opinion of the United States District Court for the Western District of Missouri and held that the patent was invalid and that the John Deere Co. had not infringed upon it.
The other two actions which were consolidated with the Graham case, (No. 37, Calmar, Inc. v. Cook Chemical Co., and No. 43, Colgate-Palmolive Co. v. Cook Chemical Co.) were both declaratory judgment actions filed contemporaneously against Cook Chemical Company.  Calmar was a producer of “hold-down” sprayers for bottles of chemicals such as insecticides, and Colgate-Palmolive was a purchaser of these sprayers.  Inventor Baxter I. Scoggin, Jr. had assigned his patent for sprayer design to Cook Chemical Co.  Calmar and Colgate-Palmolive sought a declaration of invalidity and non-infringement of the patent, and Cook Chemical Co. sought to maintain an action for infringement.  The validity of the patent was sustained by the District Court, and the Eighth Circuit affirmed.
Decision
Background as to the patent law in the U.S.
Justice Clark, writing for the majority, first briefly explained the history and policy behind U.S. patent law, beginning with the Patent Act of 1790.  He explained that U.S. patent law was originated by Thomas Jefferson, who based his ideas on patent law on the utilitarian economic concern of promoting technological innovation rather than protecting inventors’ moral rights to their discoveries.  This was largely because Jefferson was quite suspicious of monopolies.  This legal theory was embodied in the words of the Constitution itself, in the words of the Patents and Copyright Clause (Art. I, § 8, cl. 8).  Thus, Jefferson intended that the limited monopoly granted by a patent was only to be permitted in order to "promote the progress of science", rather than for small details and obvious improvements.
The Patent Act of 1952
Prior to the Patent Act of 1952, the Congress required only novelty and utility for issuance of patent, and never created any statutory requirement of nonobviousness.  However, the U.S. Supreme Court, in the case of Hotchkiss v. Greenwood,. invalidated a patent on the grounds that it involved only a substitution of materials rather than any real innovation.  The Hotchkiss court effectively added the requirement of nonobviousness, and it had been left to the judiciary to determine whether the patent involved non-obvious invention.  Following that case, the Supreme Court issued myriad decisions with an evolving and unpredictable standard for obviousness.  It was not until the Congress enacted the Patent Act of 1952 that the test was to be given with some degree of predictability.
The Patent Act of 1952 added 35 U.S.C. § 103, which effectively codified nonobviousness as a requirement to show that an idea is suitable for patent protection.  The section essentially requires a comparison of the subject matter sought to be patented and the prior art, to determine whether or not the subject matter of the patent as a whole would have been obvious, at the time of the invention, to a person having ordinary skill in the art.  Clark held that the Congress, in passing the Act, intended to codify and clarify the common law surrounding the Patent Act by making explicit the requirement of nonobviousness.
Application of the law to the facts
Clark then examined the prosecution history and prior art of both sets of patents involved in the case.  In the Graham case, the '798 patent was originally rejected by the patent examiner as being insufficiently distinguished from the previous '811 patent.  The only two claims which differed between the two patents were (1) the stirrup and the bolted connection of the shank to the hinge plate do not appear in '811; and (2) the position of the shank is reversed, being placed in patent '811 above the hinge plate, sandwiched between it and the upper plate.  One argument which Graham raised before the court, but had not raised before the USPTO, was that in the new '798 design, the flexing of the plow shank was limited to the points between the spring clamp and the tip of the plow shank, absorbing the shock of hard objects on the ground more efficiently.  The court rejected this argument and invalidated the '798 patent for two reasons:  first, Graham had not raised this “flexing” argument before the USPTO, and second, the parts in the '798 patent served the same purposes as those in the prior art.
In the matters concerning Cook Chemical, Scoggin, a corporate officer at Cook, had originally based his design on Calmar's previous unpatented design, but later claimed that the integration of the sprayer and container solved the problem of external leakage during assembly and shipping of insecticide products.  The district court held that Scoggin's sprayer was not obvious because even though its individual elements were not novel, nothing in the prior art would have suggested the combination of elements.  After the initial rejection of his patent, Scoggin drafted claims more carefully to distinguish the prior art, limiting new claims to the use of a rib seal, rather than a washer or gasket, to maintain a seal, as well as the existence of a small space between the overcap and the sprayer.  Clark held that because Scoggin narrowed his claims to meet the limitations requested by the patent examiner, Cook Chemical could not now claim broader subject matter (see Prosecution history estoppel).  Clark further held that the differences between Scoggin's design and the prior art were simply too minor and non-technical to maintain the validity of Cook's patent.
A companion case, United States v. Adams, was argued the same day and - in contrast to the holding in Graham v. Deere - held that non-obviousness was satisfied.
Graham establish practical criteria of determining of what patent claims are non-obvious. Another SCOTUS case, that followed in 2007, KSR_International_Co._v._Teleflex_Inc., clarified what is obvious.
 Notes 
External links
 US Patent No. 2,493,811
 US Patent No. 2,627,798
Category:John Deere
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States patent case law
Category:1966 in United States case law
"""

From "Graham v. Richardson" ==> """
Graham v. Richardson, 403 U.S. 365 (1971), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court determined that state restrictions on welfare benefits for legal aliens but not for citizens violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The Court invalidated an Arizona law that required citizenship or 15 years of residence to receive welfare benefits. The 9–0 decision was written by Harry A. Blackmun..
The state argued that rational basis review should apply, which would require the non-citizen to prove that the law served no conceivable legitimate state interest, or alternatively that the law was not rationally related to the government's purpose. However, the court applied the strict scrutiny standard, holding, "Aliens as a class are a prime example of a 'discrete and insular' minority for whom such heightened judicial solicitude is appropriate."Graham, 403 U.S. at 372.
References
External links
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Granholm v. Heald" ==> """
Granholm v. Heald, 544 U.S. 460 (2005), was a court case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States in a 5–4 decision that ruled that laws in New York and Michigan that permitted in-state wineries to ship wine directly to consumers but prohibited out-of-state wineries from doing the same were unconstitutional. The case was unusual because the arguments centered on the rarely-invoked Twenty-First Amendment to the Constitution, ratified in 1933, which ended Prohibition in the United States.
Background
Granholm v. Heald was the conclusion of an eight-year fight by small wineries against such laws. Although direct shipments to consumers constituted only about 2% of wine sales in the United States (whose total sales were $21.6 billion in 2003), direct sales were thought to be an opportunity for growth. Laws varied from state to state, but typically, a winery could distribute wine only by selling it to a wholesaler in the state. Retailers were then required to purchase from the wholesalers. That made the large wholesalers very powerful in the wine industry since if wholesalers in New York decided not to purchase wine from a particular winery, that winery would be completely shut out of the New York market.
Arguments
The court case, which was a consolidation of two separate lawsuits, pitted the Dormant Commerce Clause doctrine, inferred from the Constitution's Article I, against Section 2 of the Twenty-First Amendment, which reads:
The transportation or importation into any State, Territory, or possession of the United States for delivery or use therein of intoxicating liquors, in violation of the laws thereof, is hereby prohibited.
The Commerce Clause of Article 1 of the Constitution grants Congress the power:
To regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States, and with the Indian Tribes.
In turn, the Dormant Commerce Clause (DCC) has been inferred from the Commerce Clause. The DCC is a doctrine that had evolved over many decisions of the US Supreme Court that states do not have the power to enact anticompetitive laws that discriminate against sellers in other states without the permission of Congress.
Eleanor Heald, a wine collector, and eleven other plaintiffs, argued that Michigan's Liquor Control Code violated the DCC by making it a misdemeanor for an out-of-state winery to ship wine directly to a Michigan resident but did not prohibit direct shipping by in-state wineries. The same argument was made in a separate case against the government of New York State by Juanita Swedenburg and other owners of out-of-state wineries.
In both cases, the state governments of Michigan and New York had argued that Section 2 of the Twenty-First Amendment granted them carte blanche to regulate liquor. One of their justifications for the laws was that by regulating out-of-state wineries that way, they might be able to hinder the shipment of alcohol to underage minors, which would serve a valid state purpose.
The government of New York had won in the federal Second Circuit Court, and the government of Michigan had lost in the Sixth Circuit. The cases were consolidated and heard together by the US Supreme Court.
In a 5–4 decision, the Supreme Court decided the states' laws were unconstitutional. The context of the Twenty-First Amendment was to return to the status quo that had existed before Prohibition. The Court made it clear that states have the power to regulate alcohol however they wished, including banning alcoholic beverages entirely within the state. Before Prohibition, the states did not have the power to violate the Dormant Commerce Clause, and the Twenty-First Amendment was not intended to grant them that power.
Aftermath
Michigan's liquor control board announced that it would recommend to the state government to ban all direct wine sales to consumers, which would join the 15 other states that currently ban all such sales.
New York Governor George Pataki unveiled a bill that would limit each winery's direct sales to consumers to two cases per month per consumer. As a Wall Street Journal editorial noted, two cases per month is a relatively large amount of wine for a consumer, but the measure was intended to reduce competition for New York alcohol distributors.  New York State enacted a bill in 2006 that allows direct shipment of wine to consumers on a reciprocal basis. New York residents can purchase wine that is shipped from a state that grants New York wineries the same rights.
Since the ruling, many more states have allowed direct shipping from wineries. According to the Wine Institute, a public policy advocacy association of California wineries, 37 states permitted at least some form of direct shipping from wineries to consumers, as of July 2010. Different states have enacted different regulations. An editorial article on the commercial wine selling web site Appellation America states that many of the conditions in those regulations are so complex or so expensive that they discourage wineries from complying.
In March 2011, a bill was introduced in the US House of Representatives that would explicitly allow states to regulate alcohol products from outside of the state differently from those produced within the state.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 544
List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Twenty-first Amendment to the United States Constitution
References
External links
Web page on the case, including evidence and briefs, by Alex Tanford, an attorney involved in the litigation
Article  on the case (while it was still underway) from the Medill School of Journalism
Law Journal article  published prior to the Supreme Court argument
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Twenty-first Amendment case law
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
Category:Alcohol law in the United States
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Michigan
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Michigan wine
Category:New York (state) wine
"""

From "Gratz v. Bollinger" ==> """
Gratz v. Bollinger, 539 U.S. 244 (2003), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding the University of Michigan undergraduate affirmative action admissions policy. In a 6–3 decision announced on June 23, 2003, Chief Justice Rehnquist, writing for the Court, ruled the University's point system's "predetermined point allocations" that awarded 20 points towards admission to underrepresented minorities "ensures that the diversity contributions of applicants cannot be individually assessed" and was therefore unconstitutional..
Case
The University of Michigan used a 150-point scale to rank applicants, with 100 points needed to guarantee admission. The University gave underrepresented ethnic groups, including African-Americans, Hispanics, and Native Americans, an automatic 20-point bonus towards their score, while a perfect SAT score was worth 12 points.
The petitioners, Jennifer Gratz and Patrick Hamacher, both residents of Michigan, applied for admission to the University of Michigan's College of Literature, Science, and the Arts (LSA). Gratz applied for admission in the fall of 1995 and Hamacher in the fall of 1997.  Both were subsequently denied admission to the university. Gratz and Hamacher were contacted by the Center for Individual Rights, which filed a lawsuit on their behalf in October 1997. The case was filed in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan against the University of Michigan, the College of LSA, James Duderstadt, and Lee Bollinger. Duderstadt was president of the university while Gratz's application was under consideration, and Bollinger while Hamacher's was under consideration. Their class-action lawsuit alleged "violations and threatened violations of the rights of the plaintiffs and the class they represent to equal protection of the laws under the Fourteenth Amendment... and for racial discrimination."
Like Grutter, the case was heard in District Court, appealed to the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals, and asked to be heard before the Supreme Court.
U.S. Supreme Court consideration
Issues of standing
It has been argued by some that Jennifer Gratz lacked legal standing to bring this action. Gratz applied in 1995, three years before the University of Michigan adopted its points system. Gratz could not claim injury as a result of the points system, and thus, under traditional legal rules, Gratz lacked standing. Gratz chose not to attend the University of Michigan by declining the university's offer to be placed on a waiting list. Every Michigan student who agreed to go onto the waiting list in the spring of 1995 was admitted to the University of Michigan for the Fall 1995 semester. However, Gratz argues that she did fill out the paperwork for said waiting list, but the University claims it got lost.
Opinion of the court
Chief Justice Rehnquist delivered the opinion of the court. The court's majority found that Gratz and co-plaintiff Hamacher had standing to seek declaratory and injunctive relief, relying on Northeastern Fla. Chapter, Associated Gen. Contractors of America v. Jacksonville, 508 U.S. 656 (1993). Here the "injury in fact" necessary to establish standing in the case was the denial of equal treatment resulting from the imposition of the barrier, and not in the ultimate inability to obtain the benefit.
The court held that because the university’s use of race in its current freshman admissions policy was not narrowly tailored to achieve the respondents' asserted interest in diversity, the policy violated the Equal Protection Clause.
Dissent
Justices Stevens, Souter, and Ginsburg dissented. Ginsburg wrote that "government decisionmakers may properly distinguish between policies of exclusion and inclusion...Actions designed to burden groups long denied full citizenship stature are not sensibly ranked with measures taken to hasten the day when entrenched discrimination and its after effects have been extirpated."
See also
 Grutter v. Bollinger (2003)
List of class action lawsuits
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 539
References
Further reading
External links
 Transcript of April 1, 2003 Supreme Court arguments (PDF format)
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States affirmative action case law
Category:2003 in United States case law
Category:Class action lawsuits
Category:University of Michigan
Category:University and college admissions in the United States
Category:Legal history of Michigan
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Gravel v. United States" ==> """
Gravel v. United States, 408 U.S. 606 (1972), was a case regarding the protections offered by the Speech or Debate Clause of the United States Constitution. In the case, the Supreme Court of the United States held that the privileges and immunities of the Constitution's Speech or Debate Clause enjoyed by members of Congress also extend to Congressional aides, but not to activity outside the legislative process..
History
On Tuesday, June 15, 1971, Senator Mike Gravel (D-Alaska) received a copy of the Pentagon Papers from Ben Bagdikian, an editor at The Washington Post."How the Pentagon Papers Came to be Published by the Beacon Press: A Remarkable Story Told by Whistleblower Daniel Ellsberg, Dem Presidential Candidate Mike Gravel and Unitarian Leader Robert West." Democracy Now. July 2, 2007. Accessed June 14, 2008. Over the next several days, Gravel (who was dyslexic) was assisted by his congressional office staff in reading and analyzing the report. Worried his home might be raided by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Gravel smuggled the report (which filled two large suitcases) into his congressional office, which was then guarded by disabled Vietnam veterans.
On the evening of June 29, 1971, Gravel attempted to read the Pentagon Papers into the Congressional Record."Preface." In The Pentagon Papers: The Defense Department History of United States Decisionmaking on Vietnam. Vol. 1.  Senator Gravel Edition. Boston: Beacon Press, 1971. A lack of a quorum, however, prevented the Senate from convening. As chair of the Senate Subcommittee on Public Buildings and Grounds, Gravel convened a meeting of the subcommittee and spent an hour reading part of the Pentagon Papers into the record. Prevented by his dyslexia from continuing, Gravel had the remainder of the Pentagon Papers entered into the record.
Gravel subsequently arranged to have the Pentagon Papers published by a private publisher. The publisher was Beacon Press, a non-profit book publisher owned by the Unitarian Universalist Association.
A federal grand jury was subsequently empaneled to investigate possible violations of federal law in the release of the report.  Leonard Rodberg, a Gravel aide, was subpoenaed to testify about his role in obtaining and arranging for publication of the Pentagon Papers. Senator Gravel intervened and asked a court to quash the subpoena, contending that forcing Rodberg to testify would violate the Speech or Debate Clause of the Constitution.Gravel, 408 U.S. at 608–609.
A district court refused to grant the motion to quash but did agree to proscribe certain questions. The trial court also held that publication of the Pentagon Papers by a private press was not protected by the Speech or Debate Clause. The Court of Appeals affirmed the district court's ruling (although it modified the categories of barred questions). The United States appealed the barring of questions, and Senator Gravel appealed the ruling regarding publication.  The United States Supreme Court granted certiorari.Gravel v. United States, .
Majority holding
In a 5–4 ruling, the Supreme Court held that the privileges of the Constitution's Speech or Debate Clause enjoyed by members of Congress also extend to Congressional aides. Rejecting the reasoning of the court of appeals and substituting its own, the court declared that "the privilege available to the aide is confined to those services that would be immune legislative conduct if performed by the Senator himself."Gravel, 408 U.S. at 622, 627. However, the Court refused to protect congressional aides from prosecution for criminal conduct, or from testifying at trials or grand jury proceedings involving third party crimes.Gravel, 408 U.S. at 622. The Supreme Court also threw out the lower courts' order permitting some questions and barring others, concluding that if the testimony is privileged then the privilege is absolute.Gravel, 408 U.S. at 627–629.
However, the Court upheld the district court's ruling regarding private publication. "[Private] publication by Senator Gravel through the cooperation of Beacon Press was in no way essential to the deliberations of the Senate; nor does questioning as to private publication threaten the integrity or independence of the Senate by impermissibly exposing its deliberations to executive influence."Gravel, 408 U.S. at 625.
Dissents
Associate Justice Potter Stewart dissented in part, concluding that the Court had too narrowly construed the protections granted by the Speech or Debate Clause.  Justice Stewart would have extended the protections of the clause to cover testimony before a grand jury about preparing for legislative acts as well.Gravel, 408 U.S. at 629.
In his dissent, Associate Justice William O. Douglas argued that the private publication was an adjunct of speech or debate function of Senator Gravel, and was therefore protected speech.  He further condemned politicians for excessive secrecy and the media for largely failing to challenge it:  
In his dissent, Associate Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. disagreed with the majority's narrow construction of the Speech or Debate Clause, and defined a much broader conception of the right.  Brennan was joined by Justices Douglas and Marshall.
Significance
The case is considered a landmark for not only reaffirming the constitutional protections offered by the Speech or Debate Clause, but for narrowing it as well.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 408
United States v. Brewster, a related case involving Senator Daniel Brewster
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States grand jury case law
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:Speech or Debate Clause case law
"""

From "Graver Tank & Manufacturing Co. v. Linde Air Products Co." ==> """
Graver Tank & Manufacturing Co. v. Linde Air Products Co., 339 U.S. 605 (1950), was an important United States Supreme Court decision in the area of patent law, establishing the propriety of the doctrine of equivalents, and explaining how and when it was to be used..
Facts
The plaintiff Linde Air Products Co. owned a patent for an electric welding process, and sued defendants including the Graver company for infringing the patent. The defendants asserted that they were not infringing the patent because the patented welding process used a welding composition made of alkaline earth metal silicate and calcium fluoride (usually expressed as silicates of calcium and magnesium), while the purported infringers substituted a similar element, manganese, for the patentee's magnesium. The United States district court found infringement, and the Court of Appeals affirmed the infringement claim.
Issue
The Supreme Court agreed to review the case, limited to the question of whether the substitution of a similar material not claimed in the patent itself would save the defendants from being held liable for infringements.
Result
The Court, in an opinion written by Justice Robert Jackson, raised the doctrine of equivalents. It noted that if another party could use a process exactly the same as one that is patented, but escape infringement by making some obvious substitution of materials, it would deprive the patentee of the exclusive control meant to come with a patent. This would undermine the profitability of the patent, which would go against the policy of encouraging inventors to invent by giving the opportunity to profit from the labor of invention.
The Court also outlined how the doctrine should be used, noting that "what constitutes equivalency must be determined against the context of the patent, the prior art, and the particular circumstances of the case." The Court laid out two possible tests to determine equivalency.
Under the first of these (which has since come to be known as the "triple identity" test), something is deemed equivalent if:
It performs substantially the same function
in substantially the same way
to obtain the same result. 
Under the second test, something is deemed equivalent if there is only an "insubstantial change" between each of the features of the accused device or process and the patent claim.  
In this case, the Court gave particular weight to the determination of "whether persons reasonably skilled in the art would have known of the interchangeability of an ingredient not contained in the patent with one that was." Finding that the substitution of magnesium for manganese was both obvious to anyone working in the field, and was an insubstantial change, the Court upheld the finding of patent infringement.
Dissent
Justice Hugo Black dissented, joined by Justice Douglas. They contended that it is the responsibility of the person seeking the patent to claim everything that the patent covers, and noted that processes exist for a patent to be amended. They asserted that it was the responsibility of the Patent Office to determine the scope of the invention, and it was therefore an intrusion for courts to be expanding the scope of the patent beyond what the Patent Office has determined.
Later developments
The employment of this doctrine raised a great deal of controversy, as many legal commentators thought that it allowed patentees to protect more than they had specifically requested, and indeed more than they may have been permitted to request in a patent claim. The doctrine was again questioned by the Supreme Court in Warner-Jenkinson Company, Inc. v. Hilton Davis Chemical Co.,. which unanimously reaffirmed it, although with some refinements.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 339
References
External links
Category:Linde plc
Category:1950 in United States case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:Welding
"""

From "Graver v. Faurot" ==> """
Graver v. Faurot, (162 U.S. 435), is a case decided in 1896 by the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit on the issues of res judicata and fraud on the court. The Seventh Circuit had heard the case the preceding year but, like the district court that had previously heard it, was unable to decide which of two recent U.S. Supreme Court cases was controlling. After the Supreme Court denied certiorari to resolve the issue, on procedural grounds, the Seventh Circuit resolved the case itself.
The case had arisen from an 1889 investment made by Graver in a company recommended by Faurot, a banker he was acquainted with. Represented to Graver as promising, the company was actually worthless. After learning this, he suspected Faurot and the company's owner, Bailey, of having concealed the company's true condition from him and sued the two in federal court for securities fraud. Both defendants denied any scheme when questioned under oath, and Graver and the two agreed to dismiss the case. Three years later, when Faurot's bank failed, documents introduced in the bankruptcy proceedings and on file with the federal government revealed not only that both he and Bailey knew the stock's true value but that Faurot had had an interest in the company and had concluded an agreement with Bailey to divide the proceeds of Graver's purchase between them. Graver filed a new action in federal court seeking, as equitable relief, to have the previous dismissal set aside since it had been obtained through perjured testimony.
Two recent decisions of the Supreme Court, United States v. Throckmorton and Marshall v. Holmes, addressed the relevant question of whether Graver could reopen the suit, but with contrary interpretations. The district judge said that while the facts of the case showed that Graver had been defrauded he could not distinguish the two cases, and certified the case to the Seventh Circuit, which in turn sought guidance from the Supreme Court. In a unanimous opinion written by Chief Justice Melville Fuller, the Court denied certiorari, on the grounds that the appellate court had effectively certified the entire case to it, which the Judiciary Act of 1891 forbade them from accepting without a federal question to decide. Even though there was such a question, the Court preferred not to answer it without deciding a case whose facts might dictate a contrary conclusion. So later that year the Seventh Circuit held for Graver that the perjury constituted extrinsic fraud which had prevented him from having his case fairly heard and decided.
Since Graver the Supreme Court has considered some other cases where the factual question of whether a litigant's deception and misbehavior has constituted intrinsic fraud which under Throckmorton cannot be used as a basis for relief, cases in which observers hoped it would resolve the conflict they saw with Marshall, which suggested a court could grant relief from a prior judgement allegedly obtained by fraud if it was unconscionable not to. It has never reconsidered the question offered in Graver of which case controls. Lower federal, and state, courts that have done so have pointed to Graver as the reason they felt compelled to.
Background
Courts of equity, empowered to give orders as relief rather than award monetary judgements as courts of law do, in England and later the U.S., had long dealt with cases where unsuccessful litigants seeking to negate a judgement against them at law had come before alleged perjury or forgery by the other party during the original action, often supported by just the testimony of one witness. Since hearing these cases could easily ensure that the litigation continued for years, courts began requiring minimum standards to hear them. "New matter may in some cases be ground for relief," wrote Lord Keeper Nathan Wright in Tovey v. Young, a 1702 English case, "but it must not be what was tried before; nor, when it consists in swearing only, will I ever grant a new trial, unless it appears by deeds, or writing, or that a witness on whose testimony the verdict was given was convicted of perjury, or the jury attainted." 
In 1813 the U.S. Supreme Court decided Marine Insurance Co. v. Hodgson, a case where the petitioner appealed a federal court's finding in favor of the respondent, who they alleged had submitted documentation that overstated the value of a ship and her cargo, leading the insurer to pay out a much larger claim than it should properly have. Chief Justice John Marshall wrote for a unanimous Court that while a court of equity could consider an application for relief where a litigant alleged unconscionable conduct on an opposing party's part, "[o]n the other hand it may with equal safety be laid down as a general rule that a defence cannot be set up in equity which has been fully and fairly tried at law, although it may be the opinion of that Court that the defence ought to have been sustained at law." Since the insurer had decided to accept a certificate of the vessel's value from its captain even though Hodgson would not vouch for its accuracy, the Court held that they had lost their opportunity to make a case for fraud and seek an injunction against enforcement of the judgement against them.
United States v. Throckmorton
In 1878 the Supreme Court heard United States v. Throckmorton, in which the federal government appealed a California lower court decision that left undisturbed the government's acceptance of a settler's 1830s Mexican land claim two decades earlier. The government had later learned that a document filed with the claim had been falsely backdated and affidavits attesting to the document being signed on the supposed date were in fact perjured. It unanimously affirmed the lower court.
Justice Samuel Freeman Miller balanced two principles in his opinion. On the one hand, while he agreed that "there is no question of the general doctrine that fraud vitiates the most solemn contracts, documents, and even judgments", it became more difficult to prove a past fraud over time. It was also equally important that, per the legal Latin maxim interest rei publicae, ut sit finis litium, litigation not be allowed to continue indefinitely and that no one be punished or tried twice for the same offense.Throckmorton, at 64–69
Miller thus distinguished two types of fraud on the court for purposes of deciding whether equitable relief could be granted, if the fraud were proven, where the case was otherwise beyond reopening. Fraud such as that in the instant case, which "was founded on a fraudulent instrument, or perjured evidence, or for any matter which was actually presented and considered in the judgment assailed" (subsequently called intrinsic fraud) would not be eligible for relief. But in cases where the fraud was "extrinsic", where it never touched any of the evidence presented at trial, or where "there has never been a real contest in the trial or hearing of the case" because the fraud prevented the injured party from making a full and fair presentation, then courts could grant relief, Miller wrote.
Marshall v. Holmes
Thirteen years after Throckmorton, the Court heard Marshall v. Holmes, another case where past fraud on the court had been uncovered and the defeated litigant sought equitable relief from the judgement. In 1887, petitioner Sarah Marshall, a New York woman who owned a large Louisiana plantation, had been sued in state court by Mayer, a supplier, along with her tenants for nonpayment. Since all the cases Mayer brought presented the same issues, the parties agreed to save time and money by trying them singly. According to a document purportedly signed by Marshall that Mayer presented at trial in her absence, their defaults entitled him to payment apportioned between cash and raw cotton at the equivalent market value; based on this, the court held in his favor.
With an appeal pending, Marshall saw the document Mayer claimed she had signed for the first time and recognized it as a forgery. The Louisiana Supreme Court declined to hear the appeal on the grounds that none of the cases presented a large enough amount in controversy and the law did not allow it to aggregate the cases. Marshall then sought equitable relief from the original judgement in federal court for the Southern District of New York, but the Louisiana state court refused to follow the removal order, so she appealed to the Supreme Court.
Again the Court was unanimous. After establishing that Marshall's case was properly before a federal court in diversity jurisdiction, and that the aggregate value of the judgement was enough to justify a federal case, Justice John Marshall Harlan's opinion considered whether she was entitled to relief. Observing that, in the instant case, "the judgments in question would not have been rendered against Mrs. Marshall but for the use in evidence of the letter alleged to be forged",Marshall, at 596 he found the case to be among those that Hodgson allowed courts to grant relief in, quoting from that decision at some length. Harlan appended to the quotation other cases that supported the finding, including Throckmorton and later distinguished the case further from two the respondents had relied on, on the grounds that in those cases the party seeking relief could have found evidence of the fraud at trial, whereas Marshall had not known of the forged letter until after the trial.Marshall, at 600
Underlying dispute
In 1889 Graver, an Illinois man who had been enticed by Faurot, an Ohio banker he had deposited money with, to buy stock at an apparent discount; it was actually worthless. He came to believe his banker had an interest in the company and had thus benefited materially from the fraudulent sale, and filed suit in state court. Before trial, Graver deposed both Faurot and Bailey, the company owner, asking them both under oath about details of the alleged scheme. They denied it, and with no evidence of the alleged fraud, the judge dismissed the case., hereafter Graver I, hereafter Graver II
Three years later, the bank failed, and from records disclosed during the bankruptcy proceedings, including records filed with the federal government two years prior to the transaction, Graver was able to confirm his original suspicions of fraud. Faurot had represented himself as a disinterested party when Graver bought the stock, but he actually had owned a portion of the company, and he and Bailey had made a written agreement to divide the profits from the sale between them. With this evidence in hand, Graver filed suit in federal court for the Northern District of Illinois, seeking equitable relief and a chance to retry the case.
District court
thumb|right|Judge James Graham Jenkins
Judge James Graham Jenkins found Graver's petition to be an original suit that he could consider. "Assuming the facts to be as stated in this bill, I have been impressed with the conviction that the complainant has been grievously defrauded", he wrote in his 1894 decision. But he found himself conflicted between Throckmorton and Marshall as to which case controlled and thus whether he could grant Graver relief:Graver I, at 242–244
Jenkins chose to resolve that question by procedurally ruling for the defendants and suggesting the problem might be resolved on appeal.Graver I, 245–246 
Supreme Court
The Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals decided to certify the question to the Supreme Court before attempting to decide the case. In 1896 the Court unanimously declined. As part of the record, the Seventh Circuit had submitted the entire case, which, Chief Justice Melville Fuller wrote, put the Supreme Court in a difficult position. The Judiciary Act of 1891 forbid the appellate circuits from submitting an entire case to the Court without a specific question or questions to resolve. And while that was not technically the case with Graver, as a practical matter it was. 
"[I]f we should find that the bill was insufficient when tested by principles accepted in both the cases referred to, we should be indisposed to return an answer not required for the disposition of the case," Fuller observed. "This practically requires us to pass upon the whole case as it stands, and to decide whether the demurrer was properly sustained or not." Thus, he said, the Court would not consider the question unless the whole case was appealed to it.
Seventh Circuit
On remand, the Seventh Circuit issued its decision, holding provisionally for Graver, later that year. Judge William Allen Woods wrote for a unanimous three-judge panel that carefully considered the distinction drawn in the two cases. "[M]anifestly it is not true of a complainant in equity that when he brings his bill he must come prepared with proof to maintain it, and to meet any defense which may be interposed", he wrote. "It is his privilege to search the conscience of his adversary by requiring him to answer under oath, and if possessed of no other evidence, or means of obtaining it, he must accept or at least yield to the answer as true."Graver II, 261–262
In the original case, Graver had strongly suspected the scheme but had no documentary evidence or witnesses other than the two defendants, both of whom swore falsely that there was no deceitful intent, interest or agreement between them. That perjury constituted an original fraud in addition to the one Graver alleged, not only victimizing him but the court as well. Because of the false testimony the case could not go to trial, bringing it under Throckmortons exception for extrinsic fraud. "The present case does not come within the strict letter, and certainly not within the spirit or reason, of the rule", Woods wrote.
Ultimately, Woods concluded, it was not necessary to reconcile the two cases; in fact both of them justified holding for Graver. "In reason and good conscience a decree obtained as this one is alleged to have been ought to be annulled", he wrote. "There can be no consideration of public policy or of private right on which it ought to stand. There can be and ought to be no repose of society where for such wrongs the courts are incapable of giving redress."Graver II, 263
Subsequent jurisprudence
In several cases over the next two decades, the Supreme Court cited Graver when refusing cases from the appellate circuits that were certified in their entirety or with only questions of fact.
In 1909's Boring v. Ott, the Wisconsin Supreme Court decided to follow Marshall rather than Throckmorton. Dissenting justice Roujet D. Marshall noted that Graver was supposed "to settle the matter" but did not. A clear statement from the Court was not necessary; Marshall believed that the Supreme Court's rejection of two later cases that asked it to do the same thing as the Seventh Circuit had in Graver, and its restatement of Throckmortons rule in Hilton v. Guyot, were to be taken as indications of support for that case from the Supreme Court. 
During the 1930s, federal courts seeking resolution of the apparent conflict between Throckmorton and Marshall took note of Gravers refusal to resolve the issue. The Southern District of Florida characterized Graver as a refusal to decide the question in 1935, and four years later, the Third Circuit, quoting that decision, observed that Graver "must have discouraged others". It chose to follow Marshall, holding that "truth is more important than the trouble it takes to get it."Publicker, at 952 The Supreme Court denied certiorari on that case as well.
Around that time, the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure were introduced, with Rule 60(b) allowing a petition for equitable relief regardless of the type of fraud alleged within a year of the judgement to be attacked. Commentators hoped that when Hazel-Atlas Glass Co. v. Hartford-Empire Co., a complex case on the issue, came before the Court in 1944, it would choose between Throckmorton and Marshall. But while citing both cases, Justice Hugo Black's opinion for a narrow majority instead created an exception for fraud committed by officers of the court. State courts in more recent decisions have noted that the issue remains unresolved.
See also
1896 in the United States
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 162
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Fuller Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit cases
Category:United States res judicata case law
Category:Estoppel
Category:Fraud in the United States
Category:1896 in United States case law
"""

From "Gray v. Sanders" ==> """
Gray v. Sanders, 372 U.S. 368 (1963),  was a  Supreme Court of the United States  case dealing with equal representation in regard to the American election system and formulated the famous "one person, one vote" standard applied in this case for "counting votes in a Democratic primary election for the nomination of a United States Senator and statewide officers — which was practically equivalent to election."
Background
James O'Hear Sanders, a businessman and voter in Fulton County, Georgia, brought a lawsuit which challenged the legality of the County Unit System. James H. Gray, the chairman of the State Executive Committee of the Democratic Party, was one of the named defendants as the suit focused on the Democratic party primary elections which usually determined the selection of Georgia officeholders.
Sanders argued that the County Unit System gave unequal and preferential voting power to smaller counties.  Rural counties which accounted for one-third of Georgia's population,  accounted for a majority of County Unit votes.  Fulton County had 14.11% of Georgia's population at that time,  but only 1.46%  (6 unit votes)  of the 410 Unit Votes.  Echols County, Georgia,  the smallest county in Georgia at the time,  had 1,876United States Census, 1960 people or .05% of the state's population and .48% (1 unit vote) of the unit system.  The system gave votes to Fulton County at a proportion of one-tenth the county population while giving Echols County a vote which was 10 times the population of the county.  The Supreme Court  granted certiorari in this case despite having refused to hear previous challenges to the Unit System.
The court's decision
By a vote of 8 to 1, the court struck down the County Unit System. Justice William O. Douglas wrote the majority opinion and said "The concept of political equality...can mean only one thing—one person, one vote". The court found that the separation of voters in the same election into different classes was a violation of the 14th Amendment's guarantee of equal protection. Justice John Marshall Harlan II dissented, suggesting the case be sent back for retrial, which would have investigated the constitutional requirements for legislative districts.
Aftermath
Georgia had the option of modifying the County Unit System to make it more equal, but instead the state decided to move to using the popular vote in primary elections.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 372
 One Person, One Vote
Further reading
Toplak, Jurij. Gray v. Sanders : 372 U.S. 368 (1963). In: Schultz, David W (Ed.). Encyclopedia of the Supreme Court. New York: Facts on file, 2005, pp. 188–189.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
Category:United States One Person, One Vote Legal Doctrine
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:1963 in United States case law
Category:Democratic Party (United States) litigation
Category:Civil rights movement case law
"""

From "Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co. v. Supermarket Equipment Corp." ==> """
Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co. v. Supermarket Equipment Corp., 340 U.S. 147 (1950), is a patent case decided by the United States Supreme Court..  The Court held that a patent for a cashier's counter and movable frame for grocery stores was invalid because it was a combination of known elements that added nothing new to the total stock of knowledge.
Background
Patent number 2,242,408 ("the Turnham patent") claimed the invention of a cashier's counter equipped with a three-sided frame with no top or bottom which, when pushed or pulled, moved groceries deposited in it by a customer to the clerk and left them there when pushed back to repeat the operation.
The district court found that, although each element of the device was known to prior art, a counter with an extension to receive a self-unloading tray with which to push the contents of the tray in front of the cashier was a novel feature and constituted a new and useful combination.  The Court of Appeals affirmed the district court's decision.  Both courts found that every element claimed in the Turnham patent was known to prior art, except the extension of the counter.
Supreme Court decision
The Supreme Court disagreed with the lower courts' conclusion that the extension of the counter constituted an invention because (1) the extension was not mentioned in the claim, (2) an invention cannot be found in a mere elongation of a merchant's counter, and (3) the Turnham patent overclaimed the invention by including old elements, unless together with its other old elements, the extension made up a new patentable combination.  The Court explained that the key to the patentability of a mechanical device that brings old factors into cooperation is the presence or lack of invention: "[O]nly when the whole in some way exceeds the sum of its parts is the accumulation of old devices patentable."  The Court concluded that the invention claimed by the Turnham patent lacked any "unusual or surprising consequences" from the combination of old elements.
The Court added that patents are intended to add to the sum of useful knowledge, and they cannot be sustained when their effect is to subtract from resources freely available.  The Court also emphasized that commercial success without invention is not sufficient for purposes of patentability.
Concurrence
In his concurrence, Justice Douglas stated that to be patentable, an invention must push back the frontiers of science.  In his view, the Patent Office took advantage of the opportunity to expand its own jurisdiction and granted patents to inventions that had no place in the constitutional scheme of advancing scientific knowledge.
References
External links
Category:1950 in United States case law
Category:The Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:Retail point of sale systems
"""

From "Green Tree Financial Corp.-Ala. v. Randolph" ==> """
Green Tree Financial Corp-Ala. v. Randolph, 531 U.S. 79 (2000), is a decision by the United States Supreme Court. The case dealt with the enforceability of arbitration agreements that did not discuss the cost of the arbitration itself and with the finality of certain arbitration decisions.
Background
Larketta Randolph purchased a mobile home from Better Cents Home Builders, Inc., in Opelika, Alabama. This was financed through Green Tree Financial Corporation and its subsidiary, Green Tree Financial Corp.-Alabama. Randolph's Manufactured Home Retail Installment Contract and Security Agreement required that Randolph buy a specific type of insurance and that disputes about this provision would have to be settled by arbitration.531 U.S. 79 at 83 Randolph sued and sought a formal trial and not arbitration. However, Green Tree Financial Corporation asked the District Court to compel arbitration.531 U.S. 79 at 84 The District Court granted that motion to compel arbitration and Randolph appealed to the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals.
The Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit made two rulings. Firstly, it held that under the Federal Arbitration Act, the decision of the District Court was a "final decision", thus giving the appellate court jurisdiction. Secondly it held that the arbitration agreement was unenforceable because it was silent with respect to the payment of filing fees, arbitrators' costs and other arbitration-related expenses. Because the agreement would therefore force Randolph to pay the "steep" arbitration costs,531 U.S. 79 at 84-85 and thus was unfair and invalid. It was this point on which the Supreme Court split when they heard the appeal in 2000.
Opinion of the Court
Chief Justice Rehnquist delivered the opinion of the Court. The Court unanimously upheld the Court of Appeals' jurisdiction to hear the case, saying that the order compelling Randolph into arbitration was a "final decision". However, the Court divided on whether the arbitration agreement was enforceable even when it was silent on arbitration costs and fees. Writing for the majority, Rehnquist wrote that "[a]lthough the existence of large arbitration costs may well preclude a litigant...from effectively vindicating [her statutory rights], the record does not show that Randolph will bear such costs if she goes to arbitration."531 U.S. 79 at 91-92
Dissent
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote a brief opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part, arguing that the fact that Randolph had no idea how much the arbitration proceedings could cost her would cause the agreement to be unenforceable. The majority, in disagreeing, remanded the case back to the Eleventh Circuit with instructions to find the agreement valid under law.
Subsequent History
The Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the original finding that Randolph was forced to go into arbitration.244 F.3d 814 (2001) Because the Supreme Court had upheld the provision of the arbitration agreement that was silent on the costs of arbitration proceedings, there was no way to vacate the initial judge's decision.
See also
 Contract law
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States arbitration case law
Category:2000 in United States case law
"""

From "Green v. Biddle" ==> """
Green v. Biddle, 1 U.S. (8 Wheat.) 1 (1823), is a 6-to-1 ruling by the Supreme Court of the United States that held that the state of Virginia had properly entered into a compact with the United States federal government under Clause One of Article Four of the United States Constitution. This compact surrendered Virginia's claim to the area that eventually became the state of Kentucky, but imposed restrictions on Kentucky's ability to upset title to land sold or otherwise granted by the state of Virginia at the time of the compact.  The Supreme Court held that legislation enacted by Kentucky that restricted these rights unconstitutionally infringed on Virginia's right to surrender the land in accordance with Article Four, Clause One.
Background
During European colonization of the Americas, James I of England granted the Charter of 1606 to the newly established Virginia Company, asserting royal title to Native American-occupied land between the 34th and 45th latitudes and  inland, and permitting the Virginia Company to establish colonies there.Hubbard, American Boundaries: The Nation, the States, the Rectangular Survey, 2009, p. 7-9. In 1609, James I redefined the Colony of Virginia's boundaries to extend the colonies northern and southern boundaries as well as asserting title to all land west to the Pacific Ocean.Hubbard, American Boundaries: The Nation, the States, the Rectangular Survey, 2009, p. 10. Conflicting land claims as well as claims that land grants extended to the Pacific Ocean proved highly contentious issues after the American Revolution. To help resolve the issue, in 1781 Virginia agreed to surrender to the United States federal government all title to its land claims west of the Ohio River.Ayers, Gould, Oshinsky, and Soderland, American Passages: A History of the United States, 2009, p. 174.
In the compact between Virginia and the United States under which Virginia surrendered its territory was the following clause (ellipsis in original):.
That all private rights and interests of lands within the said district [of Kentucky] derived from the laws of Virginia prior to such separation shall remain valid and secure under the laws of the proposed state, and shall be determined by the laws now existing in this state.
Title was transferred in 1784, and the Congress of the Confederation passed the Land Ordinance of 1784, Land Ordinance of 1785, and the Northwest Ordinance to turn these lands into territories and (eventually) states.Miller, Native America, Discovered and Conquered: Thomas Jefferson, Lewis & Clark, and Manifest Destiny, 2006, p. 62. In 1792, after 10 constitutional conventions and three statehood enabling acts passed by the Virginia legislature, Kentucky was admitted as a state on June 1, 1792.Harrison, Kentucky's Road to Statehood, 1992, p. 19-90 The terms of the Virginia-U.S. compact regarding title to land was included in the Constitution of Kentucky.
On February 27, 1797, the state of Kentucky passed legislation protecting individuals who had title to their land stripped from them due to improper conveyance. In part, the legislation: 1) Absolved the former titleholder from paying any rent or profits accrued while improper title was held (e.g., mesne profits); 2) Held the successful claimant liable to the former titleholder for any improvements made to the property; and 3) In the case where improvements exceeded the value of the unimproved land, the successful claimant could return the property to the former titleholder without paying the balance or the successful claimant could keep the property but was required to post a bond and warranty until the value of the improvements was paid.Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 4-5.
On January 31, 1812, Kentucky again passed legislation protecting individuals who had title to their land stripped from them due to improper conveyance.  This second legislation, in part: 1) Required successful claimants to pay to ejected titleholders, 2) The successful claimant may avoid paying the value of the improvements by relinquishing the land and accepting payment in the amount of the value of the unimproved property instead, or may keep the land (but must post bond and warranty if the value of improvements exceeds three-fourths of the value of the unimproved property); 3) The ejected titleholder is responsible for paying rents and profits on the property after judgment against him, but only up to a period not to exceed five years after the ruling against him; and 4) Courts must ascertain the value of land, rents, and profits in such cases.Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 5-7.
The heirs of John Green sued Richard Biddle to reclaim title to certain land in the state of Kentucky.
Ruling
Majority opinion
Associate Justice Joseph Story delivered the opinion of the Court.
For the majority, the primary question was whether the two Kentucky legislative acts were constitutional.Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 11. Justice Story conceded that each state has the sovereign right to determine the legal structure under which property may be conveyed and title settled.Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 11-13. That right was exercised by Virginia when it agreed to the compact surrendering its lands to the United States, however, and that compact declared "in the most explicit terms that all private rights and interests of lands, derived from the laws of Virginia, shall remain valid and secure under the laws of Kentucky, and shall be determined by the laws then existing in Virginia."Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 13. The question before the Court, then, was whether the acts of 1797 and 1812 restricted titleholders' rights enumerated under Virginia law at the time the compact entered into force in 1784.  Story concluded for the majority that those rights were restricted,Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 13-17. holding that the Kentucky legislation was an unconstitutional infringement on Virginia's sovereign rights (as defined in the compact).Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 68.
Justice Bushrod Washington did not participate in this decision.
Majority opinion on rehearing
Kentucky moved for an immediate rehearing.  Justice Washington participated in the decision of the Court, and delivered the decision of the Court.Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 69. Justice Washington reviewed the pertinent legislative language in the 1797 and 1812 Kentucky acts.Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 69-74. The similarities and differences between the Kentucky acts (on the one hand) and Virginia law and European and developing American common law (on the other) were compared and contrasted.Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 74-85. However, he concluded, the Kentucky acts restricted titleholders' rights and imposed duties and responsibilities on them that Virginia law and court decisions did not contain.Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 83-85.
Justice Washington then reviewed two additional claims:  1) That the Kentucky acts were unconstitutional for Congress had not assented to Virginia's restrictions upon that state, and 2) That the Kentucky acts violated Virginia's sovereignty over the land previously held by it and surrendered only until terms of the compact of 1784.Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 85. The first claim, Washington observed, was based on the idea that Congress had not given its explicit consent to specific article in question in the compact.Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 85-86. He rejected this argument, concluding that "the act of Congress [was] not ... a mere tacit acquiescence, but ... an express declaration of the legislative mind, resulting from the manifest construction of the act itself."Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 87. Therefore, with congressional assent, Virginia had been able to constitutionally impose restrictions on Kentucky.Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 88. As to the second claim, the majority held that the Constitution specifically barred any attempt to impair the obligations of contract.Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 91-92. "Kentucky, therefore, being a party to the compact which guaranteed to claimants of land lying in that state under titles derived from Virginia their rights as they existed under the laws of Virginia, was incompetent to violate that contract by passing any law which rendered those rights less valid and secure."Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 92-93.
Dissenting opinion
Associate Justice William Johnson dissented.
To Johnson, the first question was whether the Kentucky acts were constitutional.Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 94-95. If constitutional, which act should be applied?Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 95.  The suit was filed after the legislation of 1797 was enacted, but before the legislation of 1812 was enacted.
Johnson declined to rule on the first question, as it had not been raised on appeal.Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 96. He did feel compelled to comment on one aspect of the case, however.  Kentucky had argued that it had recognized Virginia's 1784 compact as a compact, but not as fundamental law.  Was this true?  In dicta, Johnson argued that this provision of the Kentucky constitution did not limit Kentucky's sovereignty over its own land.Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 96-100. To conclude that Congress, Kentucky, and Virginia had so intended would lead to a particularly undesirable result:  "This would be cutting deep indeed into the sovereign powers of Kentucky, and would be establishing the anomaly of a territory over which no government could legislate—not Virginia, for she had parted with the sovereignty; not Kentucky, for the laws of Virginia were irrevocably fastened upon two-thirds of her territory."Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 99.
So was the Kentucky constitution meaningless?  Johnson said no.  There were two possible interpretations, he suggested.  The first was that the Kentucky lands were not "land" in the legal sense, as no state yet existed to cover them, but that Virginia intended for titleholders in the area to have their rights protected to a great degree as if they held title to actual land.Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 100. A second interpretation viewed Virginia's stipulations as similar to those nations imposed on each another to protect basic rights (such as the right to recover goods from a wreck or pirate).Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 100-101. Such stipulations could not go so far as to deny Kentucky the right to regulate title and conveyance to its lands, nor to seize land for public purpose in return for fair compensation (as is every sovereign state's right).Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 101-103.
But Johnson reluctantly agreed that abandoning strict construction of the Kentucky constitution left the Court afloat "on a sea of uncertainty as to the extent of the legislative power of Kentucky over the territory held under Virginia grants..."Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 103.
Johnson concluded that, if forced to choose between strict construction and uncertainty, that he would opt for uncertainty.Green v. Biddle, 21 U.S. at 103-104. Resolving this uncertainty was not, however, a question properly before the Supreme Court, and should be resolved by the political arena.
References
Bibliography
Ayers, Edward L.; Gould, Lewis L.; Oshinsky, David M.; and Soderland, Jean R. American Passages: A History of the United States. Boston, Mass.: Wadsworth/Cengage Learning, 2009.
Harrison, Lowell Hayes. Kentucky's Road to Statehood. Lexington, Ky.: University Press of Kentucky, 1992.
Hubbard, Bill. American Boundaries: The Nation, the States, the Rectangular Survey. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009.
Miller, Robert J. Native America, Discovered and Conquered: Thomas Jefferson, Lewis & Clark, and Manifest Destiny. Westport, Conn.: Praeger Publishers, 2006.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:1823 in United States case law
Category:Internal territorial disputes of the United States
Category:Legal history of Kentucky
Category:Legal history of Virginia
Category:1823 in Virginia
"""

From "Green v. Brennan" ==> """
Green v. Brennan, 578 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that when filing a workplace discrimination complaint under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the filing period begins only after an employee resigns. The filing period begins at the time that the employee gives notice of resignation, not the effective date of resignation.SCOTUSblog coverageGreen v. Brennan, No. 14–613, 578 U.S. ____ (2016).
 Background 
Marvin Green was denied a promotion at the United States Postal Service. He alleged that he was denied the promotion because he was black and U.S.P.S. counter-alleged that Green had engaged in the crime of intentionally delaying the mail.
 Opinion of the Court 
Associate Justice Sonia Sotomayor authored the Court's decision.
 References 
External links
 SCOTUSblog coverage
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:United States Postal Service litigation
Category:United States employment discrimination case law
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Green v. County School Board of New Kent County" ==> """
Green v. County School Board of New Kent County, 391 U.S. 430 (1968), was an important United States Supreme Court case involving school desegregation. Specifically, the Court dealt with the freedom of choice plans created to avoid compliance with the Supreme Court's mandate in Brown II in 1955. The Court held unanimously that New Kent County's freedom of choice plan did not adequately comply with the school board's responsibility to determine a system of admission to public schools on a non-racial basis. The Supreme Court mandated that the school board must formulate new plans and steps towards realistically converting to a desegregated system. Green v. County School Board of New Kent County was a follow up of Brown v. Board of Education.
“When this opinion is handed down, the traffic light will have changed from Brown to Green.” –U.S. Supreme Court Justice William Brennan, 1968.
Green established what came to be known as the five Green factors — faculty, staff, transportation, extracurricular activities and facilities — the criteria by which later courts would evaluate school districts' progress on desegregation.
Background
In Brown v. Board of Education in 1954, the Warren Court ruled that state-sanctioned segregation of public schools was unconstitutional under the 14th Amendment. One year later, in Brown II, enforcement of this principle was given to district courts, ordering that they take the necessary steps to make admittance to public schools nondiscriminatory "with all deliberate speed." The term "all deliberate speed" did little to speed up the school board's plan for integration. Judge John J. Parker of the United States Court of Appeals for the 4th Circuit led many in the South in interpreting Brown as a charge not to segregate, but not as an order to integrate. The Supreme Court heard several more cases surrounding the speed and efficacy of desegregation between its initial ruling in Brown and the Green v. School Board case in 1968.
Factual background
Virginia had long mandated racial segregation in public education under the Virginia Constitution of 1902. 
At the time of the 1960 census, in New Kent County, Virginia, approximately half of the 4,500 residents were African American. The school system had only two schools, the New Kent School for white students and the George W. Watkins School for black students. School buses traveled overlapping routes throughout the county.
The school board continued to operate a segregated system in the wake of the Brown rulings, on the authority of several "massive resistance" state laws enacted to resist them. One such law, the Pupil Placement Act, divested local boards of authority to assign children to particular schools and centralized that power with the newly created State Pupil Placement Board. Under the act, children were automatically reassigned to their prior school each year unless they applied for transfer to another school and the board approved their application. New students' schools were also assigned by the board.Records of the Virginia Pupil Placement Board, 1957-1966. Accession 26517, State records collection, The Library of Virginia, Richmond, Va. Retrieved from http://ead.lib.virginia.edu/vivaxtf/view?docId=lva/vi02003.xml White families almost uniformly chose the predominantly white school, and African-American families almost uniformly chose the predominantly black school. As of September 1964, no New Kent student had applied to the Pupil Placement Board for a transfer between the schools.
The U.S. Congress, concerned with the lack of progress nationally in school desegregation, included provisions in the Civil Rights Act of 1964 that would withhold federal funding from schools that refused to dismantle segregation.
Legal proceedings
The case was initially tried in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia in Richmond.
Plaintiffs filed suit in 1965 for injunctive relief against maintenance of allegedly segregated schools. In response, the Board, in order to remain eligible for federal financial aid, adopted a "freedom of choice" plan for desegregating the schools. The plan permitted students, except those entering the first and eighth grades, to choose annually between the schools; those not choosing were assigned to the school previously attended; first and eighth graders must affirmatively choose a school. In 1965, thirty-five black students enrolled in the previously all-white New Kent school. The District Court approved the plan, as amended.
More than a hundred additional African-American students enrolled each year in 1966 and 1967. The newly enrolled black students reported harassment by their white peers, to which teachers and administrators turned a blind eye.
The case was argued before the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit on January 9, 1967, and decided June 12, 1967.
The Court of Appeals approved the "freedom of choice" provisions, although it remanded for a more specific and comprehensive order concerning teachers. During the plan's three years of operation, no white student chose to attend the all-African-American school, and although 115 Black pupils enrolled in the formerly all-white school, 85% of the African-American students in the system still attended the all-Black school.
Green before the Supreme Court
This case was argued during the same term as Raney v. Board of Education of Gould School District and Monroe v. Board of Commissioners of Jackson, Tenn. In the latter case, the plan in question was called "free transfer."
NAACP Legal Defense Fund lawyers Samuel W. Tucker, Jack Greenberg, Henry L. Marsh, III, James Nabrit III,    Michael Meltsner and Oliver W. Hill argued and prepared the petitioners' case, and Tucker presented their arguments. Frederick T. Gray represented the school board, and Louis F. Claiborne served as amicus curiae.
The Court noted that "freedom of choice" plans tended to be ineffective at desegregating a school system.
Although the Court did not rule that all "freedom of choice" plans were unconstitutional, it held that in New Kent County's case the freedom-of-choice plan violated the Constitution.
The Court's skepticism of New Kent's freedom of choice plan was due in part to the county's slowness: "it is relevant that this first step did not come until some 11 years after Brown I was decided and 10 years after Brown II directed the making of a 'prompt and reasonable start.' ... Moreover, a plan that, at this late date, fails to provide meaningful assurance of prompt and effective disestablishment of a dual system is also intolerable. 'The time for mere 'deliberate speed' has run out,' Griffin v. County School Board, 377 U. S. 218, 377 U. S. 234."
 Impact of Green and the five "Green factors" 
To comply with the Court's mandate, the school board separated the New Kent and George Watkins schools by grade level, rather than race. The Watkins School became George Watkins Elementary School, and New Kent became New Kent High School.
In the decades following Green, courts throughout the U.S. used five criteria identified in Green, known as the five Green factors, to assess whether school systems had sufficiently desegregated. The Green factors are: (1) faculty, (2) staff, (3) transportation, (4) extracurricular activities, and (5) facilities. These five Green factors from the following text in Green, assessing New Kent's failure to integrate:
This guidance built on the Court's previous guidance from Brown II in 1955 where the Supreme Court charged the district courts to:
"consider problems related to administration arising from the physical condition of the school plant, the school transportation system, personnel, revision of school districts and attendance areas ... and revision of local laws and regulations."
 50th anniversary celebration 
Several events took place in New Kent County, Virginia during May 2018 to celebrate 50 years since the Supreme Court's ruling on the case.  The Green vs County School Board of New Kent organization has a list of the events.website
In 2018, the Library of Virginia honored Calvin Coolidge Green (1931–2011), pastor, soldier, educator, civil rights activist and father of named plaintiff Charles Green, as one of its Strong Men and Women.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 391
References
Further reading
Allen, Jody and Daugherity, Brian. "Recovering a ‘Lost’ Story Using Oral History: The United States Supreme Court's Historic Green v. New Kent County, Virginia, Decision," Oral History Review, vol. 3, issue 2, 25-45 (June 2006).
Daugherity, Brian and Bolton, Charles, editors. With All Deliberate Speed: Implementing Brown v. Board of Education. Fayetteville: University of Arkansas Press, 2008.
External links
The Civil Rights Movement in Virginia: The Green Decision of 1968   - Virginia Historical Society online exhibition
New Kent School and the George W. Watkins School: From Freedom of Choice to Integration - National Park Service lesson plan
Green v County School Board of New Kent Celebration (50th Anniversary Celebration of the Green v New Kent Case)
Category:Education in New Kent County, Virginia
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States civil rights case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States school desegregation case law
Category:1968 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:African-American history of Virginia
Category:Legal history of Virginia
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Greenbelt Cooperative Publishing Ass'n, Inc. v. Bresler" ==> """
Greenbelt Cooperative Publishing Association, Inc. v. Bresler, 398 U.S. 6 (1970), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that using the word "blackmail" in a newspaper article "was no more than rhetorical hyperbole" and that finding such usage as libel "would subvert the most fundamental meaning of a free press" guaranteed by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution..   The ruling also touched on the plaintiff's status as a public figure.
 Background 
Dorothy Sucher, a reporter for the Greenbelt News Review of Greenbelt, Maryland, covered a 1965 city council hearing in a case where developer Charles S. Bresler was trying to obtain variances to build a high-density housing development on land he owned while the city was seeking to purchase a parcel owned by Bresler that would be the site of a new high school. Bresler indicated that he would be willing to sell the property the city wanted as long as he received the variances he was seeking. Residents at the hearing were critical of the deal and of the way that Bresler was using the leverage he had in delaying the sale of the proposed high school property to obtain the right to build more densely on the properties he owned.Hevesi, Dennis. "Dorothy Sucher, Reporter in Press-Freedom Case, Dies at 77", The New York Times, August 31, 2010. Accessed September 2, 2010. An article written by Sucher in the October 14, 1965 issue of the Greenbelt News Review reporting on the council meeting quoted a resident saying that "It seems that this is a slight case of blackmail" continuing to state that "the word was echoed by many speakers from the audience" a charge that was rejected in the article by a city councilmember who said that this was not blackmail, but was part of a negotiations process that was "a two-way street". Bresler filed a lawsuit in Prince George's County circuit court claiming that the allegations and use of the word "blackmail" constituted libel, and a jury found in his favor, awarding him $5,000 in compensatory damages and $12,500 in punitive damages.Buerger, Megan. "Dorothy Sucher dies at 77; wrote story that was test case for freedom of press", The Washington Post, August 28, 2010. Accessed September 2, 2010. The judgment was affirmed by the Maryland Court of Appeals,Greenbelt Cooperative Publishing Ass'n, Inc. v. Bresler, 253 Md. 324, 252 A.2d 755 (1969). and certiorari was granted by the U.S. Supreme Court..
 Opinion of the Court 
In 1970, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled 8–0 to overturn the lower court ruling. The majority found that Bresler, who served in another district as a member of the Maryland House of Delegates, was a public figure as defined by New York Times Co. v. Sullivan (1964) and that the standard that the plaintiff would have to satisfy would be to show that the term was used with malice, with knowledge that the claim was false or in reckless disregard for the truth. The Supreme Court found that the lower court judge's instructions were incorrect in setting a standard for making a verdict. The court found no dispute with the contention that the descriptions in Sucher's article were accurately reported and that the word "blackmail" had been used. The opinion written by Associated Justice Potter Stewart found that "even the most careless reader must have perceived that the word was no more than rhetorical hyperbole" and that "It is simply impossible to believe that a reader who reached the word 'blackmail' in either article would not have understood exactly what was meant" and that no reader would have interpreted the word in question to mean that Bresler had committed the criminal offense. To have ruled otherwise "would subvert the most fundamental meaning of a free press".
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1970 in United States case law
Category:Greenbelt, Maryland
"""

From "Greene v. Fisher" ==> """
Greene v. Fisher, 565 U.S. 34 (2011), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States involving the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act (AEDPA), which sets the standard of review for habeas corpus petitions brought in federal court to challenge state court convictions. AEDPA requires that to be set aside, the state court judgment must have been "contrary to, or involved an unreasonable application of, clearly established Federal law as determined by the Supreme Court of the United States."
In a unanimous opinion delivered by Justice Antonin Scalia, the Court ruled in Greene that "clearly established Federal law" under AEDPA does not include Supreme Court decisions that are announced after the last adjudication of the merits in state court but before the defendant's conviction becomes final.
 Further reading 
 External links 
 Brief for Petitioner
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:2011 in United States case law
"""

From "Greenholtz v. Inmates of the Nebraska Penal & Correctional Complex" ==> """
Greenholtz v. Inmates of the Nebraska Penal and Correctional Complex, 442 U.S. 1 (1979), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that when state law requires the state to grant parole whenever a prisoner satisfies certain conditions, due process requires the state to allow the prisoner to present evidence in support of his request for parole and to furnish a written explanation of the reasons why his request has been denied.
 Background 
Nebraska had both mandatory and discretionary parole.  Mandatory parole meant that the prisoner must be released when he had served the full length of his sentence, less any good time credits.  Discretionary parole meant that a prisoner who satisfied the state's criteria for being a good candidate for early release would be released in the discretion of the state's Board of Parole.
Under Nebraska's discretionary parole system, all prisoners were reviewed each year regardless of whether they were yet eligible for parole.  At this initial hearing, the Board examined the prisoner's entire preconfinement and postconfinement record and considered any statements or letters the prisoner presented on his own behalf.  If the Board determined at this initial hearing that the prisoner was not suitable for parole, then parole was denied and the prisoner was informed as to the Board's reasons for denying parole.  If, however, the Board determined at the initial hearing that the prisoner was suitable for parole, then it scheduled a final parole hearing.  At this final parole hearing, the prisoner was permitted to present evidence on his behalf and to be represented by private counsel of his choice.  He was not, however, permitted to cross-examine witnesses or hear any evidence presented against him.  The hearing was recorded.  If the Board denied parole at this final hearing, the prisoner was furnished with a written explanation within 30 days.
Nebraska prisoners brought suit in federal court under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, arguing that the Board's procedures denied them due process.  The federal district court in Nebraska and the Eighth Circuit agreed.  The Eighth Circuit held that, in order to satisfy due process, the State had to adhere to the following procedures:
 Provide a full formal hearing for each inmate eligible for parole;
 Notify the prisoner in advance of the hearing and notify him of the factors that the Board may use to reach its decision;
 Allow the prisoner to appear in person before the Board and present evidence;
 Maintain a record of the proceedings that is "capable of being reduced to writing";
 Furnish the prisoner with a full written explanation of the facts on which the Board relied and the reasons for the Board's decision to deny parole.
The Supreme Court agreed to review the Eighth Circuit's requirements to determine whether the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment required them.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment protects against the deprivation of liberty interests at the hands of the state.  In order to trigger due process protection, the liberty interest in question must be more than merely abstract or theoretical; it must be something to which a person has a "legitimate claim of entitlement".  No prisoner has a liberty interest in being released before his sentence expires, because the trial and appeals processes have ensured that the state has lawfully deprived the person of his interest in being free from confinement.  A state may create a parole system for its prisoners, but it is not required to do so.  Parole exists as an adjunct to the penological goals of rehabilitation and deterrence.  Like the prison system itself, the parole regime is created and managed by the executive branch, which has no obligation to make error-free determinations in executing the laws.
In Morrisey v. Brewer, , the Court held that due process imposed certain standards on the decision to revoke parole.  The Nebraska inmates in this case argued on the basis of Morrisey that due process likewise required certain standards to govern the decision to grant parole.  The Court disagreed, because it saw a material difference between the decision to take away freedom already granted and the decision to free someone before their legitimate expectation of release ripens.  "The parole release decision is more subtle and depends on an amalgam of elements, some of which are factual but many of which are purely subjective appraisals by the Board members based on their experience with the difficult and sensitive task of evaluating the advisability of parole release".  Because the decision to grant parole depends on such subjective factors, and ultimately derives from the mere hope that the Board will grant parole, the Court held that there was no per se liberty interest in being granted parole.
However, the particular statute creating Nebraska's parole system used mandatory language, and the prisoners argued that this mandatory language gave rise to a protected liberty interest in parole:
Whenever the Board of Parole considers the release of a committed offender who is eligible for release on parole, it shall order his release unless it is of the opinion that his release should be deferred because:
 There is a substantial risk that he will not conform to the conditions of parole;
 His release would depreciate the seriousness of his crime or promote disrespect for the law;
 His release would have a substantially adverse effect on institutional discipline; or
 His continued correctional treatment, medical care, or vocational or other training in the facility would substantially enhance his capacity to lead a law-abiding life when released at a later date.
Although this statute did use the word "shall", the Court did not interpret it to mean that a decision that takes into account these criteria should for that reason alone embody the full protections of an adversarial hearing.  The Court ruled that the prisoner's opportunity to make a statement on his own behalf minimized the risk of error and thus satisfied due process because the Board had before it the prisoner's entire file.  Due process did not require the Board to articulate the specific evidence on which it had relied, because this would tend to make the hearings more adversarial in nature.  The fact that the Board communicated the reasons for its denial, couching its explanation in terms of guidance for the prisoner's future growth, was sufficient.  "The Nebraska procedure affords an opportunity to be heard, and when parole is denied it informs the inmate in what respects he falls short of qualifying for parole; this affords the process that is due under these circumstances.  The Constitution does not require more."
 Concurring opinion 
Justice Powell believed that there was a liberty interest in being released on parole that stemmed from the Due Process Clause, independent of the statutory language used to create an individual state's parole system.  Powell rejected the distinction the majority made between a hoped-for release and a previously granted release.  "When a State adopts a parole standard that applies general standards of eligibility, prisoners justifiably expect that parole will be granted fairly and according to law whenever those standards are met."  This expectation, in turn, was the source of the liberty interest Powell believed was protected by the Due Process Clause.
Powell also believed that there was no significant prejudice to the state in notifying the prisoner in advance about the evidence to be used at the hearing, so as to allow the prisoner to prepare his statement.
 Dissenting opinion 
Justice Marshall also believed that the Due Process Clause gave rise to a liberty interest in being released on parole, and rejected the majority's distinction between release and revocation.  That difference was not constitutionally significant, Marshall argued, because the Court had recognized a liberty interest in future freedom in other contexts.  Marshall observed that the Court's prior decisions never had held that the process due a person upon a deprivation of liberty depended on the extent to which subjective determinations were involved.  Finally, parole was such an integral part of the criminal sentencing scheme that it was difficult for Marshall to imagine that there was not an abstract liberty interest in parole.
Marshall also argued that the majority did not correctly applied the three-part test in Mathews v. Eldridge, .  The Court focused solely on the risk of an erroneous deprivation, without looking at the other two Mathews prongs—the nature of the interest at stake and the burden on the government that a marginal increase in procedural protections entails.  "Certainly the interest in being released from incarceration is of sufficient magnitude to have some bearing on the process due."  Moreover, the Court did not even focus on the risk of error that the Nebraska procedure actually entailed, with the result that its analysis of the effect on that risk additional procedures would have was necessarily skewed as well.  Finally, due process also required that the procedures appear fair as well as actually be fair.  The Court had ignored this aspect of the due process analysis as well.
Although Marshall agreed that a formal hearing was not required, he did believe that fairness required the Board to notify the inmates sufficiently far in advance to allow them to prepare their cases and retain counsel if they so desire.  Marshall also believed that fundamental fairness required the Board to state the evidence on which it had relied in denying parole.  This requirement would focus the Board more carefully on the statutory criteria and promote a more careful consideration of the evidence, while at the same time affording the inmates to contest factual inaccuracies in the record.  The marginal increased burden on the Board was slight in comparison to the increased fairness these features would provide.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:1979 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Greenlaw v. United States" ==> """
Greenlaw v. United States, 554 U.S. 237 (2008), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a federal appeals court may not sua sponte increase a defendant's sentence unless the government first files a notice of appeal..
 Background 
Greenlaw had been charged in federal district court in Minnesota with eight counts related to his participation in gang-related sales of crack cocaine in a neighborhood on the south side of Minneapolis.  Two of these crimes were for violating 18 U.S.C. § 924(c),. which provides for a mandatory consecutive sentence for those who use firearms during or in relation to a drug crime.  The mandatory consecutive sentence amounts to 25 years if the defendant suffers a second or subsequent conviction under § 924(c).  The district court made an error at sentencing when it overlooked the holding in Deal v. United States,. that the 25-year mandatory consecutive sentence is triggered even if the defendant's two § 924(c) convictions come from the same criminal case.  The district court computed Greenlaw's sentence at 262 months, then added 120 months for the two separate "first-time" § 924(c) convictions.
Greenlaw appealed his sentence, but the Government did not.  Greenlaw argued that his sentence was unreasonably long; the Government pointed out the district court's computation error only to indicate that his sentence was unreasonably short.  The Eighth Circuit rejected all of Greenlaw's arguments in favor of a reduced sentence.  Relying on the "plain error" rule of Fed. R. Crim. P. 52(c),See also . the Eighth Circuit ordered the district court to impose the 25-year mandatory consecutive sentence for a second § 924(c) conviction.  Greenlaw asked the U.S. Supreme Court to review the case.
 Opinion of the Court 
"In our adversary system, in both civil and criminal cases, in the first instance and on appeal, we follow the principle of party presentation.  That is, we rely on the parties to frame the issues for decision and assign to the courts the role of neutral arbiter of matters the parties present."  As relevant to this case, the rules of appellate procedure required the government to notify the district court and Greenlaw that it was seeking an increase in Greenlaw's sentence by filing its own notice of appeal.  Without such a notice of appeal, the rule has historically been that an appellate court may not alter the judgment of the lower court to benefit a nonappealing party.  Furthermore, in criminal cases, the Government may not appeal without first consulting and obtaining the personal approval of the Attorney General, the Solicitor General, or a deputy solicitor general.  These two rules "should garner the Judiciary's full respect."
The Eighth Circuit, nevertheless, predicated increasing Greenlaw's sentence by 15 years on its reading of the plain-error rule of Fed. R. Crim. P. 52(b).  "A plain error that affects substantial rights may be considered [on appeal] even though it was not brought to the [lower] court's attention."  When Congress enacted the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, however, there was no intent to supplant the cross-appeal requirement.  Ordinarily, the plain-error rule inures to the benefit of defendants; appellate courts will correct so-called "plain" errors only when ignoring them would work to the detriment of the defendant (who usually has a different lawyer on appeal).  In the absence of a cross-appeal, the plain-error rule does not allow appellate judges to interfere with the assessment of high-level executive-branch officials who may have decided that appealing a sentence in a particular criminal case was not a wise expenditure of resources.
Furthermore, nothing in the text of 18 U.S.C. § 3742. overrides the cross-appeal rule.  Indeed, § 3742 was enacted in 1984 with full knowledge of the cross-appeal rule, which had been a firmly entrenched rule of appellate procedure.  Reading § 3742 to allow appellate courts to sua sponte increase criminal sentences without an appeal from the government would "give with one hand what it takes away with the other."  Executive-branch officials would be vested with the discretion to seek an increased sentence, but their decision not to do so could be overridden by judicial officers; Congress, in enacting § 3742, would not have intended such an inconsistent result.  
Finally, the Court has long held that the deadlines for filing a notice of appeal are firm, and that the purpose of having such firm deadlines is to preserve an opposing party's interest in notice and finality.  If an appellate court could increase a sentence sua sponte without the Government's filing a notice of appeal, nothing would prevent the Government from routinely asking appellate courts to exercise that power for the first time in its responsive brief in the court of appeals.  This, in turn, would deprive criminal defendants of the opportunity to argue against increasing their sentences, because other rules of appellate practice forbid parties who file appeals from raising new arguments for the first time in responding to arguments made by the prevailing party in the lower court.  Indeed, Greenlaw might have chosen not to appeal at all if he knew that to do so risked a sua sponte increase in his sentence, even if that increase was the result of an effort to correct a legal error made by the district court.  
Justice Stephen Breyer emphasized that he concurred in the judgment solely because he believed the cross-appeal rule to be a "rule of practice" for the courts of appeals rather than a jurisdictional limitation.
 Dissenting opinion 
Justice Samuel Alito started with the premise that the cross-appeal rule was merely a "rule of appellate practice" that "rest[s] on premises about the efficient use of judicial resources and the proper role of the tribunal in an adversary system."  Because those rules are judge-made rules, they can be altered by judges sua sponte.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 554
References
External links
  Transcript of the oral argument
  Brief of Petitioner Greenlaw
  Merits brief of the Solicitor General
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure case law
Category:2008 in United States case law
"""

From "Gregg v. Georgia" ==> """
Gregg v. Georgia, Proffitt v. Florida, Jurek v. Texas, Woodson v. North Carolina, and Roberts v. Louisiana, 428 U.S. 153 (1976), is a landmark decision of the U.S. Supreme Court. It reaffirmed the Court's acceptance of the use of the death penalty in the United States, upholding, in particular, the death sentence imposed on Troy Leon Gregg. The case is referred to by a leading scholar as the July 2 Cases, and elsewhere referred to by the lead case Gregg. The court set forth the two main features that capital sentencing procedures must employ in order to comply with the Eighth Amendment ban on "cruel and unusual punishments". The decision essentially ended the de facto moratorium on the death penalty imposed by the Court in its 1972 decision in Furman v. Georgia .
Background
Cases
All five cases share the same basic procedural history. After the Furman decision, the states of Georgia, Florida, Texas, North Carolina, and Louisiana amended their death penalty statutes to meet the Furman guidelines. Subsequently, the five named defendants were convicted of murder and sentenced to death in their respective states. The respective state supreme courts upheld the death sentence. The defendants then asked the U.S. Supreme Court to review their death sentence, asking the Court to go beyond Furman and declare once and for all the death penalty to be "cruel and unusual punishment" and thus in violation of the Constitution; the Court agreed to hear the cases.
In the July 2 Cases, the Court's goal was to provide guidance to states in the wake of Furman. In Furman only one basic idea could command a majority vote of the Justices: capital punishment, as then practiced in the United States, was cruel and unusual punishment because there were no rational standards that determined when it was imposed and when it was not. The question the Court resolved in these cases was not whether the death sentence imposed on each of the individual defendants was cruel, but rather whether the process by which those sentences were imposed was rational and objectively reviewable.
Capital punishment and the Eighth Amendment
The defendants in each of the five cases urged the Court to go further than it had in Furman by holding once and for all that capital punishment was cruel and unusual punishment that violated the Eighth Amendment. However the Court responded that "The most marked indication of society's endorsement of the death penalty for murder is the legislative response to Furman." Both Congress and 35 states had complied with the Court's dictates in Furman by either specifying factors to be weighed and procedures to be followed when imposing a death sentence, or dictating that the death penalty would be mandatory for specific crimes. Furthermore, a referendum in California had overturned the California Supreme Court's earlier decision (California v. Anderson) holding that the death penalty violated the California constitution. The fact that juries remained willing to impose the death penalty also contributed to the Court's conclusion that American society did not believe in 1976 that the death penalty was unconstitutional.
The Court also found that the death penalty "comports with the basic concept of human dignity at the core of the [Eighth] Amendment". The death penalty serves two principal social purposes—retribution and deterrence." In part, capital punishment is an expression of society's moral outrage at particularly offensive conduct". But this outrage must be expressed in an ordered fashion, for America is a society of laws. Retribution is consistent with human dignity, because society believes that "certain crimes are themselves so grievous an affront to humanity that the only adequate response may be the penalty of death". And although it is difficult to determine statistically how much crime the death penalty actually deters, the Court found that in 1976 there was "no convincing empirical evidence" supporting either the view that the death penalty is an effective deterrent to crime or the opposite view. Still, the Court could not completely discount the possibility that for certain "carefully contemplated murderers", "the possible penalty of death may well enter into the cold calculus that precedes the decision to act".
Finally, the Court considered whether the death penalty is "disproportionate in relation to the crime for which it is imposed". Although death is severe and irrevocable, the Court could not say that death was always disproportionate to the crime of deliberately taking human life. "It is an extreme sanction, suitable to the most extreme of crimes."
Historical disapproval of mandatory death sentences
The Court was determined to simultaneously save capital punishment in the United States and impose some reasoned basis for carrying it out. That reasoning flows from the Eighth Amendment's cruel and unusual punishment clause. Although capital punishment, per se, was not found by the Court to be cruel and unusual, it must still be carried out in a manner consistent with the evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society. In the Court's view, the country's history with capital punishment suggests that those evolving standards of decency could not tolerate a return to the mandatory death penalty for murder that had prevailed in medieval England.
In 18th century Britain, the penalty for a vast number of serious crimes, including murder, was death. This rule traveled with the colonists to America, and was the law in all states at the time the Eighth Amendment was adopted in 1791. By then, however, a problem with the common-law mandatory death penalty had crept into the legal system. If the jury has only two options—convicting a defendant of murder, where the penalty is death, or acquitting the defendant outright—it has no vehicle to express the sentiment that the defendant should be punished somehow, but not executed. Faced with this dilemma, some juries would acquit the defendant in order to spare his life. Of course, this meant that an obviously guilty person would go free.
To mitigate the harshness of the common-law rule, Pennsylvania divided murder into "degrees" in 1794. First-degree murder, a capital crime, was limited to all "willful, deliberate, and premeditated" murders. All other murder was second-degree murder, and not a capital crime. This development eased the tension created by the common-law mandatory death penalty, but some juries still refused to convict defendants who were clearly guilty of first-degree murder because that crime carried a mandatory death penalty.
Recognizing that juries in capital cases found discretion in sentencing desirable, Tennessee, Alabama, and Louisiana afforded their juries this discretion in the 1840s. Finally, the jury could respond to mitigating factors about the crime or the criminal and withhold the death penalty even for convicted first-degree murderers. This development spread, and by 1900, 23 states and the federal government had discretionary sentencing in capital cases. Fourteen more states followed in the first two decades of the 20th century, and by 1963, all death-penalty jurisdictions employed discretionary sentencing.
Decision of the Court
The Court set out two broad guidelines that legislatures must follow in order to craft a constitutional capital sentencing scheme:
First, the scheme must provide objective criteria to direct and limit the death sentencing discretion. The objectiveness of these criteria must in turn be ensured by appellate review of all death sentences.
Second, the scheme must allow the sentencer (whether judge or jury) to take into account the character and record of an individual defendant.
In Gregg, Proffitt, and Jurek, the Court found that the capital sentencing schemes of Georgia, Florida, and Texas, respectively, met these criteria; whereas in Woodson and Roberts, the Court found that the sentencing schemes of North Carolina and Louisiana did not.
Constitutional sentencing procedures
The proposition that the death penalty was not always cruel and unusual punishment was just the beginning of the discussion. Furman had held that "where discretion is afforded a sentencing body on a matter so grave as the determination of whether a human life should be taken or spared, that discretion must be suitably directed and limited so as to minimize the risk of wholly arbitrary and capricious action." The question the Court confronted in these five cases was whether the procedures crafted by Georgia, Florida, Texas, North Carolina, and Louisiana adequately minimized that risk. In all five cases, the Court's primary focus was on the jury.
Although in most criminal cases the judge decides and imposes the sentence, "jury sentencing has been considered desirable in capital cases in order to maintain a link between contemporary community values and the penal system—a link without which the determination of punishment could hardly reflect the evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society." The drafters of the Model Penal Code concluded that the now-familiar bifurcated procedure, in which the jury first considers the question of guilt without regard to punishment, and then determines whether the punishment should be death or life imprisonment, is the preferable model. This was the model that the Court approved in these cases—although it tacitly approved a model without any jury involvement in the sentencing process, an approval that persisted until 2002's Ring v. Arizona.
The drawback of having juries rather than judges fix the penalty in capital cases is the risk that they will have no frame of reference for imposing the death penalty in a rational manner. Although this problem may not be totally correctible, the Court trusted that the guidance given the jury by the aggravating factors or other special-verdict questions would assist it in deciding on a sentence. The drafters of the Model Penal Code "concluded that it is within the realm of possibility to point to the main circumstances of aggravation and mitigation that should be weighed and weighed against each other when they are presented in a concrete case." For the Court, these factors adequately guarded against the risk of arbitrary imposition of the death sentence.
Every death sentence involves first an eligibility determination and then a selection of an eligible defendant for the death penalty. A defendant is eligible for the death penalty once the jury has concluded that he is a member of that narrow class of criminal defendants who have committed the most morally outrageous of crimes. An eligible defendant is then selected for the death penalty after the sentencer takes into account mitigating evidence about the character and record of the defendant in order to decide whether that individual is worthy of a death sentence.
In addition to jury sentencing through the guidance of aggravating factors, a constitutional capital sentencing scheme must provide for appellate review of the death sentence, typically by the state's supreme court. This review must not be a rubber stamp; there must be evidence in the state's decisional law that the court takes seriously its responsibility to ensure that the sentence imposed was not arbitrary.  Currently, those states which still maintain a death penalty option have a mandatory appeal of the sentence (defendants sentenced to death cannot waive this appeal, but can waive appeals beyond this stage subject to a competency hearing).
With Gregg and the companion cases, the Court approved three different schemes that had sufficiently narrow eligibility criteria and at the same time sufficiently broad discretion in selection. By contrast, the two schemes the Court disapproved had overly broad eligibility criteria and then no discretion in sentencing.
Capital punishment schemes approved by the Court
Georgia
Under the Georgia scheme (which generally followed the Model Penal Code), after the defendant was convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, a capital crime (under the first part of the bifurcated trial proceeding), the second part of the bifurcated trial involved an additional hearing at which the jury received additional evidence in aggravation and mitigation. In order for the defendant to be eligible for the death penalty, the jury needed to find the existence of one of ten aggravating factors:
 The defendant has previously been convicted of a capital felony or has a history of committing serious felonies.
 The capital felony was committed while the defendant was committing another capital felony.
 The defendant created a grave risk of death to others.
 The defendant committed the crime for the purpose of receiving money or anything else of value.
 The defendant killed a judge or prosecutor exercising his official duties.
 The defendant hired a killer.
 The crime was "outrageously or wantonly vile, horrible, or inhuman in that it involved torture, depravity of mind, or an aggravated battery to the victim."
 The defendant killed a police officer, prison guard, or fireman in the line of duty.
 The offense was committed by someone who had escaped from prison.
 The offense was committed for the purpose of avoiding arrest.
Once the jury found that one or more of the aggravating factors existed beyond a reasonable doubt, then the defendant would be eligible for the death penalty. The jury may, but was not required to, then evaluate all the evidence it had heard, including mitigating evidence and other aggravating evidence not supporting one of the ten factors beyond a reasonable doubt—and decide whether the defendant should live or die. This scheme is called a non-weighing scheme, because the sentencer is not required to weigh the statutory aggravating factors against mitigating evidence before imposing a death sentence.
The Court found that, because of the jury's finding at least one aggravating factor was a prerequisite for imposing the death penalty, Georgia's scheme adequately narrowed the class of defendants eligible for the death penalty. Although there was admittedly some discretion as to the mitigation phase, that discretion is channeled in an objective way, and therefore provided for individualized sentencing. Thus, Georgia's death penalty scheme complied with the Furman requirements and was thus approved by the Court.
Florida
Florida's scheme differed from Georgia's in two respects.
First, at the sentencing hearing of a capital felon, the jury determined whether one or more aggravating factors exist, drawing on a list very similar to Georgia's. Then the jury was specifically asked to weigh the mitigating evidence presented against the statutory aggravating factors that have been proved. This scheme is called a weighing scheme.
Second, the jury's role was only advisory; the judge could disregard the jury's sentencing recommendation, but had to explain his reasoning if he did. Under Florida law, if the jury recommended life but the judge imposed a death sentence, "the facts suggesting a sentence of death should be so clear and convincing that virtually no reasonable person could differ." The trial judge must independently reweigh the aggravating factors against the mitigating factors.
The Court concluded that, as the sentencer's discretion was limited in an objective fashion and directed in a reviewable manner, Florida's scheme also adequately narrowed the class of defendants eligible for the death penalty. The Court noted that Florida's scheme came closest to the Model Penal Code's recommendation of an ideal sentencing scheme, as it used a weighing scheme whereas Georgia's scheme did not, thus allowing for individual sentencing. Thus, Florida's death penalty scheme also complied with the Furman requirements and was thus also approved by the Court.
Texas
Texas's scheme differed considerably from that suggested by the Model Penal Code and followed in large part by Georgia and Florida.
In order to narrow the class of death penalty-eligible defendants as required by Furman, the Texas Legislature did not adopt the "aggravating factors" approach outlined by the Model Penal Code. Instead, it chose to modify and severely narrow the legal definition of "capital murder", thus requiring certain objective elements to be present before one could be charged with capital murder and thus eligible for the death penalty. The 1976 law defined capital murder in Texas as involving one of the five situations:
murder of a police officer or fireman;
murder committed in the course of committing kidnapping, burglary, robbery, rape, or arson;
murder committed for remuneration (contract killing);
murder committed while escaping or attempting to escape from a penal institution; and
murder committed by a prison inmate when the victim is a prison employee.
If the defendant was convicted of capital murder, and if the prosecution sought the death penalty (which it has never been required to do in Texas), the second part of the bifurcated trial required the jury to consider two (or sometimes three) "special issues":
whether the conduct of the defendant that caused the death of the deceased was committed deliberately and with the reasonable expectation that the death of the deceased or another would result;
whether there is a probability that the defendant would commit criminal acts of violence that would constitute a continuing threat to society (under Texas law, "society" was defined as both inside and outside of the prison system; thus, a defendant who would pose a threat to persons inside prison – such as other inmates or correctional officers – would be eligible for the death penalty); and
if raised by the evidence, whether the conduct of the defendant in killing the deceased was unreasonable in response to the provocation, if any, by the deceased.
If all applicable special issues were answered in the affirmative, then the result would be an automatic death sentence; if any special issue was not answered in the affirmative, the sentence would be life imprisonment.
The Court concluded that Texas's narrow legal definition of capital murder served the same purpose as the aggravating factors in the Georgia and Florida schemes, that being to adequately narrow the class of defendants eligible for the death penalty. The Court even observed that "the principal difference between Texas and the other two States [Georgia and Florida] is that the death penalty is an available sentencing option - even potentially - for a smaller class of murders in Texas".
However, the special issues feature and its automatic death sentence imposition (if all were answered in the affirmative) was the key issue in the Court's analysis. In its review, the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals (the state's highest criminal court, to which all death sentences in Texas are automatically and directly appealed) indicated that the "continuing threat to society" special issue would allow the defendant to present mitigating evidence to the jury. The Court concluded that this special issue would allow for the same extensive consideration of mitigating evidence as the Georgia and Florida schemes. Thus, Texas's death penalty scheme, though considerably different from Florida's and Georgia's also complied with the Furman requirements and was thus also approved by the Court.
The defendant in this case, Jerry Jurek (TDCJ #508), would ultimately see his sentence commuted to life in prison.  Texas would later amend its three questions, keeping the "continuing threat to society" question, adding a second question specifically dealing with mitigating evidence, and adding a third question applicable only if the defendant was convicted as an accessory.
Capital punishment schemes rejected by the Court
North Carolina
In 1974, the North Carolina General Assembly (similar to the approach taken by the Texas Legislature) chose to adopt a narrow definition of "first-degree murder" which would be eligible for the death penalty, which was defined as:
murder perpetrated by means of poison, lying in wait, imprisonment, starving, torture, or by any other kind of willful, deliberate, and premeditated killing, or which shall be committed in the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any arson, rape, robbery, kidnapping, burglary, or other felony.
North Carolina had also enacted a mandatory death penalty for first-degree rape, but the Court later ruled in Coker v. Georgia that rape is not a capital crime, at least where the victim is not killed; the statutes mandating death penalty for first-degree arson and first-degree burglary were abrogated by the General Assembly.
The North Carolina Supreme Court had ruled that its capital sentencing scheme could survive Furman analysis if the legislature removed the discretionary sentencing provision. However, it was the lack of discretion in sentencing that the Court used to rule the scheme unconstitutional.
Louisiana
In 1973, the Louisiana Legislature adopted the approach taken by North Carolina, by redefining first-degree murder as the killing of a human being in one of five circumstances:
 when the offender has a specific intent to kill and is engaged in the perpetration of aggravated kidnapping, aggravated rape, or armed robbery;
 when the offender has a specific intent to kill a fireman or police officer engaged in the performance of his duties;
 when the offender has a specific intent to kill and has previously been convicted of an unrelated murder or is serving a life sentence;
 when the offender has a specific intent to kill or inflict great bodily harm on more than one person; and
 when the offender has a specific intent to kill and has been offered or has received anything of value for committing the murder
Also, unlike North Carolina, Louisiana law required the jury in all first-degree murder cases to be instructed on second-degree murder and manslaughter, crimes ineligible for the death penalty.
Although Louisiana had created a class of death-eligible crimes somewhat narrower than North Carolina had, it still had a mandatory death penalty for a significant range of crimes, which were aggravated rape, aggravated kidnapping and treason; the lack of discretion in sentencing caused the Louisiana scheme to suffer the same unconstitutional infirmities as North Carolina's.
Other views expressed in these cases
Justices William J. Brennan and Thurgood Marshall expressed their views, which they also articulated in Furman, that the death penalty does not deter crime and that American society has evolved to the point that it is no longer an appropriate vehicle for expressing retribution. In every subsequent capital case that would come before the Court during their tenures, they would refer to their opinions in Gregg in support of their vote against the death penalty.
Justice Byron White countered that capital punishment cannot be unconstitutional because the Constitution expressly mentions it and because two centuries of Court decisions assumed that it was constitutional. Furthermore, for White the judgment of the legislatures of 35 states was paramount, and suggested that the punishment should remain in use. He also felt that the Court should defer to a state legislature's response to the problem of juror response to the prospect of capital punishment, rather than dictate that the Eighth Amendment requires a particular response. White also disagreed that the Constitution required a separate penalty hearing before imposing the death penalty. "Even if the character of the accused must be considered under the Eighth Amendment, surely a State is not constitutionally forbidden to provide that the commission of certain crimes conclusively establishes that the criminal's character is such that he deserves death." He also saw no difference between Louisiana's definition of first-degree murder and Texas's definition of capital murder.
Justice William Rehnquist would have upheld North Carolina's and Louisiana's mandatory death penalties. He disputed the historical evidence adduced in support of the claim that American juries dislike mandatory death penalties. He also felt that the Court's decisions had an analytical flaw. The Court had struck down the mandatory death penalty because it took away discretion from the jury. Yet, Rehnquist pointed out, a jury in Georgia could reject the death penalty for no reason at all. Thus, Georgia's scheme did not alleviate the concerns articulated in Furman about the arbitrariness of the death penalty any more than North Carolina's ignored them. He also disputed whether the appellate review of death sentences inherent in the systems the Court had approved could truly ensure that each death sentence satisfied those concerns. He finally took issue with the idea that the fact that "death is different" requires any extra safeguards in the sentencing process. 
Justice John Paul Stevens remarked in October 2010 that his vote in the decision was regrettable. Stevens wrote that his vote was made with respect for precedent within the court that held capital punishment to be constitutional.
Aftermath
Utah was the first state to resume executions after capital punishment was reinstated in the United States in 1976, when Gary Gilmore was executed by a firing squad on January 17, 1977.Death Penalty Information Center  Following his conviction and death sentence, Gilmore insisted he wanted to be executed, and for this reason some consider the national moratorium to have only ended in 1979 with electrocution of John Spenkelink, who resisted his execution.
The July 2 Cases mark the beginning of the United States' modern legal conversation about the death penalty. Major subsequent developments include forbidding the death penalty for rape (Coker v. Georgia, Kennedy v. Louisiana), restricting the death penalty in cases of felony murder (Enmund v. Florida), exempting the mentally handicapped (Atkins v. Virginia) and juvenile murderers (Roper v. Simmons) from the death penalty, removing virtually all limitations on the presentation of mitigating evidence (Lockett v. Ohio, Holmes v. South Carolina), requiring precision in the definition of aggravating factors (Godfrey v. Georgia, Walton v. Arizona), and requiring the jury to decide whether aggravating factors have been proved beyond a reasonable doubt (Ring v. Arizona).
Gregg has been described as a "judicial surrender to political pressure". In the wake of the Furman decision, 35 states reenacted death penalty statutes. There was a significant shift in the attitudes towards capital punishment between Furman and Gregg; in 1972, when Furman was decided, public support for the death penalty was around 50 percent. By the time Gregg was decided, a mere four years later in 1976, 66 percent of the public favored capital punishment.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 428
 List of landmark court decisions in the United States
Notes
References
External links
Gregg v. Georgia from C-SPAN's Landmark Cases: Historic Supreme Court Decisions
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:Capital punishment in Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:Legal history of Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:1976 in United States case law
"""

From "Gregory v. Ashcroft" ==> """
Gregory v. Ashcroft, 501 U.S. 452 (1991) was a U.S. Supreme Court case. It concerned a provision in the Missouri state constitution that required state judges to retire at the age of 70, and the court was asked to consider whether it conflicted with the 1967 federal Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) and the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The provision was upheld, with the case being one of several Supreme Court decisions supporting the principle that "ambiguous language will not be interpreted to intrude on areas of traditional state authority or important state governmental functions".John Fitzgerald Duffy and Michael E. Herz, A Guide to Judicial and Political Review of Federal Agencies (American Bar Association, 2005), p. 74, ISBN 1590314832.
Facts
Two Missouri state judges brought suit against John D. Ashcroft, the Governor of Missouri, alleging a provision of the Missouri state constitution, Article V, § 26, violated both the ADEA and the Equal Protection Clause. The provision required all non-municipal state judges to retire at the age of seventy.David Andrew Schultz, Encyclopedia of the United States Constitution (Facts On File, 2010), p. 329. The United States District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri granted the governor’s motion to dismiss on the grounds that Missouri's appointed judges were not protected by the ADEA because they were "appointees ... 'on a policymaking level'" and were therefore excluded from the Act's definition of "employee". The United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit affirmed the policymaking distinction, further holding that the provision did not violate the Fourteenth Amendment because there was a rational basis for distinguishing judges who had reached the age of seventy from those who had not. The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari on both the ADEA and equal protection questions. 
Judgment
In a 7–2 decision, the Court held that the Missouri constitutional provision did not violate federal statute or the Equal Protection Clause. Justice O'Connor, writing for the majority, held that under the principles of federalism and dual sovereignty, the Supremacy Clause allows Congress to impose its will on the states, but only when acting under a Constitutionally-delegated power. The Court applied the 'plain statement' rule, the idea that Congress should make its intention 'clear and manifest' if it intends to alter the federal-state balance of power and pre-empt the historic powers of the states. The opinion recognized the authority of the people of the states to determine the qualifications of their most important government officials as a power that lies at 'the heart of representative government'. The Court found that state judges were not clearly 'employees' as defined by the ADEA (29 U.S.C. § 630(f)) and concluded that the statute did not plainly cover appointed state judges. The Court also found a rational basis for the retirement age, based in Missouri citizens' interest in maintaining a judiciary fully capable of performing the demanding tasks that judges must perform and the fact that physical and mental capacity sometimes diminishes with age.
Justice White, with Justice Stevens joining, concurred in part and dissented in part. The concurrence found the majority's federalism concerns irrelevant to the "actual conflict" preemption, arguing that the cases cited for the plain statement rule involved issues of whether Congress intended for legislation to apply to states at all. The concurrence further argued that the majority's decision directly contravened the decisions in Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority (1985) and South Carolina v. Baker (1988). The concurrence agreed with the majority judgment because it found that the state judges were not included in the ADEA's definition of 'employee'. 
Justice Blackmun, joined by Justice Marshall, dissented, on the grounds that an appointed state judge is an "appointee on the policymaking level". They would instead have "deferred to the EEOC's interpretation of the statute", which "regarded the state judges as covered under the ADEA".
Legacy
The holding in Gregory v. Ashcroft imposed a stricter burden on Congress to state clearly its intent to extend federal statutes to state and local governmental functions. This decision relied on the 'plain statement' rule, but the Supreme Court required more than an expression of Congress's clear and unequivocal intent to extend federal regulation to the states; the majority's interpretation of the rule required Congress to state clearly and specifically its intention to extend the ADEA to appointed state judges in particular. 
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1991 in United States case law
Category:Ageism case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
"""

From "Gregory v. City of Chicago" ==> """
Gregory v. Chicago, 394 U.S. 111 (1969), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court overturned the disorderly conduct charges against Dick Gregory and others for peaceful demonstrations in Chicago.. 
 Background 
Social activists, including comedian Dick Gregory, protested against school segregation in Chicago, Illinois.  Twelve years earlier, in Brown v. Board of Education, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled school segregation unconstitutional. The protesters marched from Chicago's city hall to the mayor's residence in the white neighborhood of Bridgeport. After the march concluded, white bystanders began to act unruly and heckle the protesters; when they could not contain the hecklers' activity, police asked the protesters to disperse. The protesters did not disperse and were consequently arrested, and subsequently convicted by a jury, of violating Chicago's disorderly conduct ordinance. The protesters appealed to the Illinois Supreme Court. That court upheld their conviction, holding that the protesters' refusal to obey the police order justified the convictions.City of Chicago v. Gregory, 392d 47, 233 N.E.2d 422 (1968). Aided by the ACLU, the protesters appealed to the US Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
The US Supreme Court, in a unanimous decision, overturned the conviction for several reasons:
 "Petitioners were denied due process since there was no evidence to support their convictions"
 "The convictions were for demonstrating, not for refusing to obey police orders."
 "The trial judge's charge allowed the jury to convict for acts protected by the First Amendment. Stromberg v. California"
Justice Hugo Black, in a concurring opinion, argued that arresting demonstrators as a consequence of unruly behavior of bystanders would amount to a "heckler's veto." The Heckler's Veto: A Reexamination
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 394
 Stromberg v. California, 283 U.S. 359
 References 
 External links 
Chicago
Category:1969 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Gregory v. Hartley" ==> """
Gregory v. Hartley, 113 U.S. 742 (1885), was a case in error to the Supreme Court of the State of Nebraska where it was decided and reaffirmed that the words "term at which said cause could be first tried and before the trial thereof," Act of March 3, 1875, c. 137, § 3, 18 Stat. 471, mean the first term at which the cause is in law triable, i.e., in which it would stand for trial if the parties had taken the usual steps as to pleadings and other preparations. Babbitt v. Clark, 103 U.S. 808, and Pullman Palace Car Co. v. Speck, ante, 113 U.S. 87..
Decision
Chief Justice Waite delivered the opinion of the Court.
Without considering any of the other objections to the removal which might be urged, the judgment was Affirmed.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States federal jurisdiction case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:History of Lincoln, Nebraska
Category:1885 in United States case law
"""

From "Gregory v. Helvering" ==> """
Gregory v. Helvering, 293 U.S. 465 (1935), was a landmark decision by the United States Supreme Court concerned with U.S. income tax law.. The case is cited as part of the basis for two legal doctrines: the business purpose doctrine and the doctrine of substance over form. The business purpose doctrine is essentially that if a transaction has no substantial business purpose other than the avoidance or reduction of Federal tax, the tax law will not regard the transaction. The doctrine of substance over form is essentially that for Federal tax purposes, a taxpayer is bound by the economic substance of a transaction if the economic substance varies from its legal form.
Facts
Evelyn Gregory was the owner of all the shares of a company called United Mortgage Company ("United"). United Mortgage in turn owned 1,000 shares of stock of a company called Monitor Securities Corporation ("Monitor"). On September 18, 1928, she created Averill Corp and, three days after, transferred the 1000 shares in Monitor to Averill. On September 24, she dissolved Averill and distributed the 1000 shares in Monitor to herself, and on the same day sold the shares for $133,333.33. She claimed there was a cost of $57,325.45, and she should be taxed on a capital net gain on $76,007.88. On her 1928 federal income tax return, Gregory treated the transaction as a tax free corporate reorganization, under the Revenue Act of 1928 section 112. The Commissioner of Internal Revenue, Guy T. Helvering, argued in economic substance there was no business reorganization, that Gregory owned all three corporations and was simply following a legal form to make it appear like a reorganization so she could dispose of the Monitor shares without paying substantial income tax. Accordingly, she understated her liability by $10,000.
Judgment
In the ensuing litigation, the Board of Tax Appeals (a predecessor to today's United States Tax Court) ruled in favor of the taxpayer. See Gregory v. Commissioner, 27 B.T.A. 223 (1932).
Second Circuit
On appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit reversed the Board of Tax Appeals, ruling in favor of the Commissioner. Learned Hand J said the following in the course of his judgment.
Supreme Court
The Supreme Court of the United States also ruled in favor of the Commissioner. Although the letter of the law might arguably have been complied with, the intention of the Act was not to allow reorganizations merely for the purpose of tax avoidance. In the course of its judgment, the Court said the following.Gregory v. Helvering, 293 U.S. at 468-470
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 293
 References 
Further reading
External links
Category:1935 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:Tax evasion in the United States
"""

From "Griffin v. California" ==> """
Griffin v. California, 380 U.S. 609 (1965), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled, by a 6–2 vote, that it is a violation of a defendant's Fifth Amendment rights for the prosecutor to comment to the jury on the defendant's declining to testify, or for the judge to instruct the jury that such silence is evidence of guilt..
The ruling specified that this new extension to defendants' Fifth Amendment rights was binding on all States through the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.  This "no-comment rule" had already been binding on the federal government's courts because of an 1878 law.
Background of the case
Edward Dean Griffin was convicted of the murder of Essie Mae Hodson before a jury in a California court.  Griffin had been invited into an apartment shared by Hodson and her boyfriend, Eddie Seay.  After going to bed, Seay was awakened by noise; he saw Griffin and Hodson struggling, and Hodson said Griffin had tried to force her to have sex.  After Seay locked Griffin outside the apartment, Griffin broke back into the apartment and struck Seay, who ran to a bar for help.  Upon returning, Griffin and Hodson were gone.  In the morning, a witness saw Griffin, buttoning up his pants, coming out of a very large trash box in an alley about 300 feet from Hodson's apartment.  The witness found Hodson in the trash box, bleeding and apparently in shock.  She died at a hospital the next day from her injuries.  Griffin, who already had multiple felony convictions, did not testify at the trial.
As the U.S. Supreme Court said in its ruling, the prosecutor in the final argument to the jury "made much of the failure of [Griffin] to testify":
The judge, in his instructions to the jury, stated that a defendant has a constitutional right not to testify, and that this did not create a presumption of guilt, nor reduce the need for the prosecution to prove its case; but also stated to the jury:
This jury instruction was valid under the California Constitution, whose "comment practice" clause in Article I stated at the time, "[I]n any criminal case, whether the defendant testifies or not, his failure to explain or to deny by his testimony any evidence or facts in the case against him may be commented upon by the court and by counsel, and may be considered by the court or the jury."
Griffin was convicted and sentenced to the death penalty.  The California Supreme Court affirmed the conviction, and subsequently the U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari to determine "whether comment on the failure to testify violated the Self-Incrimination Clause of the Fifth Amendment which we made applicable to the States by the Fourteenth in Malloy v. Hogan."
History and legal background
Until the late 19th century, defendants in criminal trials in the United States were not allowed to testify.  Starting in 1864, the States started to allow this practice, until by the end of the 20th century, Georgia was the only State that still prohibited testimony from the defendant.Griffin, Lissa, p. 934.
A new concern was that although under the Fifth Amendment no defendant could be forced to testify, now that testifying was permitted, "the failure of a defendant to testify would be seen as a confession of guilt and that jurors would draw this inference regardless of any instructions they might receive."Griffin, Lissa, p. 935.  To help reduce the impact or the likelihood of this inference, the federal government passed a law in 1878 called the "no-comment rule", prohibiting prosecutors from commenting on the failure to testify, and prohibiting any presumption against the defendant based on his failure to testify.  (This law is currently .)
This federal law applied only to the federal courts, and because of the principle of federalism, the States made their own decisions on this matter.  For example, the California Constitution explicitly permitted counsel and the judge to comment on the failure to testify.
In two rulings before Griffin, Twining v. New Jersey (1908) and Adamson v. California (1947), the Supreme Court upheld state laws allowing such adverse comments, ruling that even if adverse comments did violate defendants' Fifth Amendment rights, the Fifth Amendment did not bind the States.  In Malloy v. Hogan (1964), the Court reversed this stance, ruling that the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment extended Fifth Amendment protections against self-incrimination to State trials.
The ruling
Justice Douglas wrote for the Court that a prosecutor's or judge's comment to the jury about a defendant's refusal to testify "is a remnant of the 'inquisitorial system of criminal justice', which the Fifth Amendment outlaws.  It is a penalty imposed by courts for exercising a constitutional privilege.  It cuts down on the privilege by making its assertion costly."
The Court then noted that an objection to this logic might be that a jury might find it "natural and irresistible" to infer the guilt of a defendant who refused to testify while possessing facts about the evidence against him, and so a judge's commenting upon the refusal did not "magnify that inference into a penalty for asserting a constitutional privilege"; but went on to state that a judge's comment on the refusal "solemnizes the silence of the accused into evidence against him."
In a footnote, the Court noted that this ruling was "no innovation", because a majority of the Court had already written in Adamson v. California (1947) that California's "comment practice" violated the Fifth Amendment.  At the time, however, the Court had not yet ruled that the Fourteenth Amendment made the Fifth Amendment applicable to the States.
Justice Harlan's concurrence
Justice Harlan concurred "with great reluctance", agreeing with the Court that "within the federal judicial system the Fifth Amendment bars adverse comment by federal prosecutors and judges on a defendant's failure to take the stand in a criminal trial", but writing that this "no-comment" rule was a "non-fundamental" part of the Fifth Amendment, and that he would only apply it to the States because of the previous term's Malloy v. Hogan decision.  (Justice Harlan had dissented from the Malloy decision, writing that the "compelled uniformity" of applying the Fifth Amendment to the States "carries extremely mischievous, if not dangerous, consequences for our federal system".)  Justice Harlan wrote that state and federal courts need not run by the same rules and that cases such as Griffin showed that the practical tendency had been for the federal judiciary to override the state judiciary, which was contrary to the basic idea of federalism; and that he hoped "that the Court will eventually return to constitutional paths which, until recently, it has followed throughout its history."
The dissent
Justice Stewart, joined by Justice White, dissented, writing that the Fifth Amendment states that no person "shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself", and that California's "comment rule" did not "compel" the defendant nor anyone else to testify.  Also, "the California procedure is not only designed to protect the defendant against unwarranted inferences which might be drawn by an uninformed jury; it is also an attempt by the State to recognize and articulate what it believes to be the natural probative force of certain facts."
Justice Stewart wrote that the formulation of such rules "is properly a matter of local concern", and noted that the American Bar Association and the American Law Institute had endorsed the "comment" practice.
Significance and criticism
In Mitchell v. United States (1999), the Court extended Griffin'''s no-comment rule to the sentencing phase of State trials.  Justice Scalia wrote in his dissent that Griffin "did not even pretend to be rooted in a historical understanding of the Fifth Amendment.  Rather, in a breathtaking act of sorcery it simply transformed legislative policy into constitutional command", and that "To my mind, Griffin was a wrong turn – which is not cause enough to overrule it, but is cause enough to resist its extension." This dissent was joined by three other Justices, including Justice Thomas, who added in a separate dissent that Griffin "lacks foundation in the Constitution's text, history, or logic", and should be overruled outright.
A 1980 article in the Michigan Law Review stated that Griffin occurred "at the peak of [the Supreme Court's] enthusiasm to expand the constitutional protections of criminal defendants", and that it has "impaired the effective operation of the criminal justice system", automatically reversing cases where the defendant's silence is mentioned but being a "complete failure to address the much more common situation in which no comment is made by judge or prosecutor but the jury nonetheless concludes that the defendant is guilty because he has nothing to offer in his own defense."Great American Court Cases wrote that the Griffin ruling "preserved the presumption of innocence to which a defendant is constitutionally entitled."
The United Kingdom had a no-comment rule similar to that established in Griffin, but the rule was reversed in Northern Ireland in 1988 as a response to IRA terrorism, and later the reversal was extended to England and Wales.Griffin, Lissa, p. 950. Using this reversal as an argument, a 2007 article in the William & Mary Bill of Rights Journal argued that "Griffin'''s no-comment rule has never faced a challenge as daunting as that posed by modern domestic terrorism", and that it is currently "vulnerable" to reversal.Griffin, Lissa, p. 961.
Subsequent events in the case
After the U.S. Supreme Court's reversal of Griffin's conviction, he was tried again for murder, and a mistrial was declared when the jury was deadlocked 2 to 10 in favor of a second-degree murder conviction.  In his third trial, the jury found Griffin guilty of first-degree murder and sentenced him to death.  Upon automatic appeal (because of the jury's recommendation of the death penalty), the court reversed the trial court's judgment of conviction and imposition of the death penalty.People v. Edward Dean Griffin, 66 Cal.2d 459 (April 25, 1967).
References
External links
Category:Legal history of California
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1965 in California
Category:1965 in United States case law
"""

From "Griffin v. County School Board of Prince Edward County" ==> """
Griffin v. County School Board of Prince Edward County, 377 U.S. 218 (1964), is a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States that held that the County School Board of Prince Edward County, Virginia's decision to close all local, public schools and provide vouchers to attend private schools were constitutionally impermissible as violations of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment..
 Background 
In response to the court's holding in Brown v. Board of Education, Virginia initiated a coordinated policy known as massive resistance to maintain segregationist policies. A legislative package known as the Stanley Plan was enacted. Numerous public schools had been closed through the tactics of massive resistance. However, when the Prince Edward County Board of Supervisors was ordered to integrate the public schools under its jurisdiction in June 1959, it took the unusual and extreme step of not appropriating any money for the school system, forcing all public schools in the county to close for the next five years.Griffin, 377 U.S. at 223.
Instead of funding public schools, Prince Edward County provided tuition grants for all students, regardless of their race, to use for private nonsectarian education.Griffin, 377 U.S. at 224. No private schools existed for blacks, resulting in the total deprivation of formal education to black children in the county from 1959 to 1963. All private schools in the region remained racially segregated. A private foundation proposed opening a private school for black children, but the offer was rejected in part because many of the black residents of Prince Edward County wanted "to continue the legal battle for desegregated public schools." In 1963, "federal, state, and county authorities cooperated to have classes conducted for Negroes and whites in school buildings owned by the county," but the county-funded schools remained closed until the Supreme Court's 1964 ruling on the litigation arising from the county's 1959 closure of the schools.
In 1959, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit had ordered the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia to require that the schools open without segregation. The District Court initially refrained from ordering the schools opened pending the separate question whether the Virginia state constitution required the operation of public schools.Griffin v. Board of Supervisors of Prince Edward County, 203 Va. 321, 124 S. E. 2d 227 (1962). In 1962, the District Court ordered the county board to fund the schools.Griffin, 377 U.S. at 224-25. The Fourth Circuit reversed, holding that the District Court should have awaited the state law determinations of whether the county was required to operate schools.Griffin, 377 U.S. at 225. The black schoolchildren appealed to the Supreme Court.
The case was argued by Robert L. Carter for the NAACP (Samuel W. Tucker and Frank D. Reeves on the brief); Virginia assistant attorney general R.D. McIlvaine (Attorney General Robert Young Button and Assistant Attorney General Frederick Thomas Gray on the brief) and Judge John Segar Gravatt for the school board, and Solicitor General Archibald Cox argued on behalf of the United States as an amicus curiae, urging reversal.
Decision
thumb|125px|right|Draft of first page of decision
The Supreme Court, in a decision authored by Justice Hugo Black, ordered the schools reopened. It held that the supervisors' action of refusing to fund the public schools violated the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment, where the county offered only private school vouchers for students and where no private schools accepted black students.
This case marked the first time that the Supreme Court ordered a county government to exercise their power of taxation.
This unusual level of intervention in the function of local government provoked a dissent by Justices Clark and Harlan:
See also
 Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 377
 References 
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States school desegregation case law
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:Education in Prince Edward County, Virginia
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:African-American history of Virginia
Category:Legal history of Virginia
"""

From "Griffin v. Illinois" ==> """
Griffin v. Illinois, 351 U.S. 12 (1956), was a case in which United States Supreme Court held that a criminal defendant may not be denied the right to appeal by inability to pay for a trial transcript.
Background
Facts
The petitioners, Griffin and Crenshaw, were tried together and convicted of armed robbery in the Criminal Court of Cook County, Illinois.
Illinois law
Illinois law gave every person convicted in a criminal trial a right of review by writ of error, but it was necessary for the defendant to furnish the appellate court with a bill of exceptions or report of proceedings at the trial certified by the trial judge, and it was sometimes impossible to prepare such documents without a stenographic transcript of the trial proceedings, which are furnished free only to indigent defendants sentenced to death.
Illinois law provided that "Writs of error in all criminal cases are writs of right and shall be issued of course." (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1955, c. 38, § 769.)
Under a separate Illinois law, indigent defendants could obtain a free transcript to obtain appellate review of constitutional questions, but, except for capital cases, not of other alleged trial errors such as admissibility and sufficiency of evidence. (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1953, c. 110, § 259.70A (Supreme Court Rule 70A), now Ill. Rev. Stat., 1955, c. 110, § 101.65 (Supreme Court Rule 65).)
Trial court: motion
Petitioners filed a motion in the trial court asking that in view of their inability to pay, a certified copy of the record, necessary for a complete bill of exceptions as required by Illinois law for a full appellate review, was to be furnished them without cost. Immediately after their conviction, they filed a motion in the trial court, asking that a certified copy of the entire record, including a stenographic transcript of the proceedings, be furnished them without cost. They alleged that they were "poor persons with no means of paying the necessary fees to acquire the Transcript and Court Records needed to prosecute an appeal...." They alleged that they were without funds to pay for such documents and that failure of the court to provide them would violate the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment.
The factual allegations were not denied; nevertheless, the trial court denied the motion without a hearing.
Trial court: petition
The defendants then filed a petition under the Illinois Post-Conviction Hearing Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 38 §§ 826–832), under which only questions arising under the State or Federal Constitution could be raised, to obtain a certified copy of the entire record for their appeal, alleging that there were manifest nonconstitutional errors in the trial that entitled them to have their convictions set aside on appeal, the only impediment to full appellate review was their lack of funds to buy a transcript, and refusal to afford full appellate review solely because of their poverty was a denial of due process and equal protection. The trial court dismissed their petition.
Supreme Court of Illinois
The Supreme Court of Illinois affirmed, solely on the ground that the petition raised no substantial state or federal constitutional question.
Certiorari and arguments
On certiorari, the prisoners contended that the failure to provide them with the needed transcript violated the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment of the US Constitution.
The question presented was whether Illinois may, consistently with the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment, administer the statute so as to deny adequate appellate review to the poor while granting such review to all others.
Opinion of the court
Majority decision
The judgment was vacated and the cause remanded. Justice Black was joined by Warren, Douglas and Clark.
Black held that while the state court was not required by the federal constitution to provide appellate courts or a right to appellate review, because the state did grant appellate review at all stages of the proceedings, the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses protected the prisoners from invidious discriminations. The court held that destitute defendants must be afforded as adequate appellate review as defendants who had enough money to buy the transcripts. It was held that the due process and equal protection clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment were violated by the state's denial of appellate review solely on account of a defendant's inability to pay for a transcript.
The court vacated and remanded the order from the state supreme court. The court held that petitioner prisoners had to be afforded as adequate appellate review as defendants with money to buy transcripts.
Concurrence
Frankfurter, while concurring in the judgment and apparently also agreeing with the substantive holding, expressed the view that the court should not indulge in the fiction that the new rule announced by it has always been the law, and therefore those who did not avail themselves of it in the past waived their rights.
Dissenting opinions
Burton
Burton, with Minton, Reed, and Harlan, dissented, holding that the Federal Constitution does not invalidate state appellate proceedings merely because a required transcript has not been provided without cost to an indigent litigant upon his request.
Harlan
Harlan, in a separate dissenting opinion, also expressed the view that the constitutional question tendered by the defendants should not have been decided, because the record did not present it in that clean-cut, concrete, and unclouded form usually demanded for a decision of constitutional issues.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 351
References
 Griffin v. Illinois, 351 U.S. 12 (U.S. 1956)
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:1956 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Griffin v. Maryland" ==> """
Griffin v. Maryland, 378 U.S. 130 (1964), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States reversed the convictions of five African Americans who were arrested during a protest of a privately owned amusement park by a park employee who was also a deputy sheriff..  The Court found that the convictions violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Background
Five African American college students were part of a June 30, 1960, protest which picketed the racial exclusionary policies of the privately owned and operated Glen Echo Amusement Park located in Montgomery County, Maryland, which had a policy of excluding any blacks who wished to patronize its facilities. There were no signs indicating this exclusionary policy, nor were tickets required for admission. The students used tickets purchased by others and boarded a carousel. A park employee who was also a deputy sheriff saw the students and, after consulting with the park manager, told the students that they were not permitted on any of the rides, and had five minutes to leave the park. After the five minutes had expired, they were arrested for criminal trespass. The five students, William L. Griffin, Marvous Saunders, Michael Proctor, Cecil T. Washington, Jr., and Gwendolyn Greene, were convicted of criminal trespass in the Circuit Court of Montgomery County and ordered to pay a fine of $100. The convictions were upheld in the Maryland Court of Appeals, noting the arrests were "an enforcement by the operator of the park of its lawful policy of segregation," and did not constitute any acton by the state.Griffin v. Bell, 225 Md. 422, 431, 171 A.2d 717, 721
Court's decision
The Supreme Court had previously found that state action in support of segregation was a violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment in Pennsylvania v. Board of Directors of City Trusts of Philadelphia, 353 U.S. 230 (1957). The Court concluded the arrests by the deputy sheriff, acting under his own authority, constituted state action enforcing a policy of segregation and was therefore in violation of this clause.
The concurring opinion of Justice Douglas described the majority opinion as holding, under the particular facts of the case, that the state was a joint participant in the policy of segregation. The dissent by Justice Harlan stated that he did not believe that the participation by the deputy sheriff was any different from if a policeman arrested the students after a complaint had been made by the park, and believed that the principles discussed in the dissent of Justice Black in Bell v. Maryland, 378 U.S. 318 (1964) applied to this case. The dissent in Bell had argued that private actions involving segregation were not within the scope of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Critical response
Griffin v. Maryland was one of five cases involving segregation protests decided on June 22, 1964. The other four cases were Barr v. City of Columbia, 378 U.S. 146 (1964), Robinson v. Florida, 378 U.S. 153 (1964), Bouie v. City of Columbia, 378 U.S. 347, and Bell v. Maryland, 378 U.S. 226 (1964). In none of these cases did the Supreme Court reach the merits of any argument addressing whether private actions of segregation which are enforced by state courts constituted a state action which violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. These decisions were announced two days after the Senate ended a filibuster and passed the bill which would become the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which outlawed segregation in public accommodations. It has been suggested that the Supreme Court refrained from reaching the merits in these cases in consideration of the Act; had it done so it would have eliminated the basis for passage of the Act.
See also
Civil Rights Movement
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 378
 References 
External links
Category:1964 in Maryland
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:Amusement parks in Maryland
Category:Montgomery County, Maryland
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Civil rights movement case law
"""

From "Griffith v. Godey" ==> """
Griffith v. Godey, 113 U.S. 89 (1885), was a suit regarding equity of defendants who were trustees of certain property that the complainant was interested in, and which they received and disposed of. 
The complainant, Ellis Griffith, and his brother, John Griffith, were partners, engaged in the business of cattle raising, and resided in Kern County, California, where they occupied what is called a stock range, a tract of country on which cattle are permitted to roam and graze. It may be termed the feeding ground-the pasture land of the cattle. Although the title to the land constituting the range was in the United States, and the land was not inclosed, the right of the Griffiths to use it for the pasturage of their cattle was recognized and respected by their neighbors and other stock raisers in the county. It had excellent springs, furnishing water to cattle roaming over a large extent of country, and was capable of supporting from one to three thousand head. The property, therefore was of great value..
Background
In April 1870, Pedro Altube, a member of the firm of Peres & Co., large cattle dealers in California, who was familiar with Kern county and with the character of the range, desired to purchase it for his firm, and offered for it, with the stock, $12,000. 
On May 21, 1870, John Griffith died, his heirs were his two brothers, the complainant and Morris Griffith. The partnership property  remained in the complainant's possession. It consisted of horned cattle, horses, and the range mentioned. The brother Morris, who would have been a proper party complainant, declined to take part in the suit. Ellis Griffith, the surviving partner, was a man of weak mind, without any knowledge of business, and barely able to read and write. The defendants were the neighbors Godey and Williams. Godey was an old resident of the county, a man of means, and had the entire confidence of the complainant. On the ninth of June, within a month after the death of the intestate, Altube spoke t Godey about purchasing the range, and stated that he would give for it, with the stock, $12,000, the sum he had offered previously in April; but Godey then had no control over the range, and could therefore give no title to it. 
On July 16, Godey filed a petition for special letters of administration on the estate of the deceased, and on the nineteenth of July he was appointed special administrator
On September 17, 1870, the complainant executed a conveyance of his claim of  to the defendant Godey for the sum of $ 500. In the bill he alleges that he did not know the contents of the instrument, but signed it at Godey's request, without intending to convey any interest in the range, and that he received no consideration for it. He was not then, nor at any other time, informed of the offer made for the range and stock by Altube, of the firm of Peres & Co. Soon after this conveyance Godey informed Altube that he and Williams would sell him the range and stock for $13,000. Altube accepted the offer on condition that a certain squatter on the land should be removed. They bought off the squatter for $500, and on the seventh of November 1870, Altube paid the $13,000 for the range and stock, which sum was equally divided between them.
It was shown that the defendant Williams participated in the fraudulent design. He never paid anything on his bid for the horses and cattle at the probate sale until weeks afterwards, and then less than one- fourth of the amount. It was not until after the cattle and horses were purchased by Altube that he paid the balance, although he knew that the probate sale could be made only for cash, and that the amount bid by him had been reported to the court as cash paid. He also knew that the property did not belong to the deceased, but to the partnership between him and the complainant. 
The record shows that all the partnership property was sold within six months after the death of the deceased, so as to net over $12,000, and that out of that sum the complainant received only $500. The defendants made a large profit out of the transactions and they were required to account to the complainant, as surviving partner of the deceased, for their unjust gains. This was not done.
Decision
The error of the lower court  arose from treating the possessory right to the cattle range on the public lands-as it was then held by the partnership on the death of John Griffith-as not constituting any property of value which could be recognized as such by the courts, the claimants being both aliens who had never taken any steps to be naturalized. But the constitution of California, then in force, invested foreigners who were bona fide residents of the state with the same rights, in respect to the possession and enjoyment of property, a native-born citizens. Article 1, 17. And the possessory right to the range, though held by aliens, was respected by their neighbors and all cattle dealers of the country, and had a market value, as shown by the price which others were ready to pay for it. The responsibility of trustees does not depend upon the validity of the title of the grantor of the trust property. If the right or interest transferred to them can be sold for a valuable consideration, it is to be treated as property, and corresponding duties devolve upon the trustees with respect to its sale as upon the sale of property, the title of which is undisputed. 
The decree of the lower court was reversed, and the cause remanded, with directions to enter a decree in conformity with this opinion; and was so ordered.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:History of Kern County, California
Category:Cattle in the United States
"""

From "Griffith v. Kentucky" ==> """
Griffith v. Kentucky, 479 U.S. 314 (1987), is a case decided by the United States Supreme Court.
Background
Randall Lamont Griffith, who is African American, was indicted for first-degree robbery in 1982 at the Circuit Court of Jefferson County, Kentucky.  This Supreme Court decision concerned the retrospective application of judge-made rules. Specifically, the Court had to decide whether a prosecutor's use of peremptory challenges to exclude black jurors, combined with his call to the jury clerk, violated the black petitioner's right to an impartial jury. The Court was called upon to decide whether its previous decision in Batson v. Kentucky was applicable to litigation that was not yet final or that was pending on direct review (that is, on direct appeal rather than a collateral attack such as by petition for a writ of habeas corpus) when Batson was decided. Both Griffith and Batson concern trials in the same courthouse.
Question
Could retroactive Supreme Court decisions be applied selectively to cases pending direct review or not yet final?
Holding
The Court held that after a new rule had been decided in a particular case, "the integrity of judicial review requires that we apply that rule to all similar cases pending on direct review." The Court reasoned that selective application of new rules violated the principle of treating similarly situated defendants on an equal basis. The Court also refused to make an exception to the rule of retroactivity in cases where there was a "clean break" with past precedent.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 479
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Batson challenge case law
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:Jefferson County, Kentucky
Category:History of Louisville, Kentucky
"""

From "Griggs v. Duke Power Co." ==> """
Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 U.S. 424 (1971), was a court case argued before the Supreme Court of the United States on December 14, 1970. It concerned employment discrimination and the disparate impact theory, and was decided on March 8, 1971..  It is generally considered the first case of its type.
The Supreme Court ruled that the company's employment requirements did not pertain to applicants' ability to perform the job, and so were unintentionally discriminating against black employees. The judgment famously held that "Congress has now provided that tests or criteria for employment or promotion may not provide equality of opportunity merely in the sense of the fabled offer of milk to the stork and the fox."
Facts
In the 1950s Duke Power's Dan River Steam Station in North Carolina had a policy restricting black employees to its "Labor" department, where the highest-paying position paid less than the lowest-paying position in the four other departments. In 1955 the company added the requirement of a high school diploma for employment in any department other than Labor, and offered to pay two-thirds of the high-school training tuition for employees without a diploma.
On July 2, 1965, the day the Civil Rights Act of 1964 took effect, Duke Power added two employment tests, which would allow employees without high-school diplomas to transfer to higher-paying departments. The Bennett Mechanical Comprehension Test was a test of mechanical aptitude, and the Wonderlic Cognitive Ability Test was an IQ test measuring general intelligence.
Whites were almost ten times more likely than blacks to meet these new employment and transfer requirements. According to the 1960 Census, while 34% of white males in North Carolina had high-school diplomas, only 18% of blacks did. The disparities of aptitude tests were far greater; with the cutoffs set at the median for high-school graduates, 58% of whites passed, compared to 6% of blacks.420 F.2d 1225, 1239 n. 6. citing U.S. Bureau of the Census, U.S. Census of Population: 1960, Vol. 1, Characteristics of the Population, pt. 35, Table 47; and Decision of EEOC, CCH Empl. Prac. Guide, ¶ 17,304.53 (December 2, 1966). See also Decision of EEOC 70-552, CCH Empl. Prac. Guide, ¶ 6139 (February 19, 1970).
Judgment
The Supreme Court ruled that under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, if such tests disparately impact ethnic minority groups, businesses must demonstrate that such tests are "reasonably related" to the job for which the test is required. Because Title VII was passed pursuant to Congress's power under the Commerce Clause of the Constitution, the disparate impact test later articulated by the Supreme Court in Washington v. Davis, 426 US 229 (1976) is inapplicable. (The Washington v. Davis test for disparate impact is used in constitutional equal protection clause cases, while Title VII's prohibition on disparate impact is a statutory mandate.)
As such, Title VII of the Civil Rights Act prohibits employment tests (when used as a decisive factor in employment decisions) that are not a "reasonable measure of job performance," regardless of the absence of actual intent to discriminate. Since the aptitude tests involved, and the high school diploma requirement, were broad-based and not directly related to the jobs performed, Duke Power's employee transfer procedure was found by the Court to be in violation of the Act.
Chief Justice Burger wrote the majority opinion.401 U.S. at 430-434.
Significance
Griggs v. Duke Power Co. also held that the employer had the burden of producing and proving the business necessity of a test. However, in Wards Cove Packing Co. v. Atonio (1989),. the Court reduced the employer's (Wards Cove Packing Company) burden to producing only evidence of business justification. In 1991, the Civil Rights Act was amended to overturn that portion of the Wards Cove decision—although legislators included language designed to exempt the Wards Cove company itself.
David Frum asserts that before Griggs, employers did not have to separate intentional wrongs from unintentional wrongs if they treated all applicants equally by appearances.
Although private employers with 15 or more employees are subject to Title VII of the Civil Rights Act, it was held in Washington v. Davis (1976) that the disparate impact doctrine does not apply to the equal protection requirement of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. Thus, lawsuits against public employers may be barred by sovereign immunity.
See also
US labor law
Intelligence and public policy
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 401
Ricci v. DeStefano
United Steelworkers v. Weber
Piscataway v. Taxman
Notes
References
E McGaughey, A Casebook on Labour Law (Hart 2019) ch 13, 595
External links
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States employment discrimination case law
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:Duke Energy
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
Category:United States affirmative action case law
"""

From "Griswold v. Connecticut" ==> """
Griswold v. Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479 (1965), was a landmark decision of the U.S. Supreme Court in which the Court ruled that the Constitution of the United States protects the liberty of married couples to buy and use contraceptives without government restriction. The case involved a Connecticut "Comstock law" that prohibited any person from using "any drug, medicinal article or instrument for the purpose of preventing conception". The court held that the statute was unconstitutional, and that its effect was "to deny disadvantaged citizens ... access to medical assistance and up-to-date information in respect to proper methods of birth control." By a vote of 7–2, the Supreme Court invalidated the law on the grounds that it violated the "right to marital privacy", establishing the basis for the right to privacy with respect to intimate practices. This and other cases view the right to privacy as "protected from governmental intrusion"..
Although the U.S. Bill of Rights does not explicitly mention "privacy", Justice William O. Douglas wrote for the majority, "Would we allow the police to search the sacred precincts of marital bedrooms for telltale signs of the use of contraceptives? The very idea is repulsive to the notions of privacy surrounding the marriage relationship." Justice Arthur Goldberg wrote a concurring opinion in which he used the Ninth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution in support of the ruling. Justice Byron White and Justice John Marshall Harlan II wrote concurring opinions in which they argued that privacy is protected by the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
 Background 
Griswold v. Connecticut originated as a prosecution under the Connecticut Comstock Act of 1873. The law made it illegal to use "any drug, medicinal article, or instrument for the purpose of preventing conception...". Violators could be "... fined not less than fifty dollars or imprisoned not less than sixty days nor more than one year or be both fined and imprisoned".
In the late 19th and early 20th century, physicians in the United States largely avoided the publication of any material related to birth control, even when they often recommended or at least gave advice regarding it to their married patients. Then in 1914, Margaret Sanger openly challenged the public consensus against contraception.  She influenced the Connecticut Birth Control League (CBCL) and helped to develop the eventual concept of the Planned Parenthood clinics.
The first Planned Parenthood clinic in Connecticut opened in 1935 in Hartford. It provided services to women who had no access to a gynecologist, including information about artificial contraception and other methods to plan the growth of their families. Several clinics were opened in Connecticut over the following years, including the Waterbury clinic that led to the legal dispute. In 1939, this clinic was compelled to enforce the 1879 anti-contraception law. This caught the attention of the CBCL leaders, who remarked on the importance of birth control for cases in which the lives of the patients depended upon it.
During the 1940s, two cases arose from the provision of contraception by the Waterbury clinic, leading to legal challenges to the constitutionality of the Comstock law, but these failed on technical grounds. In Tileston v. Ullman (1943), a doctor and mother challenged the law on the grounds that a ban on contraception could, in certain sexual situations, threaten the lives and well-being of patients. The U.S. Supreme Court dismissed the appeal on the grounds that the plaintiff lacked standing to sue on behalf of his patients. Yale School of Medicine gynecologist C. Lee Buxton and his patients brought a second challenge to the law in Poe v. Ullman (1961). The Supreme Court again dismissed the appeal, on the grounds that the case was not ripe: the plaintiffs had not been charged or threatened with prosecution, so there was no actual controversy for the Court to resolve.
The polemic around Poe led to the appeal in Griswold v. Connecticut, primarily based on the dissent of Justice John Marshall Harlan II in Poe, one of the most cited dissents in Supreme Court history.
He argued, foremost, that the Supreme Court should have heard the case rather than dismissing it. Thereafter, he indicated his support for a broad interpretation of the due process clause. On the basis of this interpretation, Harlan concluded that the Connecticut statute violated the Constitution.
After Poe was handed down in June 1961,  the Planned Parenthood League of Connecticut (PPLC) decided to challenge the law again. Estelle Griswold served on the PPLC as executive director from 1954 to 1965. Struggling through legal battles against birth control restrictions in Connecticut, Griswold and PPLC made an initial effort to financially support women who wanted contraceptives to bus to cities in New York and Rhode Island. Griswold and Dr. Buxton (PPLC medical volunteer), opened a birth control clinic in New Haven, Connecticut, "thus directly challeng[ing] the state law". The clinic opened on November 1, 1961, and that same day received its first ten patients and dozens of appointment requests from married women who wanted birth control advice and prescriptions. Less than two days after the fact, police officers arrived, to which Griswold explained in detail both the operations of the clinic and openly admitted to breaking state law. A week later, the detectives arrived with arrest warrants. Griswold and Buxton were arrested, tried in a one-day bench trial, found guilty, and fined $100 each. The conviction was upheld by the Appellate Division of the Circuit Court, and by the Connecticut Supreme Court.
 Supreme Court decision 
On June 7, 1965, the Supreme Court issued a 7–2 decision in favor of Griswold that struck down Connecticut's state law against contraceptives.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|right|upright=0.9|Justice William O. Douglas, the author of the majority opinion in Griswold
Seven justices formed the majority and joined an opinion written by justice William O. Douglas. The Court held that the U.S. Constitution protects "marital privacy" as a fundamental constitutional right, but it struggled to identify a particular source for the right in the Constitution's text. The Court rejected the Due Process Clause of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to the U.S. Constitution as the source of the marital privacy right, because at the time the Court still formally rejected the doctrine of substantive due process due to its association with the 1905 decision Lochner v. New York.
Instead of trying to justify the right to marital privacy under substantive due process, the Court said that the marital privacy right was implied by the specific provisions of the Bill of Rights, such as those in the First, Third, Fourth, and Fifth Amendments.  It referenced earlier cases where the Court had found personal liberties that were constitutionally protected despite not being specifically enumerated in the Constitution, such as the constitutional right to parental control over childrearing found in the early 20th century cases Meyer v. Nebraska (1923) and Pierce v. Society of Sisters (1925). The Court viewed marital privacy right's implicit nature to be similar, and in a now well-known line Douglas used the metaphor of shined light and its shadows to describe it.
Reasoning that the provisions of the Bill of Rights created "emanations" of protection that created "penumbras" within which rights could still be covered even if not explicitly enumerated in the Constitution, Douglas wrote that the right to marital privacy fell within this protection. The Court concluded that Connecticut's Comstock Law violated this right to privacy, and therefore was unconstitutional.  Douglas reasoned that the right to marital privacy was "older than the Bill of Rights", and ended the opinion with an impassioned appeal to the sanctity of marriage in the Anglo-American culture and common law tradition.
Concurrences
Justice Arthur Goldberg concurred with the Court and wrote a separate opinion to emphasize his view that the Ninth Amendmentwhich states that if the Constitution enumerates certain rights but does not enumerate others it does not mean that the other rights do not existwas sufficient authority on its own to support the Court's finding of a fundamental constitutional right to marital privacy. Justice John Marshall Harlan II also concurred with the Court, and wrote a concurring opinion arguing that the right to privacy should be protected under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Justice Byron White concurred only in the judgment, and wrote an opinion describing how he thought Connecticut's law failed rational basis scrutiny, saying: "I wholly fail to see how the ban on the use of contraceptives by married couples in any way reinforces the State's ban on illicit sexual relationships."Griswold, 381 U.S. at 505 (White, J., concurring in the judgment), quoted in .
Dissents
Justices Hugo Black and Potter Stewart dissented from the Court's decision. Both justices' dissents argued that because the U.S. Constitution does not expressly mention privacy in any of its provisions, the Court had no basis to strike down Connecticut's Comstock Law. Black's dissent concluded: "I get nowhere in this case by talk about a constitutional 'right of privacy' as an emanation from one or more constitutional provisions. I like my privacy as well as the next one, but I am nevertheless compelled to admit that government has a right to invade it unless prohibited by some specific constitutional provision."Griswold, 381 U.S. at 508 (Black, J., dissenting), quoted in .
 Precedent for later cases  
Later decisions by the U.S. Supreme Court extended the principles of Griswold beyond its particular facts.
Right to birth control for unmarried couples, 1972
Eisenstadt v. Baird (1972) extended Griswold's holding to unmarried couples. The argument in Eisenstadt was that it was a violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to deny unmarried couples the right to use contraception when married couples did have that right (under Griswold). Writing for the majority, Justice Brennan wrote that Massachusetts could not enforce the law against married couples because of Griswold v. Connecticut, so the law worked "irrational discrimination" if not extended to unmarried couples as well.
Right to abortion for any woman, 1973
The reasoning and language of both Griswold and Eisenstadt were cited in the concurring opinion by Associate Justice Potter Stewart in support of Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973). The decision in Roe struck down a Texas law that criminalized aiding a woman in getting an abortion. The Court ruled that this law was a violation of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Abortion became legalized for any woman for any reason, up through the first trimester, with possible restrictions for maternal health in the second trimester (the midpoint of which is the approximate time of fetal viability). In the third trimester of pregnancy, abortion is potentially illegal with exception for the mother's health, which the court defined broadly in Doe v. Bolton. On June 24, 2022, Dobbs v. Jackson overturned Roe, reversing the application of the Due Process Clause in the case of abortion.
Right to contraception for juveniles at least 14 years of age, 1977
In Carey v. Population Services International (1977) the U.S. Supreme Court held that it was unconstitutional to prohibit anyone other than a licensed pharmacist to distribute nonprescription contraceptives to persons 16 years of age or over, to prohibit the distribution of nonprescription contraceptives by any adult to minors under 16 years of age, and to prohibit anyone, including licensed pharmacists, to advertise or display contraceptives. The Court also held that the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution does not allow a state to intrude on an individual's decisions on matters of procreation which is protected as privacy rights.
Right to homosexual relations, 2003
Lawrence v. Texas (2003) struck down a Texas sodomy law that prohibited certain forms of intimate sexual contact between members of the same sex. Without stating a standard of review in the majority opinion, the court overruled Bowers v. Hardwick (1986), declaring that the "Texas statute furthers no legitimate state interest which can justify its intrusion into the personal and private life of the individual." Justice O'Connor, who wrote a concurring opinion, framed it as an issue of rational basis review. Justice Kennedy's majority opinion, based on the liberty interest protected by the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, stated that the Texas anti-sodomy statute touched "upon the most private human conduct, sexual behavior, and in the most private of places, the home", and attempted to "control a personal relationship that ... is within the liberty of persons to choose without being punished". Thus, the Court held that adults are entitled to participate in private, consensual sexual conduct. While the opinion in Lawrence was framed in terms of the right to liberty, Kennedy described the "right to privacy" found in Griswold as the "most pertinent beginning point" in the evolution of the concepts embodied in Lawrence..
Right to same-sex marriage, 2015
Griswold was also cited in a chain of cases that led the Supreme Court to legalize same-sex marriage in another landmark case, Obergefell v. Hodges.
Right to abortion overturned, 2022
On June 24, 2022, the majority opinion in Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization written by Justice Samuel Alito limited the right to privacy to exclude the right to an abortion. In Justice Clarence Thomas' concurrence, he argued, "In future cases, we should reconsider all of this Court's substantive due process precedents, including Griswold, Lawrence, and Obergefell, ... Because any substantive due process decision is 'demonstrably erroneous' ... we have a duty to 'correct the error' established in those precedents," referring to decisions on contraception, sodomy, and same-sex marriage as future cases for the Supreme Court to reverse. In regards to unenumerated rights, the opinion also said, "The abortion right is also critically different from any other right that this Court has held to fall within the Fourteenth Amendment's protection of 'liberty'."
The dissenting opinion criticized the majority for overturning precedents dating back to Griswold, and argued, "And no one should be confident that this majority is done with its work. The right Roe and Casey recognized does not stand alone. To the contrary, the Court has linked it for decades to other settled freedoms involving bodily integrity, familial relationships, and procreation. Most obviously, the right to terminate a pregnancy arose straight out of the right to purchase and use contraception. In turn, those rights led, more recently, to rights of same-sex intimacy and marriage. They are all part of the same constitutional fabric, protecting autonomous decisionmaking over the most personal of life decisions ... So one of two things must be true. Either the majority does not really believe in its own reasoning. Or if it does, all rights that have no history stretching back to the mid-19th century are insecure. Either the mass of the majority's opinion is hypocrisy, or additional constitutional rights are under threat. It is one or the other."
 See also 
 Birth control movement in the United States
 Catherine Roraback
 List of sex-related court cases in the United States
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 381
 Lochner v. New York
 Meyer v. Nebraska
 NAACP v. Alabama
 Margaret Sanger
 References 
Citations
Works cited
 Further reading 
 Johnson, John W. Griswold v. Connecticut: Birth control and the constitutional right of privacy. University Press of Kansas, 2005.
 External links 
 Griswold v. Connecticut from C-SPAN's Landmark Cases: Historic Supreme Court Decisions
Category:1965 in Connecticut
Category:1965 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Birth control in the United States
Category:Birth control law and case law
Category:History of women in Connecticut
Category:Legal history of Connecticut
Category:Right to privacy under the United States Constitution
Category:United States Ninth Amendment case law
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:United States reproductive rights case law
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Groff v. DeJoy" ==> """
Groff v. Dejoy (Docket 22-174), is a pending United States Supreme Court case regarding religious liberty and employment accommodations under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The plaintiff seeks the Supreme Court's reconsideration of the precedent set in Trans World Airlines, Inc. v. Hardison.
 Background 
Gerald E. Groff, the petitioner in this case was a postman, specifically a Rural Carrier Associate (RCA), working for the United States Postal Service (USPS) from 2012 till 2019. He is an evangelical, protestant Christian and observes Sunday Sabbath. As a result, his religion requires him to rest and worship on a Sunday instead of working.
In 2013, Amazon contracted USPS to deliver their packages. Quarryville, Pennsylvania soon became an important hub and started delivering Amazon packages from 2015 onwards. Groff was initially an RCA at the Quarryville post office and informed USPS of his religious need and his inability to work on Sundays. Accordingly, the USPS moved to accommodate his religious requirements by allowing him not to work on Sunday insofar as he covers the other shifts throughout the week.
However, on May 2016, a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the USPS and the National Rural Letter Carriers' Association only allowed the exemption of work on Sunday on 2 conditions; (1) if the person had applied for leave on that day, and, (2) if the person would have exceeded the limit of 40 hours of work that week on Sunday.
The MOU did not provide Groff with a religious exemption to working on Sundays and as a result, the USPS again moved to accommodate him by transferring him to a smaller station that did not do Amazon delivery then, the Holtwood post office.
Similarly to Quarryville, Holtwood also started Sunday Amazon deliveries on March 2017. The postmaster at Holtwood then tried to oblige with his request by allowing him to pray on Sunday morning before returning to work later in the day, Groff refused such an offer and skipped work on Sundays. In the peak season of 2017, another RCA volunteered to take over his shifts on Sunday, but the personnel fell ill, leaving the rest of the RCAs and the postmaster to be additionally burdened to take over delivery on Sundays.
Groff continued to be absent from his scheduled work on Sundays after the 2017 peak season and consequently was punished, so he filed a complaint asking USPS to transfer him to a job that did not require him to work on Sundays. This complaint was promptly denied as no position in USPS had such an exemption.
Groff eventually resigned in 2019 and sued the USPS for 2 reasons, he was “disparate(ly) treat(ed)” due to his religion and failure to accommodate his religion.
 Lower courts decision 
In the United States District Court of the Eastern District for Pennsylvania, Groff argued that the company discriminated against him.
In his first argument, the defendant argued that he had direct evidence that the USPS discriminated against him. Nevertheless, the court found the evidence provided by Groff against the USPS to be insufficient. Therefore, the McDonnell Douglas Burden Shifting Test was adopted, which places the burden on the defendant, Groff, to show that there was a prima facie case of religious discrimination, which Groff's argument does. The burden then shifted to the USPS to reason if there is a non-discriminatory reason to do so, the USPS did so by proving the importance of Sunday Amazon delivery due to their poor financial situation. The burden shifted back to the petitioner to prove a pretext, which he failed to do so. Therefore, the court rejected his first argument.
In his second argument on failure to accommodate, the court rejected the argument saying that the employer does not need to entirely rectify the conflict to accommodate and they do not need to accommodate the request due to Groff’s request adding an undue hardship on the company. The court adds that satisfying the demands by the petitioner is more than the de-minimis-cost test set up by the case, Trans World Airlines, Inc. v. Hardison.
Groff appealed to the United States Court of Appeal for the Third Circuit, who affirmed the lower court’s decision by a 2-1 decision, with Judge Hardiman dissenting.
Groff then appealed the decision by the lower courts by appealling to the Supreme Court.
 Supreme Court 
Fifteen Republican members of Congress filed an amicus brief in support of the plaintiff, on 26 September 2022, arguing that the standard set in Hardison for "undue hardship" was irreconciliable with the text and congressional purpose of Title VII, asking the court to grant certiorari and overturn its precedent.
The Supreme Court discussed the case in their January 13, 2023 conference and heard the case on 18 April, 2023.
 See also 
 Estate of Thornton v. Caldor, Inc.
 Equal Employment Opportunity Commission v. Abercrombie & Fitch Stores
 Religion and business § Landmark United States Supreme Court cases
 References 
 External links 
Category:2023 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States civil rights case law
"""

From "Grosjean v. American Press Co." ==> """
Grosjean v. American Press Co., 297 U.S. 233 (1936), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court over a challenge to a separate sales tax on newspapers with circulation of over 20,000.
 Background 
U.S. Senator Huey Long received more support in rural areas whereas the larger urban newspapers tended to be more critical of him. In 1934, his political allies levied a 2% gross receipts tax in an attempt to tax newspapers critical of him into submission. Nine publishers representing 13 newspapers impacted by the tax sued in federal court.
 Decision 
The Supreme Court, in a unanimous decision, found the tax unconstitutional. The decision held that states could charge customary taxes on media but higher taxes ran afoul of the First Amendment. Specifically, the court found the law similar to the British Stamp Act of 1712 in that it would suppress free speech through taxation and allowing a similar law would be against the clear Founders' Intent of the Bill of Rights. Justice George Sutherland wrote that "the revolution really began when, in 1765, that government sent stamps for newspaper duties to the American colonies.".
The case is often cited because it defined corporations as "persons" for purposes of analysis under the Equal Protection clause.
The Court stated, "The predominant purpose of the grant of immunity here invoked was to preserve an untrammeled press as a vital source of public information. The newspapers, magazines and other journals of the country, it is safe to say, have shed and continue to shed, more light on the public and business affairs of the nation than any other instrumentality of publicity, and, since informed public opinion is the most potent of all restraints upon misgovernment, the suppression or abridgment of the publicity afforded by a free press cannot be regarded otherwise than with grave concern. The tax here involved is bad not because it takes money from the pockets of the appelles. If that were all, a wholly different question would be presented. It is bad because, in the light of its history and of its present setting, it is seen to be a deliberate and calculated device in the guise of a tax to limit the circulation of information to which the public is entitled in virtue of the constitutional guaranties. A free press stands as one of the great interpreters between the government and the people. To allow it to be fettered is to fetter ourselves."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 297
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1936 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Louisiana
Category:1936 in Louisiana
Category:Sales taxes
Category:Huey Long
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:Mass media in Louisiana
"""

From "Gross v. FBL Financial Services, Inc." ==> """
Gross v. FBL Financial Services, Inc., 557 U.S. 167 (2009), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States in 2009, involving the standard of proof required for a claim under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA).
Jack Gross, an employee of FBL Financial Services, Inc., was transferred to another position and a former subordinate took on many of Gross' old responsibilities. They both received the same compensation, but Gross believed his reassignment was a demotion. Gross brought suit against FBL in April 2004 in District Court, claiming ADEA violations. The court found in his favor and awarded him $5,000,000 in lost compensation. The United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit reversed the decision. The Supreme Court affirmed that reversal, finding that a plaintiff must prove by preponderance of evidence, that age was the "but for" cause of the adverse employment action.
 References 
 Keep Young and Beautiful — Especially At Work
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States employment discrimination case law
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
"""

From "Grove City College v. Bell" ==> """
Grove City College v. Bell, 465 U.S. 555 (1984), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that Title IX, which applies only to colleges and universities that receive federal funds, could be applied to a private school that refused direct federal funding but for which a large number of students had received federally funded scholarships. The Court also held that the federal government could require a statutorily mandated "assurance of compliance" with Title IX even though no evidence had been presented to suggest that Grove City College had discriminated. However, the Court also held that the regulation would apply only to the institution's financial aid department, not to the school as a whole.
Opinion of the court
Justice Byron White delivered the opinion of the Court, which was unanimous except for Part III.
In an opinion by White, joined by Chief Justice Warren Burger and Harry Blackmun, Lewis Powell, William Rehnquist, and Sandra Day O'Connor, it was held that (1) Title IX applied to the college, even though it accepted no direct assistance, since it did enroll students who received BEOGs, (2) for Title IX enforcement purposes, the education program or activity at the college receiving federal financial assistance was the college's financial aid program, and not the entire college, (3) federal assistance to the college's financial aid program could be terminated solely because the college had refused to execute an assurance of compliance with Title IX, and (4) the application of Title IX to the college did not infringe the First Amendment rights of the college or its students.
Concurring and dissenting opinions
Lewis Franklin Powell Jr. joined by Chief Justice Warren Burger and Sandra Day O'Connor, concurred, expressing the view that the above holdings were dictated by the language and legislative history of Title IX and the regulations of the Department of Education.
John Paul Stevens concurred in part and concurred in the result, stating that he was unable to join in holding 2 above because he considered it an advisory opinion unnecessary to the overall decision and because it was predicated on speculation rather than evidence.
William Brennan joined by Thurgood Marshall concurred in part and dissented in part, expressing the view that the program-specific language in Title IX was designed to insure that the reach of the statute is dependent upon the scope of federal financial assistance provided to the college, so that when the financial assistance is clearly intended to serve as federal aid for the entire college, the college as a whole should be covered by the prohibition on sex discrimination.
Overturning of decision
The holding that compliance with Title IX is necessary only in the particular programs or activities that receive federal funding was abrogated when the United States Congress subsequently passed the Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987, which specified that recipients of federal funds must comply with civil rights laws in all areas.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 465
 Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987
Further reading
Pittsburgh Press analysis
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:Grove City College
Category:Abrogated United States Supreme Court decisions
"""

From "Grovey v. Townsend" ==> """
Grovey v. Townsend, 295 U.S. 45 (1935), was a United States Supreme Court decision that held a reformulation of Texas's white primaries system to be constitutional. The case was the third in a series of Court decisions known as the "Texas primary cases".
In Nixon v. Herndon (1927),. Lawrence A. Nixon sued for damages under federal civil rights laws after being denied a ballot in a Democratic party primary election on the basis of race. The Court found in his favor on the basis of the Fourteenth Amendment, which guarantees equal protection under the law, while not discussing his Fifteenth Amendment claim. After Texas amended its statute to authorize the political party's state executive committee to set voting qualifications, Nixon sued again; in Nixon v. Condon (1932),. the Court again found in his favor on the basis of the Fourteenth Amendment.
The Democratic Party of Texas state convention then adopted a rule banning black voting in primary elections. R. R. Grovey, a black Texas resident, sued Townsend, a county clerk enforcing the rule, for violation of Grovey's civil rights under the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments. The Court unanimously upheld the party's rule as constitutional, distinguishing the discrimination by a private organization from that of the state in the previous primary cases.. However, Grovey would be overturned nine years later in Smith v. Allwright (1944), another of the Texas primary cases..
 References 
 External links 
Category:1935 in United States case law
Category:African-American history of Texas
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:History of voting rights in the United States
Category:Legal history of Texas
Category:United States Fifteenth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:Democratic Party (United States) litigation
Category:Texas elections
Category:Texas Democratic Party
Category:Harris County, Texas
Category:African-American history between emancipation and the civil rights movement
Category:Minority rights case law
"""

From "Grutter v. Bollinger" ==> """
Grutter v. Bollinger, 539 U.S. 306 (2003), was a landmark case of the Supreme Court of the United States concerning affirmative action in student admissions. The Court held that a student admissions process that favors "underrepresented minority groups" does not violate the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause so long as it takes into account other factors evaluated on an individual basis for every applicant.
The case arose after a prospective student to the University of Michigan Law School alleged that she had been denied admission because the school gave certain minority groups a significantly greater chance of admission. The school admitted that its admission process favored certain minority groups, but argued that there was a compelling state interest to ensure a "critical mass" of students from minority groups. In a majority opinion joined by four other justices, Justice Sandra Day O'Connor held that the Constitution "does not prohibit the law school's narrowly tailored use of race in admissions decisions to further a compelling interest in obtaining the educational benefits that flow from a diverse student body."
In her majority opinion, O'Connor wrote that "race-conscious admissions policies must be limited in time," adding that the "Court expects that 25 years from now, the use of racial preferences will no longer be necessary to further the interest approved today." Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen Breyer concurred in the judgment, but did not subscribe to the belief that the affirmative measures in question would be unnecessary in 25 years. In a dissent joined by three other justices, Chief Justice William Rehnquist argued that the university's admissions system was, in fact, a thinly veiled and unconstitutional quota system.
The decision largely upheld the Court's decision in Regents of the University of California v. Bakke (1978), which allowed race to be a consideration in admissions policy but held racial quotas to be unconstitutional. In Gratz v. Bollinger (2003) a separate case decided on the same day as Grutter, the Court struck down a points-based admissions system that awarded an automatic bonus to the admissions scores of minority applicants.
Dispute
When the University of Michigan Law School denied admission to Barbara Grutter, a Michigan resident with a 3.8 GPA and 161 LSAT score,Pg. 73 The Legal & Regulatory Environment of Business she filed this suit, alleging that respondents had discriminated against her on the basis of race in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment, Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as well as 42 U.S.C. § 1981; that she was rejected because the Law School uses race as a "predominant" factor, giving applicants belonging to certain minority groups a significantly greater chance of admission than students with similar credentials from disfavored racial groups; and that respondents had no compelling interest to justify that use of race. Lee Bollinger (then-President of the University of Michigan), was the named defendant of this case.Past Presidents of the University of Michigan; 
The University argued that there was a compelling state interest to ensure a "critical mass" of students from minority groups, particularly African Americans and Hispanics, which is realized within the student body. They argued that this aims to "ensure that these minority students do not feel isolated or like spokespersons for their race; to provide adequate opportunities for the type of interaction upon which the educational benefits of diversity depend; and to challenge all students to think critically and re-examine  stereotypes."
Lower courts
In March 2001, U.S. District Court Judge Bernard A. Friedman ruled that the admissions policies were unconstitutional because they "clearly consider" race and are "practically indistinguishable from a quota system." Due to the significance of the case, the Court of Appeals agreed to hear the case en banc. In May 2002, in a closely divided 5–4 ruling, the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed the decision, citing the Bakke decision and allowing the use of race to further the "compelling interest" of diversity.  The plaintiffs subsequently requested the Supreme Court review.  The Court agreed to hear the case, the first time the Court had heard a case on affirmative action in education since the landmark Bakke decision of 25 years prior.
On April 1, 2003 the US Supreme Court heard oral arguments for Grutter. The Court allowed the recordings of the arguments to be released to the public the same day, only the second time the Court had allowed same-day release of oral arguments. The first time was Bush v. Gore, 531 U.S. 98 (2000), the case that ultimately ended the 2000 presidential election.
Supreme Court's decision
The Court's majority ruling, authored by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, held that the United States Constitution "does not prohibit the law school's narrowly tailored use of race in admissions decisions to further a compelling interest in obtaining the educational benefits that flow from a diverse student body." The Court held that the law school's interest in obtaining a "critical mass" of minority students was indeed a "tailored use". O'Connor noted that sometime in the future, perhaps twenty-five years hence, racial affirmative action would no longer be necessary in order to promote diversity. It implied that affirmative action should not be allowed permanent status and that eventually a "colorblind" policy should be implemented. The opinion read, "race-conscious admissions policies must be limited in time." "The Court takes the Law School at its word that it would like nothing better than to find a race-neutral admissions formula and will terminate its use of racial preferences as soon as practicable. The Court expects that 25 years from now, the use of racial preferences will no longer be necessary to further the interest approved today." The phrase "25 years from now" was echoed by Justice Thomas in his dissent. Justice Thomas, writing that the system was "illegal now", concurred with the majority only on the point that he agreed the system would still be illegal 25 years hence.
The decision largely upheld the position asserted in Justice Powell's concurrence in Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, which allowed race to be a consideration in admissions policy, but held that quotas were illegal.
Public universities and other public institutions of higher education across the nation are now allowed to use race as a plus factor in determining whether a student should be admitted. While race may not be the only factor, the decision allows admissions bodies to take race into consideration along with other individualized factors in reviewing a student's application. O'Connor's opinion answers the question for the time being as to whether "diversity" in higher education is a compelling governmental interest.  As long as the program is "narrowly tailored" to achieve that end, it seems likely that the Court will find it constitutional.
In the majority were Justices O'Connor, Stevens, Souter, Ginsburg, and Breyer. Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justices Scalia, Kennedy, and Thomas dissented.  Much of the dissent concerned a disbelief in the validity of the law school's claim that the system was necessary to create a "critical mass" of minority students and provide a diverse educational environment. In the dissent, Chief Justice Rehnquist used admissions data to argue that unconstitutional discrimination occurred, despite the precedent set in McCleskey v. Kemp that dismisses statistical racial disparities as doctrinally irrelevant in equal protection claims.Baldus, David C.; Pulaski, Charles A.; Woodworth, George (1992). "Law and Statistics in Conflict: Reflections on McCleskey v. Kemp". In Kagehiro, Dorothy K.; Laufer, William S. (eds.). Handbook of Psychology and Law. New York: Springer-Verlag. pp. 271–291. ISBN 978-0-387-97568-9.
The case was heard in conjunction with Gratz v. Bollinger, , in which the Court struck down the University of Michigan's more rigid, point-based undergraduate admission policy, which was essentially deemed a quota system. The case generated a record number of amicus curiae briefs from institutional supporters of affirmative action. A lawyer who filed an amicus curiae brief on behalf of members and former members of the Pennsylvania legislature, State Rep. Mark B. Cohen of Philadelphia, said that Sandra Day O'Connor's majority decision in Grutter v. Bollinger was a "ringing affirmation of the goal of an inclusive society." In both Grutter and Gratz, O'Connor was the swing vote.
Dissent
Chief Justice Rehnquist, joined by Justice Scalia, Justice Kennedy, and Justice Thomas, argued the Law School's admissions policy was an attempt to achieve an unconstitutional type of racial balancing.  The Chief Justice attacked the Law School's asserted goal of reaching a "critical mass" of minority students, finding the absolute number of African-American, Hispanic, and Native American students varied markedly, which is inconsistent with the concept in that one would think the same size critical mass would be needed for all minority groups.  He noted that "[f]rom 1995 through 2000, the Law School admitted... between 13 and 19... Native American[s], between 91 and 108... African American[s], and between 47 and 56... Hispanic[s]... One would have to believe that the objectives of 'critical mass' offered by respondents are achieved with only half the number of Hispanics, and one-sixth the number of Native Americans as compared to African Americans." Citing admissions statistics, the Chief Justice noted the tight correlation between the percentage of applicants and admittees of a given race and argued that the numbers were "far too precise to be dismissed as merely the result of the school paying 'some attention to [the] numbers.'"
Justice Thomas, joined by Justice Scalia, issued a strongly worded opinion, concurring in part and dissenting in part, arguing that if Michigan could not remain a prestigious institution and admit students under a race-neutral system, the "Law School should be forced to choose between its classroom aesthetic and its exclusionary admissions system."  In Justice Thomas' opinion, there is no compelling state interest in Michigan maintaining an elite law school, because a number of states do not have law schools, let alone elite ones.  Moreover, Justice Thomas noted that in United States v. Virginia, , the Court required the Virginia Military Institute to radically reshape its admissions process and the character of that institution.
Another criticism raised by Justice Thomas compared Michigan Law to the University of California, Berkeley School of Law, where California's Proposition 209 had barred Berkeley Law from "granting preferential treatment on the basis of race in the operation of public education." Despite Proposition 209, however, Berkeley Law was still able to achieve a diverse student body.  According to Thomas, "the Court is willfully blind to the very real experience in California and elsewhere, which raises the inference that institutions with 'reputations for excellence'...rivaling [Michigan Law's] have satisfied their sense of mission without resorting to prohibited racial discrimination."
A final criticism leveled at Justice O'Connor's opinion was the length of time the racial admissions policy will be lawful. Justice Thomas concurred that racial preferences would be unlawful in 25 years, however, he noted that in fact the Court should have found race-based affirmative action programs in higher education unlawful now:
I therefore can understand the imposition of a 25-year time limit only as a holding that the deference the Court pays to the Law School's educational judgments and refusal to change its admissions policies will itself expire. At that point these policies will clearly have failed to "'eliminate the [perceived] need for any racial or ethnic'" discrimination because the academic credentials gap will still be there. [citation omitted] The Court defines this time limit in terms of narrow tailoring, [internal citation omitted] but I believe this arises from its refusal to define rigorously the broad state interest vindicated today. [internal citation omitted]. With these observations, I join the last sentence of Part III of the opinion of the Court.
For the immediate future, however, the majority has placed its imprimatur on a practice that can only weaken the principle of equality embodied in the Declaration of Independence and the Equal Protection Clause. "Our Constitution is color-blind, and neither knows nor tolerates classes among citizens." Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 527, 559, [...] (1896) (Harlan, J., dissenting). It has been nearly 140 years since Frederick Douglass asked the intellectual ancestors of the Law School to "[d]o nothing with us!" and the Nation adopted the Fourteenth Amendment. Now we must wait another 25 years to see this principle of equality vindicated. I therefore respectfully dissent from the remainder of the Court's opinion and the judgment.
Timeline of federal courts' decisions
The District Court found the Law School's use of race as an admissions factor unlawful..
The Sixth Circuit reversed, holding that Justice Powell's opinion in Bakke was binding precedent establishing diversity as a compelling state interest, and that the Law School's use of race was narrowly tailored because race was merely a "potential 'plus' factor" and because the Law School's program was virtually identical to the Harvard admissions program described approvingly by Justice Powell and appended to his Bakke opinion.
The Supreme Court affirmed the Sixth Circuit's reversal of the District Court decision, thereby upholding the University's admissions policy.
Law adopted post case
Following the decision, petitions were circulated to change the Michigan State Constitution.  The measure, called the Michigan Civil Rights Initiative, or Proposal 2, passed in November 2006 and prohibited the use of race in the Law School admissions processes. In this respect, Proposal 2 is similar to California's Proposition 209 and Washington's Initiative 200, other initiatives that also banned the use of race in public university admissions decisions.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit overturned MCRI on July 1, 2011. Judges R. Guy Cole Jr. and Martha Craig Daughtrey said that "Proposal 2 reorders the political process in Michigan to place special burdens on minority interests." This decision was upheld by the full Court of Appeals on November 16, 2012. After the ruling, Michigan Attorney General Bill Schuette announced he would appeal the court ruling to the Supreme Court. On March 25, 2013 the Supreme Court granted a writ of certiorari, agreeing to hear the case.  The Court ultimately upheld MCRI in Schuette v. Coalition to Defend Affirmative Action.
The Supreme Court decided a challenge to the University of Texas at Austin's admission policy, Fisher v. University of Texas, in June 2013. In this case, the Court reaffirmed that universities were entitled to deference on their judgment that diversity is a compelling state interest.  Importantly, though, the Court ruled that a university was entitled to "no deference" on its judgment that race-based affirmative action was necessary to achieve diversity and its educational benefits.  The Court remanded the case to the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals for reconsideration, and that court again upheld UT's use of race.  The plaintiff again appealed to the Supreme Court in 2016, which held that the Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit correctly found that the University of Texas at Austin's undergraduate admissions policy survived strict scrutiny, in accordance with Fisher v. University of Texas (2013).
The same advocacy group and legal team challenging UT Austin also filed lawsuits against Harvard University and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill in November 2014.  These cases are pending in U.S. District Courts and are partially on hold until the Supreme Court provides further guidance in its second UT Austin ruling. 
Further challenge
The Supreme Court granted certiorari to Students for Fair Admissions v. President and Fellows of Harvard College and Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. University of North Carolina, two cases dealing with race-based admissions at Harvard College and The University of North Carolina in January 2022. Both cases seek to overturn Grutter and the use of race in admissions.
See also
 Regents of the University of California v. Bakke (1978)
 Gratz v. Bollinger (2003)
 Fisher v. University of Texas (2013)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 539
 Affirmative action at the University of Michigan
References
Further reading
External links
 Briefs, Decisions and audio recordings (mp3 & realmedia)
 (Oral Argument recording)
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States affirmative action case law
Category:2003 in United States case law
Category:2003 in education
Category:University of Michigan
Category:University and college admissions in the United States
Category:Legal history of Michigan
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Guam v. United States" ==> """
Guam v. United States, 593 U.S. ___ (2021), was a U.S. Supreme Court case dealing with a dispute on fiscal responsibility for environmental and hazardous cleanup of the Ordot Dump created by the United States Navy on the island of Guam in the 1940s, which Guam then ran after becoming a territory in 1950 until the landfill's closure in 2011. The Supreme Court ruled unanimously that under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (aka Superfund), Guam had filed its lawsuit to recover a portion of cleanup costs for the landfill from the United States government in a timely manner, allowing their case to proceed.
Background
thumb|left|Ordot Landfill in 2016
Guam, an island in the Pacific Ocean, had become a key base for the United States Navy during World War II after the United States regained control of it from Japan in the Battle of Guam in 1944. As part of establishing ports and bases on the island, the Navy created the Ordot Dump landfill for disposal of waste, including material like DDT and Agent Orange. After the war, Guam was made into a U.S. territory by the Guam Organic Act of 1950. Since this gave the island its own governance, the Navy transferred control of the Ordot Dump to Guam that year. The Navy continued to use the landfill until the 1970s, while the landfill was the only solid waste disposal facility for Guam until the 2000s. As the landfill was built without liners or caps, it became an environmental hazard. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) added the Ordot Dump to the National Priorities List in 1983 and had named the Navy as a potentially responsible party to it in 1988.
In 2002, the EPA filed a complaint against Guam, stating that their management of the Ordot Dump violated the Clean Water Act, as waste contaminants from the dump were found to run off into the nearby Lonfit River and eventually into the Pacific Ocean. A consent decree was achieved in 2004, with Guam agreeing to pay a fine, close the site, and install a cover on the landfill. A separate action initiated by the EPA in 2004 led to the site's forced closure in 2011, and Guam agreeing to remediate affected areas around the landfill. Total costs for completing these, along with other cleanup efforts ordered by the court, were estimated at .
Guam filed a suit against the United States in 2017 under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA, or Superfund), asserting that since the Navy had been found as a potentially responsible party contributing to the site, the U.S. bears some of the cleanup costs, as outlined in CERCLA Section 107(a). The U.S. moved to close the suit, stating that under the clauses of CERCLA, there was a three-year statute of limitations for filing such complaints under CERCLA Section 113(f)(3)(B), which started with the consent agreement in 2004, and thus Guam had missed its window.
The case was first heard in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia in 2018. The District Court ruled to allow the case to proceed in favor of Guam in September 2018. Judge Ketanji Jackson ruled that the consent decree did not involve liability for the environmental cleanup, nor involved the ability of Guam to seek liability response actions under CERCLA. The government appealed to the District of Columbia Circuit, which reversed the District Court's decision in March 2020 and agreed that the statute of limitations for Guam had expired in 2007, three years after the 2004 consent agreement, as set by Section 113(f)(3)(B).
Supreme Court
Guam petitioned their case to the Supreme Court, asking them to resolve the question of whether Section 113(f)(3)(B)'s three-year statute applied to the consent agreement they had made with the EPA. The Court granted certiorari to the case in January 2021, with oral arguments heard on April 26, 2021.
The Court issued its decision on May 24, 2021, reversing the D.C. Circuit Court's ruling and remanding the case for further review. In the unanimous opinion, the court ruled that Section 113(f)(3)(B) did not apply to the consent agreement that Guam had made with the EPA, and thus the three-year statute of limitations from Section 113(f)(3)(B) did not apply; as such, Guam had the ability to pursue action against the government as allotted by Section 107(a). Justice Clarence Thomas wrote the opinion, focusing on the statutory interpretation of CERCLA. Thomas stated that "To be sure, as the Government points out, remedial measures that a party takes under another environmental statute might resemble steps taken in a formal CERCLA 'response action'. But relying on that functional overlap to reinterpret the phrase 'resolved its liability … for some or all of a response action' to mean 'settled an environmental liability that might have been actionable under CERCLA’ would stretch the statute beyond Congress' actual language."
The decision has a potential impact on a number of pending lawsuits filed by states and local entities against the U.S. government and large companies to try to seek some recovery for the costs for cleanup of Superfund sites, as these suits had followed similar patterns of interaction between Guam and the EPA.
References
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2021 in Guam
Category:2021 in United States case law
"""

From "Guaranty Trust Co. v. York" ==> """
Guaranty Trust Co. v. York, 326 U.S. 99 (1945), was a United States Supreme Court case that described how federal courts were to follow state law. Justice Frankfurter delivered the majority opinion further refining the doctrine set forth in Erie Railroad Co. v. Tompkins.
Background
The Erie Doctrine, adopted in 1938, held that while Federal law was determinative in procedural matters, state law should control for substantive matters, thus preventing 'forum shopping' between state and Federal courts.  The defendant in Guaranty Trust argued that the plaintiff's action was time-barred under a New York statute of limitations.  The plaintiff countered that the relevant statute of limitations was "procedural," was not "substantive" law, and therefore was not within the ambit of the doctrine established in the Erie case.  
Decision of the Court
The court dispensed with this substantive/procedural distinction and stated that regardless of whether the case was argued in state or federal court, the outcome should be substantially the same.  Thus, the court set forth an "outcome determinative test" for deciding whether a piece of state law must be obeyed in federal courts—if the outcome is substantively the same then the federal court can apply its own rules instead of state rules.  The court held in this case that the New York Statute of limitations be obeyed and the case was reversed and remanded.
This rule was refined first in Byrd v. Blue Ridge Rural Electric Cooperative, Inc. and subsequently defined more specifically in a related series of cases over the next few decades.
See also
 Erie Doctrine
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 326
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:Conflict of laws case law
Category:Diversity jurisdiction case law
Category:United States Erie Doctrine
Category:1945 in United States case law
"""

From "Hernandez v. Mesa" ==> """
Hernandez v. Mesa was a pair of United States Supreme Court cases (582 U.S. ____ (2017) and 589 U.S. ____ (2020)) in which the court held that the precedent established under the 1971 Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents decision did not extend to claims based on cross-border shootings.
The case centered on the 2010 shooting of a Mexican teenager on the Mexican side of the Mexico–United States border by a U.S. Border Patrol agent who was standing on the U.S. side of the border at the time he fired his weapon. The case, heard through the Fifth Circuit, had reached the Supreme Court twice, first in 2017 and again in 2019. Both times, the Fifth Circuit ruled that the agent could not be sued for his actions. At the time of the 2017 hearing, the Supreme Court had just ruled in Ziglar v. Abbasi, another case involving Bivens which introduced special considerations for these types of cases; and the Supreme Court reversed the Fifth Circuit's decision in Hernandez and remanded the case to be reheard on the basis of Ziglar. On its appeal in 2019, the Court decided the situation was an international one that required a diplomatic solution to be set by Congress rather than a civil one determined by the courts, and upheld the Fifth Circuit's ruling.
 Background 
 Case history 
On June 7, 2010, Jesus Mesa Jr., a U.S. Border Patrol agent, shot and killed Sergio Adrián Hernández Güereca in the cement culvert separating Ciudad Juarez, Chihuahua, Mexico, and  El Paso, Texas. At the time of the shooting, Hernández Güereca, a 15-year-old Mexican boy, was standing on the Mexican side of the Mexico–United States border, while the agent was on the American side. Hernández Güereca and several other boys had been playing around in the culvert running up to touch the fence on the U.S. side of the border and then running back into Mexico. The agent claimed after the shooting that he had used deadly force because the boys had been throwing rocks at him. Cell phone video contradicted that claim.
The shooting led to a protracted court case which has examined whether the due process clause of the 5th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution protected Hernández Güereca's life even though he was not standing on U.S. soil, and whether Mesa could claim qualified immunity for his actions as a U.S. law enforcement officer.
Initial consideration in lower courts
The Mexican government indicted Mesa for murder for the killing, but the U.S. refused to extradite him to Mexico. The U.S. Department of Justice investigated the incident, but declined to prosecute Mesa.
Hernández Güereca's parents alleged that Mesa's actions violated his civil rights under the Fourth and Fifth amendments, and filed a claim citing the Bivens precedent, a 1971 Supreme Court case that established an implied cause of action for violations of civil rights by federal agents. The U.S. District Court for the Western District of Texas initially dismissed the case. However, a panel of judges for the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals concluded that Hernández Güereca had 5th Amendment rights, and that these rights had been violated when Mesa killed him. The panel further said that Mesa could not claim qualified immunity for his actions, as "no reasonable officer would have understood Agent Mesa's alleged conduct to be lawful." There was then a rehearing by the full panel en banc in the Fifth Circuit, which reversed the prior panel and unanimously reaffirmed the District Court's dismissal of the case, saying that regardless of whether Hernández Güereca had 5th Amendment rights or not, Mesa was entitled to qualified immunity because he could not have been aware that his actions would not qualify for immunity under the circumstances, since there had not been prior case law to settle the issue.
 At the Supreme Court 
 First consideration and its aftermath 
The case was then heard by the U.S. Supreme Court in February 2017. 
 Majority opinion 
In June 2017, the Supreme Court reversed part of the Court of Appeals's ruling and requested reconsideration by the Court of Appeals to address Hernández Güereca's claim of 4th Amendment rights and the impact of another Supreme Court decision that was reached at about the same time in the case of Ziglar v. Abbasi., 137 S. Ct. 2003 (2017). Neil Gorsuch did not participate in the consideration or decision of the case, as he had joined the court after the case was heard.
Dissents
Justice Clarence Thomas filed a dissent, as did Stephen Breyer, who was joined by Ruth Bader Ginsburg. Thomas said he would have restricted the application of the prior rulings to not apply to cross-border actions and would have simply affirmed the ruling of the Court of Appeals. Breyer and Ginsburg said that since the incident occurred in a border zone of overlapping jurisdiction in which both governments had a management responsibility, and since Mesa also could not have known for certain whether Hernández Güereca was a U.S. citizen or not, his actions should be judged as if they had occurred within the United States. 
 Reconsideration in lower court 
The Court of Appeals then again upheld the dismissal of the case by the lower court.
Second consideration 
The case reached the Supreme Court for a second time in November 2019. On behalf of the Trump Administration, the Department of Justice filed an amicus brief arguing that such actions of border agents should be immune from liability even if the entire incident had clearly occurred within the United States "ten miles from the border". The Mexican government filed an amicus brief saying that failing to provide an effective remedy when fundamental rights were violated would undermine U.S. human rights obligations, saying that "A nation's obligations to respect human rights do not stop at its borders but apply anywhere that the nation exercises effective control."
 Majority opinion 
The Court issued its decision on February 25, 2020, which upheld the Fifth Circuit decision. Writing for a 5–4 majority, Justice Samuel Alito ruled against Hernandez and held that the Court's precedent under Bivens did not extend to cross-border shootings. The Court concluded that the petitioners Bivens claim arose under a new and significantly different context (a cross-border shooting) than in previous claims by other defendants and also concluded that expanding Bivens would interfere with the executive branch's lead role in setting foreign policy and also interfere with border security. The majority opinion also stated that the Supreme Court would violate constitutional separation of powers by extending Bivens to additional categories of cases and that it is up to the United States Congress to design a remedy for this type of case.
 Concurrence 
Writing separately, Justice Clarence Thomas concurred with the majority opinion but also said that Bivens may have been wrongly decided and should be discarded as a precedent. In his concurrence, he said that in recent years the Supreme Court has been less and less willing to create or expand implied causes of action beyond what Congress has explicitly authorized by statute. He cited as an example Alexander v. Sandoval, a 2001 case in which the Supreme Court rejected the idea that a court could create an implied private right action under a regulation enacted under title VI of the Civil Rights Act. He asserted that adhering even to a limited form of Bivens risks usurping the power of the legislature.
 Dissent 
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote a dissent, which was joined by Justices Stephen Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor, and Elena Kagan. In her dissent, Ginsburg stated that the circumstances of the cross-border shooting were not in fact a "new" context under the Bivens analysis and that the majority opinion was incorrect in suggesting that foreign policy or national security would be impaired by allowing the litigation to go forward. She referred to the strong similarities between the current case as well as the circumstances under the original Bivens case, as well as the fact that the United States has the authority to govern the conduct of its U.S. Border Patrol officers.
See also
 Shooting of José Rodríguez
References
External links
SCOTUSblog coverage
Category:2010 in Texas
Category:2010 in Mexico
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:International incidents
Category:Mexico–United States border
Category:People shot dead by law enforcement officers
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Guerrero-Lasprilla v. Barr" ==> """
Guerrero-Lasprilla v. Barr, 589 U.S. ___ (2020), was a United States Supreme Court case, the question before the Court was "Is a request for equitable tolling, as it applies to statutory motions to reopen, judicially reviewable as a question of law?"
Decision
In a 7–2 decision written by Justice Breyer, the court ruled that the request for equitable tolling was judicially reviewable as a question of law, the court vacated and remanded the case..
Dissent
References
External links
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Guerrieri v. United States" ==> """
redirectList of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 399
Note: full text of the decision is:
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1970 in United States case law
"""

From "Guey Heung Lee v. Johnson" ==> """
Guey Heung Lee v. Johnson, 404 U.S. 1215 (1971), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding the desegregation of schools in San Francisco.
In 1971, the San Francisco Unified School District attempted to desegregate the school system by reassigning pupils attending segregated schools to other public schools. The School District submitted a comprehensive plan for desegregation which the District Court approved.
Some Chinese parents protested the move, because in the Asian schools the students could learn about their cultural heritage, and they would lose this if they went to public schools.
The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit entered a temporary stay pending a hearing in the District Court. Four days later, however, the Court of Appeals vacated that stay sua sponte. The District Court then denied the stay. Thereupon, a different three-judge panel of the Court of Appeals heard oral argument on the motions for a stay and denied those motions.
The Supreme Court too denied the stay, saying
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 404
 Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (1954)
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States education case law
Category:United States racial desegregation case law
Category:Public education in California
Category:School segregation in the United States
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:1971 in education
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Asian-American issues
"""

From "Guinn v. United States" ==> """
Guinn v. United States, 238 U.S. 347 (1915), was a United States Supreme Court decision that found certain grandfather clause exemptions to literacy tests for voting rights to be unconstitutional. Though these grandfather clauses were superficially race-neutral, they were designed to protect the voting rights of illiterate white voters while disenfranchising black voters.
The 1870 ratification of the Fifteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution barred each state from denying the right to vote on the basis of "race, color, or previous condition of servitude". In response, several Southern states, including Oklahoma, established constitutional provisions designed to effectively disenfranchise African-American voters without explicitly violating the Fifteenth Amendment. In his majority opinion, Chief Justice Edward Douglass White held that Oklahoma's grandfather clause was "repugnant to the Fifteenth Amendment and therefore null and void". The decision had little immediate impact, as Southern legislatures found other methods to disenfranchise blacks.
Background
When Oklahoma was admitted to the Union in 1907, it had adopted a constitution which allowed men of all races to vote, in compliance with the Fifteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. However, legislators soon passed an amendment to the Constitution that required voters to satisfy a literacy test. A potential voter could be exempted from the literacy requirement if he could prove either that his grandfathers had been voters or had been citizens of some foreign nation, or had served as soldiers before 1866. As a result, illiterate whites were able to vote — but not illiterate blacks, whose grandfathers had almost all been slaves and therefore barred from voting or serving as soldiers before 1866. Most states that had permitted free people of color to vote in early decades of the 19th century had rescinded that right before 1840. Thus, even blacks who might have descended from families free before the Civil War could not get an exemption from literacy tests. In practice these were highly subjective, administered by white registrars who discriminated against black voters. Oklahoma's amendment followed those of numerous Southern states that had similar grandfather clauses in their constitutions.
The Oklahoma amendment provided:
"No person shall be registered as an elector of this state or be allowed to vote in any election held herein, unless he be able to read and write any section of the Constitution of the state of Oklahoma; but no person who was, on January 1, 1866, or any time prior thereto, entitled to vote under any form of government, or who at that time resided in some foreign nation, and no lineal descendant of such person, shall be denied the right to register and vote because of his inability to so read and write sections of such Constitution. Precinct election inspectors having in charge the registration of electors shall enforce the provisions of this section at the time of registration, provided registration be required. Should registration be dispensed with, the provisions of this section shall be enforced by the precinct election officers when electors apply for ballots to vote."
The amendment came into force before the election of November 8, 1910, was held. During that election, certain election officers refused to allow black citizens to vote; those officers were indicted and convicted of fraudulently disenfranchising black voters, in violation of the 15th Amendment and in violation of Oklahoma State Law.
 Fifteenth Amendment 
The 15th Amendment to the Constitution of the United States provides the right to not be discriminated against while voting on the basis of race, color, or previous servitude. In the view of some, the Grandfather Clause in the Oklahoma Constitution was void of racial discrimination since it looked at relatives prior to 1866 and not 1871, creating a loophole that allowed discrimination.
History of grandfather clauses
Grandfather clauses were first instituted as a means of allowing whites to vote while simultaneously disenfranchising blacks.Valelly, Richard M. (2004). The Two Reconstructions: The Struggle for Black Enfranchisement. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 141. . The grandfather clause in Guinn v. United States involved requirement that a citizen must pass a literacy test in order to register to vote. At the time, many poor whites in the South were illiterate and would lose their voting rights if contingent upon passing a literacy test. The grandfather clauses were introduced since very few poor whites did not have a grandfather who had been able to vote.Valelly, Richard M. (2004). The Two Reconstructions: The Struggle for Black Enfranchisement. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 141. . These clauses typically allowed poor, illiterate whites to register to vote if they had been able to vote before 1867 or if their ancestors could have voted then, creating a loophole. The laws had time limits, which were used to try to get as many white voters registered as possible before the laws were challenged in court. The modern expression 'grandfathered in', despite its links with this racial history, is not generally associated with it.
Case
The case was argued before the Court on October 17, 1913. It represented the second appearance before the Court of John W. Davis as United States Solicitor General and the first case in which the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) filed a brief. After the case was argued, the Supreme Court ruled that the Grandfather Clause of the Constitution of Oklahoma was created and intended to exclude as many illiterate black people as possible and include as many illiterate whites as possible. The number of black citizens allowed to vote under the clause approximately equals the number of white citizens barred from voting. This is undoubtedly proof of discrimination and differences in classifying whites and blacks into two classes of illiterates. Therefore, the entire amendment regarding illiteracy in voters is wholly unconstitutional, violating the 15th Amendment. The clause was implemented as a way to try to avoid violating the 15th Amendment while still disenfranchising black voters. The previous conditions of servitude based on the race or skin color of people rendered them incapable of gaining literacy or meeting the ambiguously formed loopholes within said clause. The convictions of Guinn and Beal were upheld.http://cdn.loc.gov/service/ll/usrep/usrep238/usrep238347/usrep238347.pdf 
Decision
The Supreme Court handed down its decision in Guinn v. United States together with Myers v. Anderson, which concerned a grandfather clause in the Maryland constitution. In its decision published on June 21, 1915, the Court found "the grandfather clauses in the Maryland and Oklahoma constitutions to be repugnant to the Fifteenth Amendment and therefore null and void".Franklin, Moss p. 353 In his majority opinion, Chief Justice Edward Douglass White held that the grandfather clause was clearly designed to interfere with the voting rights protections of the Fifteenth Amendment even though it was racially neutral on its face.
Opinions
Justice Edward White wrote the majority opinion, writing that the Oklahoma law brings race-based discrimination "into existence since it is based purely on a period of time before the enactment of the Fifteenth Amendment and makes that period the controlling and dominant test of the right of suffrage." The decision was joined by all eight judges who participated in the case; there was no dissenting opinion.
Aftermath
Even though Guinn v. United States seemed to be a major step for black voters in the South, it conveyed a false sense of victory. Oklahoma immediately implemented a new voting statute which restricted voter registration, stating that "[a]ll persons, except those who voted in 1914, who were qualified to vote in 1916 but who failed to register between April 30 and May 11, 1916, with some exceptions for sick and absent persons who were given an additional brief period to register, would be perpetually disenfranchised." After Guinn in Oklahoma, similar constitutional clauses were struck down in former slave states in the South like Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, North Carolina, and Virginia, but just like Oklahoma, these states found other ways to disenfranchise black voters, mainly through poll taxes. Many kept literacy tests in place, as only the use of Grandfather Clauses had been struck down, the result being the only substantive change was poor white as well as blacks were disenfranchised.
After 23 years, the Supreme Court struck down the new Oklahoma statute in Lane v. Wilson. The Court ruled that the new statute still violated the Fifteenth Amendment because they were "operated unfairly against the very class on whose behalf the protection of the Constitution was here successfully invoked." Guinn successfully paved the way for judicial intervention regarding voter discrimination and disenfranchisement of specific groups, although it did not immediately provide enfranchisement of black voters in the South, as was expected.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Civil rights movement (1896–1954)
References
External links
 Encyclopedia of Oklahoma History and Culture - Guinn et al. v. United States
Category:History of voting rights in the United States
Category:United States Fifteenth Amendment case law
Category:1915 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Oklahoma
Category:African-American history of Oklahoma
Category:African-American history between emancipation and the civil rights movement
Category:Oklahoma elections
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Gumbel v. Pitkin" ==> """
Gumbel v. Pitkin, 113 U.S. 545 (1885), was a case brought in error to the Circuit Court of the United States for the District of Louisiana to dismiss a writ of error..
When a third party intervenes in a pending suit to claim property in the custody of the marshal by virtue of a writ of attachment issued therein, a judgment dismissing his intervention is final as to that issue, and one distributing the proceeds of the property to other parties is also final.
When a writ of error gives the names of all parties as they are found in the record of the case in the court below, and there is nothing in the record to show that there were other parties, the writ is sufficient even if the defendants in error are there described by firm names, as A. B. & Co., &c. This case distinguished from The Protector, 11 Wall. 82.
Motion to dismiss and affirm. The grounds of the first motion were (1) that no copy of the writ had been lodged with the clerk; (2) that no assignment of errors was transmitted with the record; (3) that the writ of error did not set forth the names of the members of the firms mentioned in the writ as defendants, and there was nothing in the record by which the irregularity could be corrected; (4) that the judgment appealed from was not a final judgment.
Decision
Justice Miller delivered the opinion of the Court.
A motion was made to dismiss the writ of error in this case on the following grounds:
The writ of error was never served by lodging a copy thereof with the clerk of the court.
No assignment of errors was transmitted with the record, as required by the rules of the court and by § 997 Rev.Stat.
The writ of error does not set forth the names of the members of the several firms mentioned in the writ as defendants, and there is nothing in the record by which this irregularity may be corrected.
The original petition demands restoration of the goods seized by the marshal to the sheriff on the ground of previous seizure by that officer under an attachment emanating from the state court; the amended petition abandons that ground and goes for priority in the distribution of the proceeds of sale in the marshal's hands, the result of an order of sale pendente lite; such a petition is a mere rule or motion for distribution of proceeds, and a judgment rendered thereon is not reviewable by writ of error.
The high court found:
The first appeared to be unfounded in fact, as the record now before us shows that the writ was filed in the circuit court June 14, 1884.
The second was met by the decision of this Court in the case of the School District of Ackley v. Hall, 106 U. S. 428, where it is said that a writ of error will not be dismissed for want of jurisdiction by reason of a failure to annex thereto or return therewith an assignment of errors pursuant to the requirements of § 997 Rev.Stat. Nor does Rule 8 require a copy of assignment of errors in the transcript when no such assignment was filed in the court below.
The fourth ground of dismissal was equally untenable.
The record shows that a large number of the creditors of Joseph Dreyfus, of the City of New Orleans, sued him in the circuit court of the United States, and in those actions or in one of them a writ of attachment was issued and levied on the goods of Dreyfus by the marshal, who took possession of them.  The order dismissing Gumbel's intervention disposes of his rights, and is a final judgment as to that issue, as to which he has a right to a writ of error. The order distributing the proceeds of the sale is also final, as it disposes of the fund.
As regards the third ground for dismissal, the case is not so clear.
This Court has undoubtedly, from the case of Deneale v. Stump, 8 Pet. 526, to that of The Protector, 11 Wall. 82, held that all the parties to the judgment must be named in the writ of error, and that the use of the name of one of the parties, with the addition of the words, "and others," as "Joseph W. Clark and others," does not satisfy the requirement, but on the contrary shows that there were parties to the judgment or decree in the inferior court who are not named in the writ. It is upon this ground that the judgment in the case of Smith v. Clark, 12 How. 21, is distinctly placed by Chief Justice Taney in the opinion.
In the case of The Protector, 11 Wall. 82, the appeal was taken in the name of William A. Freeborn & Co., while the record showed that William A. Freeborn, James F. Freeborn, and Henry P. Gardner were the libellants.
In this Court, counsel insisted that the objection was not fatal, and that the appeal might be amended, but the Court held otherwise and dismissed the appeal.
The transcript of the record before the court showed that these parties came into the circuit court as defendants or intervenors, and prosecuted their rights throughout the whole proceedings by the designations applied to them in this writ of error and by no other names whatever.  No amendment of the writ to remove this difficulty can therefore be made from the record.
The court thought that, where the writ gives all the names of the parties as they are found in the record of the case in the circuit court, and where there is nothing to show that any other person was a party than such as are so named, the court is not at liberty to indulge the presumption that there were others who were parties, when such presumption is not founded on anything in the record and would lead to a manifest injustice. 
The motion to dismiss was overruled, and the case is one to be heard on the merits, and not to be affirmed on motion.
Both motions were denied.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States civil procedure case law
Category:Government of New Orleans
Category:1885 in United States case law
"""

From "Gundy v. United States" ==> """
Gundy v. United States, No. 17-6086, 588 U.S. ___ (2019), was a United States Supreme Court case that held that , part of the Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act ("SORNA"), does not violate the nondelegation doctrine.. The section of the SORNA allows the Attorney General to "specify the applicability" of the mandatory registration requirements of "sex offenders convicted before the enactment of [SORNA]". Precedent is that it is only constitutional for Congress to delegate legislative power to the executive branch if it provides an "intelligible principle" as guidance. The outcome of the case could have greatly influenced the broad delegations of power Congress has made to the federal executive branch, but it did not.
Background
Herman Avery Gundy was on supervised release for a prior federal offense he had committed when he was convicted of sexual assault in Maryland (a state offense), on October 3, 2005. He was sentenced to 20 years imprisonment and 5 years probation, with 10 of the 20-year sentence suspended. Consequently, on March 23, 2006 he was convicted in federal court of violating his supervised release and sentenced to 2 years imprisonment (to be served consecutively to his sexual assault sentence). After he had served his prison sentence for the sexual assault in state custody, on June 15, 2011, he was transferred to federal custody in Pennsylvania to serve his sentence for violating his supervised release.
On July 17, 2012, Gundy received permission to travel unsupervised to a residential reentry center in New York. On August 27, 2012, he was released from federal custody. Gundy did not register as a sex offender in either Maryland (where he committed his crime) or New York (his state of residence), and was thus arrested for violating SORNA (). In January 2013, he was indicted for that offense.
Despite being convicted of a sexual offense before the implementation of SORNA, Gundy was still subject to the law. This is the result of 42 U.S.C. § 16913(d), which reads:
The Attorney General shall have the authority to specify the applicability of the requirements of this subchapter to sex offenders convicted before the enactment of this chapter or its implementation in a particular jurisdiction, and to prescribe rules for the registration of any such sex offenders and for other categories of sex offenders who are unable to comply with subsection (b).The Attorney General decided that this law is applicable to everyone convicted of a sexual offense, making the law retroactive.
Lower court proceedings
Gundy filed a motion to dismiss the single charge against him. On May 22, 2013, District Judge J. Paul Oetken of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York granted the motion. Oetken found that Gundy was not required to comply with SORNA's registration requirements until after he served his full sentence (at which point he was in federal custody in New York), as his conviction for violation of his supervised release was, according to Oetken, "a sentence of imprisonment with respect to the offense giving rise to the registration requirement".
The prosecution appealed the dismissal to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. Circuit Judge Susan L. Carney disagreed with the District Court's reading. She held that 42 U.S.C. § 16913(b), which states that offenders are only required to register after completing "a sentence of imprisonment with respect to the offense giving rise to the registration requirement", did not mean that the general requirement to register only applied after having completed the sentence. The Court found that Gundy was subject to SORNA as soon as it became retroactive. The District Court's judgement was thus reversed and remanded.
After a bench trial before Judge Oetken, the District Court found Gundy guilty. He was sentenced to time served and five years of supervised release. Gundy appealed the judgement to the Second Circuit. The Court of Appeals ruled that Gundy participated in voluntary interstate travel and was therefore required to register his travel to New York under SORNA. As he failed to do so, he was subject to sentencing as done by the District Court. It rejected Gundy's argument that the delegation of authority to the Attorney General within SORNA violated the nondelegation clause, based on circuit precedent in the case United States v. Guzman.
Supreme Court
On September 20, 2017, Gundy's counsel petitioned for a writ of certiorari to the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit regarding 4 questions presented:(1) Whether convicted sex offenders are "required to register" under the federal Sex Offender Notification and Registration Act ("SORNA") while in custody, regardless of how long they have until release.
(2) Whether all offenders convicted of a qualifying sex offense prior to SORNA's enactment are "required to register" under SORNA no later than August 1, 2008.
(3) Whether a defendant violates 18 U.S.C. § 2250(a), which requires interstate travel, where his only movement between states occurs while he is in the custody of the Federal Bureau of Prisons and serving a prison sentence.
(4) Whether SORNA's delegation of authority to the Attorney General to issue regulations under 42 U.S.C. § 16913(d) violates the nondelegation doctrine.The Supreme Court granted certiorari, though limited to question 4 of the petition, on March 5, 2018. The Cato Institute, Pacific Legal Foundation, American Civil Liberties Union, Downsize DC Foundation and various other organizations and people filed amici curiae in support of Gundy.
Oral arguments were held on October 2, 2018.
Decision
On June 20, 2019 — nearly a full term after the case was argued — the Supreme Court issued their opinion.
The plurality opinion was written by Elena Kagan, who was joined by Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen Breyer, and Sonia Sotomayor. Justice Kagan found that because SORNA guided the Attorney General to eventually apply the registration requirements to all offenders, it did not violate the nondelegation doctrine.
Justice Samuel Alito wrote a brief opinion concurring in the judgement. He stated that he might wish to revisit the court's approach to nondelegation "[i]f a majority of this Court were willing to reconsider the approach we have taken for the past 84 years", but that the statute at issue in this case was not unique enough. Therefore, he voted with the plurality to affirm.
Justice Neil Gorsuch, joined by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Clarence Thomas, filed a dissenting opinion. His opinion referenced and disagreed with Justice Alito's vote, believing that this case would be an appropriate vehicle to revisit nondelegation. He believed that the statute "hand[ed] off to the nation’s chief prosecutor the power to write his own criminal code."
Subsequent events
On July 11, 2019, Gundy's counsel filed a petition for rehearing. He argued that Justice Kavanaugh's recusal had influenced Justice Alito to vote as he had and requested that the case be heard before the full court. Simultaneously, another case (Paul v. United States) resting on largely the same facts was appealed to the Supreme Court. The cases' respective rehearing and cert petitions were relisted and distributed at several conferences before both were denied. Justice Kavanaugh wrote a statement respecting the denial of certiorari in Paul, indicating that he too might wish to revisit nondelegation in a future case.
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:Sex offender registries in the United States
Category:United States nondelegation doctrine case law
"""

From "Gunn v. Minton" ==> """
Gunn v. Minton, 568 U.S. 251 (2013), is a US patent law case. The case dealt with the question of jurisdiction of patent law litigation in regard to attorney malpractice..   In a unanimous ruling, the United States Supreme Court decided that federal laws granting exclusive jurisdiction to cases involving patents does not preclude the ability of state courts to hear cases related to but not involving patents.  The case was remanded to the Texas state courts for further proceedings.
References
External links
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Gunn v. University Committee to End the War in Viet Nam" ==> """
Gunn v. University Committee to End the War in Viet Nam, 399 U.S. 383 (1970), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court that since the District Court has issued neither an injunction nor an order granting or denying one, Supreme Court has no jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1253,. which provides for review of orders granting or denying interlocutory or permanent injunctions.Gunn v. Univ. Comm. to End War in Viet Nam, .
 Background 
 Facts 
Demonstrators against the war in Vietnam were arrested for disturbing the peace after they appeared with antiwar placards at the edge of a crowd attending a speech by President Johnson at Fort Hood, Texas.
They were charged with disturbing the peace under Tex. Pen. Code, Art. 474.
 Complaint 
In an action filed nine days later against defendant county officials in the United States District Court for the Western District of Texas, they asked that a three-judge district court be convened, that enforcement of Art. 474 be enjoined, and that it be declared unconstitutional.
A three-judge District Court was convened.
 Dismissal sought 
A few days after plaintiffs filed their federal suit, the state charges against plaintiffs were dismissed because plaintiffs' conduct had taken place within a military enclave over which Texas lacked jurisdiction.
Defendants then sought to dismiss the federal case.  Plaintiffs, conceding that there was no remaining controversy as to the prosecution of the state charges, asked that the district court grant relief against enforcement of the statute because of its unconstitutionality.
 District Court 
The three-judge District Court held that the disturbing-the-peace statute was unconstitutionally broad, and that the demonstrators were entitled to a declaratory judgment to that effect and to injunctive relief against the enforcement of the statute, but that the mandate would be stayed pending the next session of the Texas Legislature, so that the legislature, if it so desired, could enact such disturbing-the- peace statute as would meet constitutional requirements. After the Texas Legislature at its next session took no action with respect to the statute, the District Court entered no further order of any kind.
The three-judge court issued a per curiam opinion, concluding that Art. 474 "is . . . unconstitutionally broad. The Plaintiffs herein are entitled to their declaratory judgment to that effect, and to injunctive relief against the enforcement of Article 474 as now worded . . . . However, . . . the mandate shall be stayed and this Court shall retain jurisdiction of the cause pending the next session . . . of the Texas legislature . . . ."Gunn, 289 F. Supp. at 475.
 Appeal and arguments 
The county officials took a direct appeal to the United States Supreme Court under 28 U.S.C. § 1253, which provides for an appeal to the Supreme Court from a three- judge Federal District Court order "granting or denying" an injunction.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court stated that § 1253 provided for a direct appeal to it only from an order granting or denying an injunction. Here, no injunction had ever been entered, as the parties themselves recognized. All the district court had done was to write a rather discursive per curiam opinion. Thus, the Court had no jurisdiction over the appeal.
The United States Supreme Court dismissed the appeal for want of jurisdiction. Justice Potter Stewart, writing for a unanimous court, held that since the District Court had issued neither an injunction nor an order granting or denying one, the Supreme Court had no power under 1253 either to remand to the District Court or to deal with the merits of the case in any way at all.
Justice Byron White, joined by Justice William J. Brennan Jr., joined in the opinion of the court, but expressed the view that the District Court's opinion should have been viewed as having the operative effect of a declaratory judgment invalidating the Texas disturbing-the-peace statute, so that the state was entitled to have that phase of the case reviewed by the United States Court of Appeals.Gunn, 399 U.S. at 391 (White, J., concurring).
Aftermath
Companion cases, Dial v. Fontaine,399 U.S. 521 (1970). and Hutcherson v. Lehtin399 U.S. 522 (1970) were each dismissed in a one-line per curiam opinions citing Gunn.
 See also 
 Mora v. McNamara
 Lloyd Corp. v. Tanner
 References 
External links
Category:Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States federal jurisdiction case law
Category:Bell County, Texas
Category:1970 in United States case law
"""

From "H. L. v. Matheson" ==> """
H. L. v. Matheson, 450 U.S. 398 (1981), was a United States Supreme Court abortion rights case, according to which a state may require a doctor to inform a teenaged girl's parents before performing an abortion or face criminal penalty..
Overview
A female minor, known by her initials H.L., was living in Utah with her parents when she became pregnant in 1978. A doctor advised H.L. that an abortion would be in her best medical interests. A Utah law enacted in 1974 required abortion providers to "[n]otify, if possible" the parents of any female under the age of majority who is scheduled to undergo an abortion, at least 24 hours before the abortion.Utah Code Annotated § 76-7-304(2). Note that as of 2008, the law has been revised to exclude parental notification requirement if a doctor advises an abortion is medically necessary to save the mother's life or avoid serious medical complications, if the parents have a history of abuse towards the minor female, if the pregnancy is a result of parental incest, or if the parents have not assumed responsibility for the minor's care and upbringing. Violation was a misdemeanor subject to a fine up to $1000 and/or several months imprisonment. H.L. initiated a lawsuit as part of a proposed class action of unmarried unemancipated females, arguing that Utah's parental notification statute was unconstitutional. Scott M. Matheson, then the governor of Utah, was named as the defendant. 
The case made its way to the Utah Supreme Court, where the law was upheld as consistent with Roe v. Wade (1973). The judgment noted, among other points, that H.L.'s proposed class action was overly broad; and that the Utah statute mandated parental notification but did not grant parents authority to stop such an abortion.
The case was appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States of America. Utah's statute was upheld on a 6 to 3 vote.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 450
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:Right to abortion under the United States Constitution
Category:Right to privacy under the United States Constitution
Category:1981 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Utah
"""

From "H.P. Hood & Sons v. Du Mond" ==> """
H.P. Hood & Sons v. Du Mond, 336 U.S. 525 (1949), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held a New York protectionist law which prohibits licensure to suppliers who are alleged will create “destructive competition” in the local market to violate the Commerce Clause of the U.S. Constitution.
Background
H.P. Hood & Sons was a milk processor/distributor, which distributed to the Massachusetts area but also owned three milk-receiving stations in New York. The petitioner desired to have a fourth distribution center in New York, and applied to the relevant state board, which denied their license request. The request was denied on the basis of a regulation stating that a license shall not be granted until the state commissioner was satisfied that the license would further the state of New York’s public interest and would not unduly hamper state competition. Plaintiff sued on the grounds that the law/regulation violated the interstate commerce clause, namely stating that the state law took away power from the federal government to regulate commerce between states.
Issue
Does a New York state licensing law which prohibits licensure to suppliers who are alleged will create “destructive competition” or where the Commissioner finds that such licensing is not in the public interest violate the Commerce Clause?
Holding
In a majority opinion authored by Justice Jackson, the Court held that the New York state statute, as applied, violates the commerce clause. The “practical effect” of the regulation would be to hamper interstate commerce. This is true because Plaintiff distributes his milk between state lines, and the competition between state lines would be necessarily hampered if, for reasons of protecting New York’s particular economic interest, he was further denied a license. The license was denied because of the states protectionist desire to insulate its local market from outside competition. This violates the very purpose of the commerce clause. The states’ general police power does not extend to protectionism; the states may regulate and pass laws for the general public welfare, health, and safety, but not for economic insulation from outside competition.
This distinction between the power of the State to shelter its people from menaces to their health or safety and from fraud, even when those dangers emanate from interstate commerce, and its lack of power to retard, burden or constrict the flow of such commerce for their economic advantage is one deeply rooted in both our history and our law.
When victory relieved the Colonies from the pressure for solidarity that war had exerted, a drift toward anarchy and commercial warfare between states began.
". . . each State would legislate according to its estimate of its own interests, the importance of its own products, and the local advantages or disadvantages of its position in a political or commercial view."
This came "to threaten at once the peace and safety of the Union".Story, The Constitution, §§ 259, 260. See Fiske, The Critical Period of American History, 144; Warren, The Making of the Constitution, 567 The sole purpose for which Virginia initiated the movement which ultimately produced the Constitution was
"to take into consideration the trade of the United States; to examine the relative situations and trade of the said States; to consider how far a uniform system in their commercial regulations may be necessary to their common interest and their permanent harmony,"
and, for that purpose, the General Assembly of Virginia, in January of 1786, named commissioners and proposed their meeting with those from other states.Documents, Formation of the Union, H.R.Doc. No. 398, 12 H. Docs., 69th Cong., 1st Sess., p. 38.
The desire of the Forefathers to federalize regulation of foreign and interstate commerce stands in sharp contrast to their jealous preservation of the state's power over its internal affairs. No other federal power was so universally assumed to be necessary, no other state power was so readily relinquished. There was no desire to authorize federal interference with social conditions or legal institutions of the states. Even the Bill of Rights amendments were framed only as a limitation upon the powers of Congress. The states were quite content with their several and diverse controls over most matters, but, as Madison has indicated,
"want of a general power over Commerce led to an exercise of this power separately, by the States, wch [sic] not only proved abortive, but engendered rival, conflicting and angry regulations." (3 Farrand, Records of the Federal Convention, 547)
The necessity of centralized regulation of commerce among the states was so obvious and so fully recognized that the few words of the Commerce Clause were little illuminated by debate. But the significance of the clause was not lost, and its effect was immediate and salutary. We are told by so responsible an authority as Mr. Jefferson's first appointee to this Court that
"there was not a State in the Union, in which there did not, at that time, exist a variety of commercial regulations; concerning which it is too much to suppose that the whole ground covered by those regulations was immediately assumed by actual legislation under the authority of the Union. But where was the existing statute on this subject that a State attempted to execute? or by what State was it ever thought necessary to repeal those statutes? By common consent, those laws dropped lifeless from their statute books for want of the sustaining power that had been relinquished to Congress."" (Gibbons v. Ogden, 9 Wheat. 1, concurring opinion at 22 U. S. 226.) Full text of the opinion available at Justia.com.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Vinson Court
References
 External links 
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1949 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:Dairy farming in the United States
Category:Legal history of New York (state)
"""

From "Haaland v. Brackeen" ==> """
Haaland v. Brackeen is a pending Supreme Court of the United States case brought by the states of Texas, Louisiana, and Indiana, and individual plaintiffs, that seeks to declare the Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) unconstitutional. In addition to Haaland v. Brackeen (docket no. 21-376), three additional cases have been consolidated to be heard at the same time. Those cases are Cherokee Nation v. Brackeen, Texas v. Haaland, and Brackeen v. Haaland. 
The matter originally came up in a Texas District Court on an adoption petition filed by Chad and Jennifer Brackeen. After their effort was challenged by the Navajo Tribe, the Brackeens brought suit in the U.S. District Court in Fort Worth. The Cherokee Nation, Oneida Nation, Quinault Indian Nation, and Morongo Band of Mission Indians intervened in the case. The U.S. District Court declared that the ICWA was unconstitutional and the case was appealed.
The Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed the District Court in a panel opinion. The full court, on rehearing the case en banc, held that parts of the law, that set federal standards for lower and state courts, were constitutional, but that the parts of the law that required state agencies to perform certain acts were unconstitutional as a violation of the Tenth Amendment.
The Supreme Court heard the case on November 9, 2022, and a decision is expected in spring 2023.
Background
Indian Child Welfare Act
thumb|right|alt=photograph of three American Indian children dressed in suits, with an inset photo in their native attire|Display on Indian assimilation at the Old Courthouse in St. Louis
In 1978, the Congress enacted a law to protect American Indian children from removal from their tribes to be adopted by non-Indians.Jessie Shaw, Commandeering the Indian Child Welfare Act: Native American Rights Exception to Tenth Amendment Challenges, ; Lucy Dempsey, Equity over Equality: Equal Protection and the Indian Child Welfare Act, ; Bradley E. Tinker, Brackeen v. Zinke, , Art. 14 (online only) (2018). As many as 35 percent of Indian children were being removed from their homes, mainly from intact families, and being placed in non-Indian homes.,  2 (1995); Troy R. Johnson, The State and the American Indian: Who Gets the Indian Child,  (1999); Shaw,  at 2010; Dempsey,  at 417. This was often not in the best interest of the child, but for racial reasons, with "programs that took Native American children from their homes and placed them into boarding schools as part of a targeted process of assimilation." Shaw,  at 2010. 
Congress established the following order of priorities for placing an Indian child who had to be removed from a home. First, the child should be placed with a member of the child's extended family, other members of the child's tribe, or other Indian families. Second, the child could be placed in a foster home approved by the child's tribe, or third, in a foster home approved by the state or other non-Indian authority. Finally, they could be placed in an institution operated or approved by an Indian tribe.Dempsey,  at 424, fn64 & fn65; Johnson,  at 209.
Brackeen adoption attempt
In June 2016, a 10-month-old Navajo boy was placed with Chad and Jennifer Brackeen, a former civil engineer and an anesthesiologist, respectively, after his Navajo mother (who lived in Texas) was found to be using drugs. Shaw,  at 2014; Onalee R. Chappeau, Trusting the Tribe: Understanding the Tensions of the Indian Child Welfare Act,  241, 265–66 (2020); Jan Hoffman, Custody Fight Pits Texas Couple Against a Law Favoring Tribes, , June 5, 2019, at A1 (hereinafter Hoffman, Custody Fight); Arnessa Garrett, NYT spotlights white Fort Worth couple's fight to adopt Native American child, , June 5, 2019, online (hereinafter Garrett, Spotlights); Roxanna Asgarian, How a white evangelical family could dismantle adoption protections for Native children,  (Feb. 20, 2020, 7:30 A.M) (hereinafter Asgarian, Protections). The father of the child is Cherokee. In 2017 a Texas state court terminated the parental rights of both the biological parents. Under the provisions of the ICWA, the Navajo Nation stepped in and sought to place the child with a Navajo family, but that failed and the Brackeens were allowed to adopt the child.Chappeau,  at 266; Hoffman, Custody Fight; Garrett, Spotlights; Asgarian, Protections; Nora Mabie, US Supreme Court to hear Brackeen v. Haaland, a case challenging Indian Child Welfare Act,  (Feb. 28, 2022, 2:02 p.m.) (last accessed Mar. 20, 2022) (hereinafter Mabie, Supreme Court); Roxanna Asgarian, Texas case could change adoption rules for Native American children, and undercut tribal rights,  (Nov. 10, 2022) (hereinafter Asgarian, Texas case). The Brackeens later attempted to adopt the boy's sister in state court, but the girl's extended family also sought to take in the girl. Shaw,  at 2014; Hoffman, Custody Fight. The Brackeens then filed suit in federal court to overturn the ICWA on the grounds of racial discrimination. Shaw,  at 2015; Hoffman, Custody Fight; Asgarian, Protections. This approach would "completely erase [...] tribal sovereignty" according to Lauren van Schilfgaarde, a tribal sovereignty advocate. Creamer, Fight.
State trial court
The adoption petition for the sister by the Brackeens was heard in state District Court by Judge Alex Kim, who stated that ICWA violated the Texas Constitution.Hoffman, Custody Fight. In state court, the Brackeens argued that they had more money than the child's Navajo relations, and would therefore be better for the child. Following the presentation of evidence, the state's attorney stated that according to state guidelines, the child should be placed with her Navajo family. Judge Kim disagreed and placed the child with the Brackeen family, but allowed limited visitation with her Navajo family.Hoffman, Custody Fight; Garrett, Spotlights. Both sides were unhappy with portions of the decision and appealed, settlement was subsequently reached and the state appeal was dismissed.In the Interest of A.M., a Child, Nos. 02-17-00298 and 02-17-00300 (Tex. App.—Fort Worth, Dec. 7, 2017, no pet.) (not designated for publication).
Libretti adoption
In March 2016, a newborn girl was surrendered by her mother and subsequently placed with Nick and Heather Libretti. According to the Nevada law, the mother gave up her parental rights when she surrendered the child. The child's father was found and he expressed a desire to raise her, but, as he was unhoused and abusing substances, she was not placed with him. The child's paternal grandmother was a member of the Tigua Pueblo tribe, and the tribe indicated that they intended to intervene if the child was not placed with relatives. Though the Librettis were able to adopt the child, they joined a lawsuit challenging ICWA, stating that the law had violated their constitutional rights.
Clifford adoption attempt
In 2016, a 5 year old girl was placed with Jason and Danielle Clifford in Minnesota. When the girl was 3 years old, her parents were arrested for drugs and child neglect, and their parental rights were terminated. The maternal grandmother, who was a member of White Earth Ojibwe Nation, was found to be unfit to raise the child by advocates for the child. The tribe initially stated that the child did not qualify for tribal membership. However, in January 2017, as the Cliffords were preparing to adopt the child, the tribe intervened, saying that they had lacked relevant information when they had found her to be ineligible. The tribe held that the child should be placed with her grandmother. The child was placed with her grandmother, and the Cliffords joined the Brackeen suit.
Oil money involvement
Gibson Dunn is representing Brackeens in the lawsuit since 2017. The firm has a history of arguing cases for oil and gas companies such as Chevron, Enbridge, and an operator of the Dakota Access Pipeline. There are concerns that, despite Gibson Dunn presenting this case on a pro bono basis, the outcome may ultimately benefit oil and gas corporations, casinos, and associated lawyers. The attorneys such as Matthew McGill and Theodore Olson who have argued cases for the fossil fuel industry are trying to exploit Indigenous infants in their efforts to undermine federal regulation, possibly amounting to genocide, and financially benefit oil magnates.
 U.S. District Court 
thumb|right|alt=photograph of the federal courthouse in Fort Worth|Federal courthouse in Fort Worth
The Brackeens' federal lawsuit was filed in the federal District Court in Fort Worth in October 2017, and assigned to Judge Reed O'Connor.Hoffman, Custody Fight; Asgarian, Protections. The Cherokee Nation, Oneida Nation, Quinault Indian Nation, and Morongo Band of Mission Indians intervened in the case.Brackeen v. Zinke, 338 F. Supp. 3d 514, 520 (N.D. Tex. 2018) (hereinafter cited as Brackeen I); National Indian Law Library, 2018 Federal Courts Cases,  (accessed on Apr. 10, 2021) (hereinafter cited as NARF, 2018 Federal Court Cases); Mabie, Supreme Court.
 Plaintiffs 
The states of Texas, Louisiana, and Indiana were the state plaintiffs, while the non-Indians Brackeens, Librettis, Cliffords, and Ms. Hernandez were individual plaintiffs.Tinker,  at 2. The Librettis (Nick and Heather) had sought to adopt a Tigua Pueblo child, with the approval of the child's mother, Altagracia Hernandez. The Tigua Pueblo tribe intervened in the Nevada state court proceedings, but agreed not to contest the adoption in late 2018. The Cliffords (Jason and Danielle) had attempted to adopt a child whose grandmother was a member of the White Earth Band of the Ojibwe Tribe in Minnesota. In the Clifford case, the child was placed with the maternal grandmother in accordance with ICWA by the Minnesota court that heard their case.Chappeau,  at 267–68.
 Defendants 
The federal defendants included the Department of the Interior and Secretary Ryan Zinke, the Bureau of Indian Affairs and Director Bryan C. Rice, and the Department of Health and Human Services and Secretary Alex Azar.Chappeau,  at fn 180, 265.
 Summary judgment 
In 2018, Judge O'Connor issued an order finding that:
It was the first time a constitutional challenge to the ICWA had been successful.Shaw,  at 2008; Dempsey,  at 414.
 Court of Appeals 
thumb|right|300px|alt=photograph of the New Orleans courthouse for the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals|The Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals courthouse in New Orleans
 Procedural background 
After the District Court found that the ICWA and the applicable federal regulations "violated equal protection, the Tenth Amendment, and the nondelegation doctrine",Brackeen v. Bernhardt, 937 F.3d 406, 420 (5th Cir. 2019) (hereinafter cited as Brackeen II). all sides appealed the case to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit. The case was assigned to a panel consisting of Senior Judge Jacques L. Wiener Jr., Judge James L. Dennis, and Chief Judge Priscilla Owen and argued on March 13, 2019.
 Panel opinion 
Judge Dennis delivered the opinion of the Court on August 9, 2019, which was modified on August 16, 2019.Brackeen II, 936 F.3d at 406. The opinion reversed the decision of the District Court, and rendered judgment for the federal government and the Indian tribes.Brackeen II, 936 F.3d at 413; Dempsey,  at 414; Erin Dougherty Lynch and Dan Lewerenz, Brackeen v. Bernhardt - Indian Child Welfare Act,  (last visited Mar. 12, 2022) (hereinafter cited as Lynch, Brackeen). Dennis ruled that although the Brackeens and other plaintiffs had standing to sue,Brackeen II, 936 F.3d at 424. the District Court erred by considering this to be a race-based law.Brackeen II, 936 F.3d at 426. Instead, it was a law based on political considerations, citing a United States Supreme Court case, United States v. Antelope which had held "that federal legislation with respect to Indian tribes ... is not based upon impermissible racial classifications.Brackeen II, 936 F.3d at 426, internal citation omitted.
The panel also looked at whether ICWA required that state courts and state officials were "commandeered" to enforce federal law and concluded, two to one, that it had not. This was based on the Supremacy Clause, and the panel concluded that ICWA did not commandeer the agencies, but merely regulated the adoption and placement of Indian children.Brackeen II, 936 F.3d at 432-33. Chief Judge Owen dissented from this part of the opinion.Brackeen II, 936 F.3d at 441 (CJ Owen, dissenting); Shaw,  at 2008.
 En banc opinion 
On November 7, 2019, the Fifth Circuit, at the request of one of the judges, ordered that the case be heard en banc.Brackeen v. Bernhardt, 942 F.3d 287 (2019); Dempsey,  at 414; Lynch, Brackeen. Once ordered, 486 Indian tribes, 59 American Indian organizations, and 26 states filed amicus briefs in support of the constitutionality of the ICWA.Shaw,  at 2015; Mabie, Supreme Court. On January 22, 2020, the Court heard oral arguments.Lynch, Brackeen. On April 6, 2021, the court issued a per curiam opinion that summarized the primary opinions of Judge Dennis or Judge Kyle Duncan.Brackeen v. Haaland, 994 F.3d 249 (5th Cir. 2021) (hereafter cited as Brackeen III). The court unanimously ruled that at least one party had standing to bring the suit,Brackeen III, 994 F.3d at 267. and a majority held that Congress had the authority to enact the ICWA.Brackeen III, 994 F.3d at 267-68; Adrianna Shannon, Indian Nations Law Update - April 2021,  (last accessed Mar. 13, 2022); Debra Cassens Weiss, In 325-page opinion, en banc 5th Circuit splits on preference for tribes in Native American adoptions,  (Online), Apr. 8, 2021 (last accessed Mar. 13, 2022).
The per curiam opinion also held that the "Indian child" classification did not violate equal protection.Brackeen III, 994 F.3d at 268; Dempsey,  at 414; Weiss,  (Online). It did however, in a non-precedental holding, determine that the adoptive placement and preference for an "Indian foster home" did violate equal protection.Brackeen III, 994 F.3d at 268; Shannon, ; Weiss,  (Online). The court held "that ICWA's "active efforts," § 1912(d), expert witness, § 1912(e) and (f), and recordkeeping requirements, § 1915(e), unconstitutionally commandeer state actors",Brackeen III, 994 F.3d at 268; Shaw,  at 2015-16; Weiss,  (Online). violating the Tenth Amendment, and affirming the District Court. However, it also held "that the following provisions validly preempt contrary state law to the extent they apply to state courts (as opposed to state agencies): the placement preferences, § 1915(a) and (b), and the placement and termination standards, § 1912(e) and (f)", reversing the lower court.
The published opinions by Dennis and Duncan, together with the concurrences and dissents by other judges were over 200 pages.Brackeen III.
Supreme Court
Petition for writ of certiorari
Following the en banc decision of the Fifth Circuit Court, the United States, the State of Texas, the Cherokee Nation, and the Brackeens all petitioned the Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari. On February 28, 2022, the Court granted all four petitions.Mabie, Supreme Court. The Supreme Court consolidated the other three cases into Deb Haaland, Secretary of the Interior, et al. v. Chad Everet Brackeen, et al., allotting one hour for oral argument. All four cases dealt with the same basic subject matter, but from the perspective of each individual appellant, and it is a more efficient use of the Court's time to hear them at the same time.
 Oral argument 
The case was argued on November 9, 2022. The Court had originally planned on one hour of oral argument, but argument took over three hours.Amy Howe, Closely divided court scrutinizes various provisions of Indian Child Welfare Act,  (Nov. 9, 2022) (last visited Nov. 10, 2022) (hereinafter cited as Howe, Divided court).
The argument of the adoptive parents
The Brackeens and the other two non-Native American couples were represented pro bono by Matthew McGill of Gibson Dunn.Howe, Divided court. The first argument presented was that ICWA did away with the "best interest of the child" test used by most states.Transcript of Oral Argument at 4, Haaland v. Brackeen, (No. 21-376) (hereinafter Transcript of Oral Argument). 
McGill argued that ICWA violated the equal protection clause by treating Native American children differently, and argued that Congress did not have the authority under the Constitution to regulate Native Americans throughout the United States. Transcript of Oral Argument at 13-14; Howe, Divided court. McGill argued that the plenary power doctrine in American Indian case law was not based nor authorized under the Indian Commerce Clause of the Constitution.Transcript of Oral Argument at 14-16. On questioning by Justice Amy Coney Barrett, McGill stated that Congress's "plenary power applies to the tribe's areas of its sovereign interests, tribal lands, treaty powers, its internal affairs, its ability to self-govern."Transcript of Oral Argument at 14. Justice Sonia Sotomayor immediately questioned that position, pointing out a list of laws governing Indians since the late 1700s.Transcript of Oral Argument at 14-15.
The argument of the federal government
The United States, represented by Deputy Solicitor General Edwin Kneedler argued that the Congress did have the right to regulate the tribes, so long as the law was "rationally related" to the governments obligations to the tribes.
The argument of the States
The position of the States was presented by Texas Solicitor General Judd E. Stone. Stone argued that ICWA violated the Tenth Amendment anti-commandeering provisions.
The argument of the tribes
Ian H. Gershengorn argued the position of the American Indian tribes to the Court.
Subsequent developments
Following the lower court decisions, New Mexico passed a law to codify various provisions of the ICWA into state law.New Mexico governor signs historic legislation providing protection for Native American children and families,  Mar. 4, 2022 (last accessed Mar. 13, 2022).
Footnotes
References
Category:Child welfare in the United States
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit cases
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States nondelegation doctrine case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Hadacheck v. Sebastian" ==> """
Hadacheck v. Sebastian, 239 U.S. 394 (1915), was an early U.S. Supreme Court case on the constitutionality of zoning ordinances..   The Court held that an ordinance of Los Angeles, California, prohibiting the manufacturing of bricks within specified limits of the city did not unconstitutionally deprive the petitioner of his property without due process of law, or deny him equal protection of the laws.
History
thumb|left|Josias J. Andrews, the Councilman who introduced the motion to eliminate all brickyards in Victoria Park, in 1909.|180px
Los Angeles City Councilman Josias J. (Jerry) Andrews, one of the owners of the Victoria Park tract, moved the City Council to eliminate all brickyards in an area bounded by Wilshire Boulevard on the north, Western Avenue on the east, Washington Street on the south and the city limits on the west. That ordinance would effectively put two brickyards out of business, one of them just a few blocks west of Victoria Park, between Crenshaw Boulevard and Woolsey Avenue (today's Bronson Avenue) on Pico Street.
The Los Angeles Times said that the brickyard "happens to be in a district where Andrews now has large real estate investments. . . . The ordinance was calculated to drive out of business a brickyard facing Victoria Park." The Times opined that the purpose of the law was "to free that ornate neighborhood [Victoria Park] of the unsightly and unesthetic brickyards. Andrews admitted a 'small' interest in the tract but vehemently declared [that] his private interests could have no influence on his duty to the people who are oppressed by the brickyards that were there before real estate agents developed new tracts.
The city law was approved by the council, vetoed by Mayor George Alexander and passed over the mayor's veto. Because of the new law, the owner of one of the yards, J.C. Hadacheck, was convicted of a misdemeanor for the violation of a city ordinance, which prohibited the establishment or operation a brickyard or brick kiln, or any manufacture or burning of brick within described limits in the city.  Hadacheck was taken into custody by Los Angeles Chief of Police Charles E. Sebastian, whereupon he filed a petition for habeas corpus with the California Supreme Court.
California Supreme Court
thumb|upright|Los Angeles Times caricature of Josias J. Andrews with "Andrews Interest Tract" sign in background, 1910.
thumb|left|Police Chief Charles E. Sebastian .|180px 
In his petition to the court, Hadacheck (who had acquired his property prior to his district's annexation by the city of Los Angeles) set forth at length his grievances with the ordinance and the decision of the lower court, including inter alia (among other things) that his land contained valuable deposits of clay which were ideal for making bricks, that his land was quite valuable and that he acquired this particular tract for the express purpose of manufacturing bricks, that the ordinance would deprive him of his use of the property and force him to abandon his business, that his business was conducted in such a manner as to emit as little pollution as possible and could not be considered a nuisance under the California Civil Code, and that the district described by the ordinance was drawn in such a manner solely to disrupt his business.  Hadacheck further alleged an unconstitutional taking by the city, and that the ordinance violated both the California Constitution and the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
The California Supreme Court found in favor of the city, accepting the judgment of the legislators.  The court held that the business was one which could be lawfully regulated, and the fact that the petitioner began his business prior to the enactment of the ordinance was no defense.  The court also discussed the affidavits submitted by interested parties which contradicted Hadacheck's assertions that the business was conducted in a sanitary, non-polluting manner.
U.S. Supreme Court decision
Justice McKenna, writing for a unanimous court, upheld the California Supreme Court's decision, holding that the ordinance was a legitimate use of the police power.  He analogized this case to an earlier one, Reinman v. Little Rock, which dealt with a similar ordinance banning livery stables.  Reinman was distinguishable on the grounds that a livery stable could be moved and operated anywhere, while bricks can only be manufactured where suitable clay is found.  Hadacheck contended that the removal of clay from his land was not physically impossible, but was prohibitively expensive.  The Court held that even though relocating the brick factory would be costly, the ordinance did not amount to a complete denial of the use of Hadacheck's property, because the ordinance did not completely deny Hadacheck the use of the clay on his land.
The Court further held that the ordinance did not violate the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.  Hadacheck alleged that his business was prohibited while those of his competitors elsewhere were not.  The Court responded that just because his business was the first to be shut down, it does not follow that others would not be in the future, thus this issue was beyond the scope of the case.
Historical importance
Hadacheck v. Sebastian was one of the first cases to deal with the issue of regulatory takings under zoning laws, even though the ordinance in question was simple and primitive in comparison to modern American zoning schemes.  Because of this, the case is commonly discussed in first year constitutional law and/or property law classes in American law schools.
Notes and references
Access to some of the links may require the use of a library card.
External links
Excerpt from Environment, Property and Law by Ronald H. Rosenberg, courtesy of Google Book Search
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States land use case law
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:1915 in the environment
Category:1915 in United States case law
"""

From "Hague v. Committee for Industrial Organization" ==> """
Hague v. Committee for Industrial Organization, 307 U.S. 496 (1939), is a US labor law case decided by the United States Supreme Court.
Facts
In Jersey City, New Jersey, Mayor Frank Hague had in 1937 used a city ordinance to prevent labor meetings in public places and stop the distribution of literature pertaining to the Committee for Industrial Organization's cause. He referred to the CIO as "communist."
Judgment
District and circuit courts ruled in favor of the CIO, which brought the suit against the mayor for these actions and which was represented by Morris L. Ernst, Spaulding Frazer, Lee Pressman and Benjamin Kaplan. Hague appealed to the Supreme Court which ruled against him and held that Hague's ban on political meetings violated the First Amendment right to freedom of assembly, and so the ordinances were void.
See also
US labor law
History of labor law in the United States
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 307
Notes
External links
 First Amendment Library entry on Hague
Category:1939 in United States case law
Category:Freedom of assembly
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Congress of Industrial Organizations
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:History of Jersey City, New Jersey
"""

From "Haig v. Agee" ==> """
Haig v. Agee, 453 U.S. 280 (1981), was a United States Supreme Court case that upheld the right of the executive branch to revoke a citizen's passport for reasons of national security and the foreign policy interests of the U.S. under the Passport Act of 1926.
The case involved Congressional delegation of authority over control of passports and the right to international travel.  Philip Agee was an ex-Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) officer living overseas who in 1974 declared a "campaign to fight the U.S. CIA wherever it is operating" and revealed the identities of several CIA officers resulting in violence against them. The Secretary of State revoked Agee's passport in 1979. Agee sued, alleging the secretary had no such authority, had denied him procedural due process rights, his substantive due process "liberty" right to travel under the Fifth Amendment, and had violated his First Amendment right to criticize government policies.  
The district court found the Secretary lacked the power to revoke the passport and the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia US Supreme Court, Haig v. Agee, 453 U.S. 280 (1981), accessed 5 April 2023 affirmed that decision. The Supreme Court reversed the lower court, holding that  the broad discretion accorded the executive branch in matters of national security and foreign policy requires that the Passport Act of 1926 (currently codified at  et seq.) should be interpreted as granting the power to revoke a passport when necessary for national security.
Facts of the case
Philip Agee, an American citizen, was employed by the Central Intelligence Agency from 1957 to 1968, holding key positions in the division of the Agency responsible for covert intelligence gathering in foreign countries. In 1974, Agee announced in London that he was launching a "campaign to fight the United States CIA wherever it is operating" and intended "to expose CIA officers and agents and to take the measures necessary to drive them out of the countries where they are operating." Agee and his collaborators repeatedly and publicly identified individuals and organizations in foreign countries as undercover CIA agents, employees, or sources. They divulged classified information, violated Agee's express contract not to make any public statements about Agency matters without prior clearance by the Agency, and prejudiced the ability of the United States to obtain intelligence. They were followed by episodes of violence against the persons and organizations identified.
In December 1979, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance revoked Agee's passport and delivered an explanatory notice to Agee in West Germany, where he was living. It advised Agee that his  activities abroad were causing or were likely to cause serious damage to the national security or the foreign policy of the United States and that he had a right to an administrative hearing. It offered to hold such a hearing in West Germany on 5 days' notice.
Agee at once filed suit against the Secretary. He alleged that the regulation invoked by the Secretary, 22 CFR 51.70 (b)(4)(1980), was not authorized by Congress and was invalid; that the regulation was impermissibly overbroad; that revocation prior to a hearing violated his Fifth Amendment right to procedural due process; and that the revocation violated a Fifth Amendment liberty interest in a right to travel and a First Amendment right to criticize Government policies. He sought declaratory and injunctive relief, and he moved for summary judgment on the question of the authority to promulgate the regulation and on the constitutional claims. For purposes of that motion, Agee conceded that his activities were causing or were likely to cause serious damage to the national security or foreign policy of the United States. The District Court held that the regulation exceeded the statutory powers of the Secretary under the Passport Act of 1926, 22 U.S.C. 211a, granted summary judgment for Agee, and ordered the Secretary to restore his passport.Agee v. Vance, 483 F. Supp. 729 (DC 1980).
A divided panel of the Court of Appeals affirmed the district court.Agee v. Muskie, 203 U.S. App. D.C. 46, 629 F.2d 80 (1980). It held that the Secretary was required to show that Congress had authorized the regulation either by an express delegation or by implied approval of a "substantial and consistent" administrative practice, citing Zemel v. Rusk (1965). The court found no express statutory authority for the revocation. The Court of Appeals took note of the Secretary's reliance on "a series of statutes, regulations, proclamations, orders and advisory opinions dating back to 1856," but declined to consider those authorities, reasoning that "the criterion for establishing congressional assent by inaction is the actual imposition of sanctions and not the mere assertion of power." The Court of Appeals held that it was not sufficient that "Agee's conduct may be considered by some to border on treason," since "[w]e are bound by the law as we find it." The court also regarded it as material that most of the Secretary's authorities dealt with powers of the Executive Branch "during time of war or national emergency" or with respect to persons "engaged in criminal conduct."  
The Court granted certiorari in the case, then called Muskie v. Agee, and stayed the judgment of the Court of Appeals until its disposition of the case.
Majority opinion
The Court began by examining the language of the statute, concluding that although the Passport Act did not in so many words confer upon the Secretary a power to revoke or to deny passport applications, it was beyond dispute that the Secretary had the power to deny a passport for reasons not specified in the statutes. A consistent administrative construction of the 1926 Act must be followed by the courts "`unless there are compelling indications that it is wrong.'" Matters intimately related to foreign policy and national security were rarely proper subjects for judicial intervention particularly in light of the "broad rule-making authority granted in the 1926 Act," citing Zemel.
It then surveyed passport law and administrative policy and practice from 1835 to 1966, concluding that the history of passport controls since the earliest days of the Republic showed congressional recognition of Executive authority to withhold passports on the basis of substantial reasons of national security and foreign policy. It compared Congressional action and inaction concerning the broad rule-making authority granted in earlier Acts, concluding that there was "weighty" evidence of congressional approval of the Secretary's interpretation that it had been delegated the power to restrict passports on the basis of national security.  The Court rejected Agee's argument that the only way the Executive could establish implicit congressional approval is by proof of longstanding and consistent enforcement of the claimed power. It distinguished Kent noting that although there had been few situations involving substantial likelihood of serious damage to the national security or foreign policy of the United States as a result of a passport holder's activities abroad, that in the cases which had arisen, the Secretary had consistently exercised his power to withhold passports. And it rejected Agee's contention that the statements of Executive policy are entitled to diminished weight because many of them concern the powers of the Executive in wartime.
It held incorrect the notion that "illegal conduct" and problems of allegiance were, "so far as relevant here, ... the only [grounds] which it could fairly be argued were adopted by Congress in light of prior administrative practice," Kent at 127-128, was not correct because Kent also recognized that the legitimacy of the objective of safeguarding our national security was "obvious and unarguable." id at 509 and that the protection accorded beliefs standing alone is very different from the protection accorded conduct.  Thus, it held that the policy announced in the challenged regulations is "sufficiently substantial and consistent" to compel the conclusion that Congress has approved it.
Regarding Agee's Constitutional attacks, the Court held that they, too, were without merit.  The revocation of his passport did not impermissibly burdens his freedom to travel because the freedom to travel abroad with a "letter of introduction" in the form of a passport issued by the sovereign is subordinate to national security and foreign policy considerations; as such, it is subject to reasonable governmental regulation.  The action was not intended to penalize his exercise of free speech and deter his criticism of Government policies and practices because assuming, arguendo, that First Amendment protections reach beyond our national boundaries, revocation of Agee's passport rested in part on the content of his speech.  To the extent the revocation of his passport operates to inhibit Agee, "it is an inhibition of action," rather than of speech.  And that failure to accord him a prerevocation hearing did not violate his Fifth Amendment right to procedural due process because when there is a substantial likelihood of "serious damage" to national security or foreign policy as a result of a passport holder's activities in foreign countries, the Government may take action to ensure that the holder may not exploit the sponsorship of his travels by the United States.
The Court found that the right to hold a passport is subordinate to national security and foreign policy considerations, and is subject to reasonable governmental regulation. Denial of Agee's passport was not protected under the First Amendment because unlike Kent v. Dulles and Aptheker v. Secretary of State involving denials of passports solely on the basis of political beliefs entitled to First Amendment protection, Agee's actions amounted to more than speech and that the national security interests here, as in Zemel v. Rusk, were sufficiently important to justify revocation. Finally, the Court held that the Government was not required to hold a pre-revocation hearing, since where there was a substantial likelihood of "serious damage" to national security or foreign policy as the result of a passport holder's activities abroad, the Government may take action to ensure that the holder may not exploit the United States' sponsorship of his travels.  Further, a statement of reasons and an opportunity for a prompt post-revocation hearing were sufficient to satisfy the Constitution's due process guarantees.
Concurrence
Blackmun concurred, stating simply that he believed this case had cut back somewhat on the standards articulated in Zemel v. Rusk and Kent v. Dulles sub silencio and that it would have been better if the Court had forthrightly construed the law such that evidence of a longstanding Executive policy or construction in this area be probative of the issue of congressional authorization.
Dissent
Justice Brennan wrote a dissent that Justice Marshall joined. He found that the decision strayed from the precedent set by Zemel and Kent because neither Zemel nor Kent held that a longstanding Executive policy or construction was sufficient proof that Congress had implicitly authorized the Secretary's action.  Those cases held that an administrative practice must be demonstrated; Kent unequivocally stated that mere construction by the Executive - no matter how longstanding and consistent - was not sufficient.  Only when Congress had maintained its silence in the face of a consistent and substantial pattern of actual passport denials or revocations - where the parties will presumably object loudly, perhaps through legal action, to the Secretary's exercise of discretion - can this Court be sure that Congress is aware of the Secretary's actions and has implicitly approved that exercise of discretion. 
The decision also relied on the very Executive construction and policy deemed irrelevant in Kent. The Court's reliance on material expressly abjured in Kent was understandable only when considering the paucity of recorded administrative practice - the only evidence upon which Kent and Zemel permit reliance - with respect to passport denials or revocations based on foreign policy or national security considerations relating to an individual. Only three occasions were cited over the past 33 years when the Secretary revoked passports for such reasons.
Finally, just as the Constitution protected both popular and unpopular speech, it likewise protected both popular and unpopular travelers. The decision applied not only to Philip Agee, whose activities could be perceived as harming the national security, but also to other citizens who may merely disagree with Government foreign policy and express their views.  The Justices feared that the majority decision handed too much lawmaking function over the government when the Constitution allocated it to the Congress.  The point that Kent and Zemel made, and the majority opinion should make, is that the Executive's authority to revoke passports touched an area fraught with important constitutional rights, and that the Court should therefore "construe narrowly all delegated powers that curtail or dilute them". Kent v. Dulles at 129  The presumption should be that Congress must expressly delegate authority to the Secretary to deny or revoke passports for foreign policy or national security reasons before he may exercise such authority and to overcome the presumption against an implied delegation, the Government must show "an administrative practice sufficiently substantial and consistent". Zemel v. Rusk, at 12.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 453
 List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:1981 in United States case law
Category:Passports
Category:Central Intelligence Agency
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
"""

From "Halbert v. Michigan" ==> """
Halbert v. Michigan, 545 U.S. 605 (2005), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a Michigan law (Mich. Comp. Laws Ann. § 770.3a (West 2000)), which denied public counsel for defendants appealing a conviction on a plea, violated the equal protection and due process clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.. In a majority opinion written by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, the Court affirmed that "a State is required to appoint counsel for an indigent defendant's first-tier appeal as of right."Halbert, 545 U.S. at 611.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 545
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Legal history of Michigan
Category:2005 in United States case law
"""

From "Hale v. Henkel" ==> """
Hale v. Henkel, 201 U.S. 43 (1906), was a major United States Supreme Court case in which the Court established the power of a federal grand jury engaged in an investigation into corporate malfeasance to require the corporation in question to surrender its records.
Background
Edwin F. Hale, the petitioner, was the treasurer of MacAndrews and Forbes. Founded in 1850, MacAndrews and Forbes was one of six companies that were under investigation for price fixing of tobacco, in violation of the Sherman Act.
In 1906, US government prosecutors served a grand jury subpoena on Hale that demanded him to testify and turn over corporate documents. Hale appeared before the jury but refused to reply to questions or to produce documents. On his company's behalf, he invoked the Fifth Amendment privilege and was held in contempt. Hale then hired a lawyer and filed a lawsuit, which ultimately came before the Supreme Court.
Hale's argument was that a grand jury cannot require persons representing corporations to testify or demand them to produce documents unless the charges that are being investigated are first explained.
Decision
In a majority opinion written by Justice Henry B. Brown, the Court rejected Hale's argument by maintaining that a grand jury can examine witnesses and demand documentary evidence in connection with a probe into possible crimes, even if it did not identify the scope of its investigation.
The Court then rejected Hale's privilege claim by ruling that the self-incrimination privilege provided to citizens by the Fifth Amendment did not apply to corporations.
In short, the Court held that corporate employees cannot assert the privilege against self-incrimination on behalf of their employer. The Fifth Amendment guarantee "protects individual civil liberties, not economic business interests." The principle that "corporations and other collective entities are treated differently from individuals" under the Fifth Amendment is called the collective entity rule.
The defendant of record in the case was William Henkel, US Marshal.
Quotes
"There is a clear distinction between an individual and a corporation, and the latter, being a creature of the State, has not the constitutional right to refuse to submit its books and papers for an examination at the suit of the State."
"The individual may stand upon his constitutional rights as a citizen. He is entitled to carry on his private business in his own way. His power to contract is unlimited. He owes no duty to the State or to his neighbors to divulge his business, or to open his doors to an investigation, so far as it may tend to criminate [sic] him. He owes no such duty to the State, since he receives nothing therefrom beyond the protection of his life and property. His rights are such as existed by the law of the land long antecedent to the organization of the State, and can only be taken from him by due process of law, and in accordance with the Constitution. Among his rights are a refusal to incriminate himself and the immunity of himself and his property from arrest or seizure except under a warrant of the law. He owes nothing to the public so long as he does not trespass upon their rights."
Aftermath
The Court's subsequent ruling in Wilson v. United States (1911) built upon Hale v. Henkel by prohibiting corporate officers from invoking their own personal Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination to justify a failure to turn over corporate documents. Such a use of the Fifth Amendment privilege, according to the Court, would inhibit the state's visitatorial rights over corporations. Later Supreme Court decisions applied the principle established in Hale v. Henkel to unions (United States v. White (1944)), partnerships (Bellis v. United States (1974)), and sole proprietorships (United States v. Doe (1984)). The cases have reflected the Court's consistent view that the Fifth Amendment privilege should apply to only individual human beings, not artificial entities.
On the other hand, the ruling in Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission (2010) granted corporations an unfettered right of political free speech, and Burwell v. Hobby Lobby (2014) recognized corporations' religious liberties. One observer has described these two most recent rulings as "underscoring a deep rift on the Roberts court about the permissible (or desirable) extent of corporate personhood under the Bill of Rights."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 201
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Fuller Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Tort law
Category:Corporate case law
Category:1906 in United States case law
Category:Grand juries in the United States
"""

From "Hale v. Kentucky" ==> """
Hale v. Kentucky, 303 U.S. 613 (1938), was a  United States Supreme Court case relating to racial discrimination in the selection of juries for criminal trials.. The case overturned the conviction of an African American man accused of murder because the lower court of Kentucky had systematically excluded African Americans from serving on the jury in the case. NAACP counsel, including Charles H. Houston, Leon A. Ransom and Thurgood Marshall, represented Hale.
Background
Joe Hale, an African American, had been convicted in McCracken County, Kentucky. No African Americans were selected as jury members within the previous 50 years although nearly 7,000 were eligible for jury service.
Opinion of the Court
The court unanimously ruled that the plaintiff's civil rights had been violated.
Impact
Hale v. Kentucky was one in a series of cases where the Supreme Court overturned convictions of blacks for reason of discrimination in jury selections in the lower courts.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 303
Norris v. Alabama (1935)
Hollins v. Oklahoma (1935)
NAACP in Kentucky
References
Further reading
 See a picture of the NAACP Legal Team 1933 including Ransom, professor at the Howard Law School, at "A Century of Racial Segregation, 1849-1950" in the Library of Congress exhibition, "With an Even Hand": Brown v. Board at Fifty. Accessed December 29, 2010. www.loc.gov/exhibits/brown/brown-segregation.html.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States equal protection and criminal procedure case law
Category:1938 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Hall Street Associates, L.L.C. v. Mattel, Inc." ==> """
Hall Street Associates, L.L.C. v. Mattel, Inc., 552 U.S. 576 (2008), was a United States Supreme Court case that held that state and federal courts cannot, on a motion to vacate or to modify an arbitration award, expand the limited scope of judicial review specified in 9 U.S.C. §§ 10 and 11, including terms that were agreed upon by the parties.
Background
Toy manufacturer Mattel was sued by its landlord Hall Street Associates in a dispute over a property lease, the property being a former View-Master factory in Beaverton, Oregon where significant pollution was found. After the litigation went to federal court, both parties agreed to resolve the case by arbitration according to the procedures outlined in the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA). Atypically, the parties' arbitration agreement stipulated that the District Court could override the arbitrator's decision if "the arbitrator's conclusions of law are erroneous." That provision of the agreement granted the federal courts a much broader role in supervising the arbitration than is specifically granted in the Act, which explicitly mentions only a narrow set of circumstances under which courts can override an arbitration award, such as corruption, partiality, or misbehavior on the part of the arbitrator.
The arbitrator heard the parties' arguments and handed down a decision in favor of Mattel. Hall sought review from the District Court, which found that the arbitrator's decision contained legally erroneous conclusions. Accordingly, the arbitrator ruled for Hall Street, and the District Court affirmed.
On appeal, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit ruled that the original arbitration award, favoring Mattel, must stand. Even if the arbitrator had made legal errors, the courts had no place to review the soundness of the arbitrator's decision. The Ninth Circuit viewed the FAA's list of circumstances meriting judicial review as an exclusive list. As far as the original arbitration agreement expanded the scope of judicial review of the arbitration, the agreement could not be enforced.
Decision
In a 63 decision, the Supreme Court rejected the argument that parties to a contract could expand the limited scope of judicial review, and it even stated that the courts cannot expand it, even for extraordinary circumstances:
Aftermath
Because the Supreme Court rejected any expansion to the limited scope of judicial review stated in 9 U.S.C. §§ 10 and 11, other courts, such as the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit, have also rejected other judicially created exceptions, such as "manifest disregard for the law."  Previously, the Eighth Circuit had recognized "manifest disregard" as a grounds to vacate an arbitration award, defining manifest disregard as when "the arbitrators were fully aware of the existence of a clearly defined governing legal principle, but refused to apply it, in effect, ignoring it." However, after the Supreme Court passed its ruling in Hall Street, the Eighth Circuit held that even manifest disregard is not a sufficient grounds to vacate an arbitration award.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 552
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2008 in United States case law
Category:United States arbitration case law
Category:Mattel
Category:Beaverton, Oregon
Category:Stereoscopic photography
"""

From "Hall v. Decuir" ==> """
Hall v. Decuir, 95 U.S. 485 (1878), was a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States. In Hall, Josephine Decuir, a wealthy woman designated a Creole, sued for racial discrimination she experienced on a steamboat. She was traveling from New Orleans to Pointe Coupee Parish, where she owned a sugar plantation.
The Supreme Court held that the Louisiana statute authorizing a damages award to Decuir unconstitutionally interfered with interstate commerce. The majority opinion, by Morrison Waite, sought to avoid conflicting state laws with regard to interstate transit. Joseph W. Singer argues that Hall marked the beginning of a phase in Supreme Court jurisprudence that led to Plessy v. Ferguson.
 Background 
Josephine Decuir , who was designated a Creole, and her husband Antoine, were members of the Black elite in the antebellum South. The two had married in 1835. Their family were among the wealthiest Black people in the nation. The family lived in Pointe Coupee Parish in south central Louisiana, where they held a vast plantation. Before the American Civil War, the family had owned over 100 slaves. They were accustomed to traveling in first class on the Mississippi River from Hermitage up to Vicksburg or down to New Orleans. Decuir lived in France during the Civil War, and her husband died near its end. Decuir was much less wealthy after the Civil War, selling some of her land. She returned to Pointe Coupee with the intent of settling her husband's estate in 1866. She attempted to visit the ladies' cabin, but was instructed to return to her isolated cabin. According to the captain, Decuir "was in tears and crying" and objected to the treatment, noting that in France she was treated "like a white lady".
In July 1872, she left New Orleans for Point Coupee to consult the lawyers E. K. Washington and Seymour Snaer  regarding her husband's estate. Decuir had purchased a first class ticket for $5. When Decuir reached the Governor Allen, she was denied access to a first class cabinthey were "specifically set aside for white persons"and instead sent to the steerage, or second-class, cabins that were poorly ventilated and also known as the "colored department". 
She did not accept the request, and sat in a chair in a recess for the night.
 Case 
Decuir's lawyers, Washington and Snaer, filed a lawsuit against the steamboat's captain, John C. Benson, shortly after the trip. In Decuir v. Benson she argued her treatment constituted a constitutional violation and "indignity to her personality". Article XIII of the 1868 Constitution of Louisiana specifically prohibited race-based discrimination on transportation. The Eighth District Court of Orleans Parish ruled in her favor, awarding $1,000 in damages. Benson appealed, criticizing the amendment as violating the Commerce Clause in the United States Constitution and the Fourteenth Amendment, which guaranteed him a right to liberty and property. The Louisiana Supreme Court, led by John T. Ludeling, affirmed the decision of the lower court, noting that the state's 1869 civil rights act was "enacted solely to protect the newly enfranchised citizens of the United States, within the limits of Louisiana, from prejudice against them." William Gillespie Wyly dissented, considering the law a violation of the Commerce Clause.
John C. Benson died, but Eliza Jane Hall, who was responsible for the execution of his estate, appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States (SCOTUS). The case was argued on April 17, 1877. SCOTUS decided the case in October and announced it on January 14 the following year.
The SCOTUS reversed the decisions of the lower courts. The decision was unanimous. The majority opinion, by the Chief Justice of the United States, Morrison Waite, sought to avoid conflicting state laws with regard to interstate transit, and held that Louisiana civil rights law unconstitutionally interfered with the federal power over interstate commerce, as the Mississippi was an inter-state waterway and the General Allen, which was federally licensed, occasionally left the state. Indeed, while Decuir was only travelling to Pointe Coupee Parish, the steamship's route went to Vicksburg. SCOTUS concluded that "If the public good requires such legislation, it must come from Congress and not from the States." This ignored the Civil Rights Act of 1875, which guaranteed equal access on transportation. Nathan Clifford wrote a lengthy concurrence to the decisionmore than six times as long as Waite's decisionthat went into more depth in supporting it.
 Legacy 
The case was the first the Supreme Court heard on segregation in common carriers after the Civil War ended. Joseph W. Singer argues that Hall marked the beginning of a phase in Supreme Court jurisprudence that led to Plessy v. Ferguson. According to historian Mia Bay, the case "all but endorsed segregation". Jack M. Beermann analyzed the case along with United States v. Cruikshank and noted that the two "signaled the Court's determination to aid in the suppression of the movement for racial justice and reinforce preexisting social and racial hierarchies." According to Charles A. Lofgren, the case "federalized" a decision that the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania had reached in West Chester and Philadelphia Railroad Company v. Miles (1867) and "in a very real sense, constitutionalized it as well".
After World War II, the Supreme Court used the precedent of Hall to declare segregation laws within states unconstitutional as they affected interstate commerce.
 References 
 Bibliography 
 Further reading 
 External links 
Category:1878 in Louisiana
Category:1878 in United States case law
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
"""

From "Hall v. Florida" ==> """
Hall v. Florida, 572 U.S. 701 (2014), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a bright-line IQ threshold requirement for determining whether someone has an intellectual disability (formerly mental retardation) is unconstitutional in deciding whether they are eligible for the death penalty.
The case fleshed out standards first announced by the Court in Atkins v. Virginia, which left the determination of what constitutes intellectual disability to the states. In Atkins, the Court held that people are intellectually disabled and thus ineligible for the death penalty if these three conditions are met: 1.) “subaverage intellectual functioning,” meaning low I.Q. scores; 2.) a lack of fundamental social and practical skills; and 3.) the presence of both conditions before age 18.  The Atkins court stated I.Q. scores under “approximately 70” typically indicate disability, but the court let the states determine who is mentally disabled and thus cannot be executed.
 Background 
On February 21, 1978, Freddie Lee Hall and Mark Ruffin committed the rape and murder of Karol Hurst. Hurst was 21-years-old and seven months pregnant. Afterwards, the pair murdered Lonnie Coburn, a sheriff's deputy, when he tried to apprehend them in a parking lot. At his trial, Hall was sentenced to death.
In the 2002 case of Atkins v Virginia, the court ruled that the Eighth Amendment prohibited the execution of the intellectually disabled. After the Atkins ruling, Hall challenged his death sentence on the grounds that he had an intellectual disability. Since his arrest, Hall had received nine I.Q tests, with scores ranging from 60 to 80. There was also significant evidence in school reports and court records of Hall's intellectual disability, a trial judge noted that he had been "mentally retarded his entire life". Hall presented an I.Q score of 71, however, under Florida Law, a person with an I.Q above 70 was not considered mentally retarded. Hall's appeal to the Florida Supreme Court was dismissed, with the court holding that Florida's 70-point threshold was constitutional.
 Judgement 
In Hall, the Supreme Court held 5-4 that Florida's interpretation of the threshold requirement was unconstitutional. 
The Court narrowed the discretion under which U.S. states can designate an individual convicted of murder as too intellectually incapacitated to be executed. The Court prohibited states in borderline cases from relying only on intelligence test scores to determine whether a death row inmate is eligible to be executed. States must look beyond IQ scores when inmate tests are in the range of 70 to 75. IQ tests have a margin of error, and those inmates whose scores fall within the margin must be allowed to present other evidence of mental disability. The Court further held that the states may not use a "rigid rule" that denies leniency to defendants with severe mental disabilities simply because they score above 70 on an IQ test. Hall had scored a 71 instead of 70 on an I.Q. test. Justice Anthony M. Kennedy wrote for the majority that this "rigid rule, the court now holds, creates an unacceptable risk that persons with an intellectual disability will be executed, and thus is unconstitutional." If an individual claiming intellectual incapacity has an IQ score that falls somewhere between 70 and 75, then that individual’s lawyers must be allowed to offer additional clinical evidence of intellectual deficit, including, most importantly, the inability to learn basic skills and adapt to changing circumstances.
The court also adopted the term "intellectually disabled" to replace "mentally retarded," which had been used in prior opinions. Intellectual disability is a condition characterized by significant limitations in both intellectual functioning and in adaptive behavior, which covers many everyday social and practical skills, and originates before the age of 18, according to the American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, and the term is preferred by the medical profession.
 Dissenting judgement 
Justice Alito filed the dissenting opinion, he was joined by Chief Justice Roberts, Justice Scalia and Justice Thomas. In his dissent, Alito criticised the majority's reliance on the views of medical experts, saying that the Justices had overruled Atkins "based largely on the positions adopted by private professional organisations". He also argued that by overruling Atkins, the court had replaced the framework, established in previous Eighth Amendment cases, with a "uniform national rule that is conceptually unsound, and likely to result in confusion". 
 Subsequent developments for Freddie Hall 
In September 2016, the Florida Supreme Court vacated Hall's death sentence.
 See also 
 Jarvis hearings
 List of United States Supreme Court decisions on capital punishment
 References 
External links
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:United States disability case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Capital punishment in Florida
Category:2014 in United States case law
"""

From "Hall v. Geiger-Jones Co." ==> """
Hall v. Geiger-Jones Co., 242 U.S. 539 (1917), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld individual states' power to regulate the offer, sale, and purchase of securities.  Such regulatory laws are commonly known today as "blue-sky laws"; the phrase is often said to be based on this opinion, although speculative securities were described as "blue sky" in sources published prior to this opinion. The opinion itself said:
The decision rejected the notion of an arbitrary and capricious power accruing to state securities commissioners.  The opinion author, Justice Joseph McKenna, reasoned such a broad delegation to state official was justified because valuing securities is "a complex problem" and requires skill and expertise often not available to the individual investor. Justice McKenna wrote of checks on government abuse because, "an adverse judgment by the commissioner is reviewable by the courts."
 External links 
Category:United States securities case law
Category:1917 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "Hall v. Hall" ==> """
Hall v. Hall, 584 U.S. ___ (2018), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that within consolidated cases under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 42(a), the losing party has the immediate right to appeal when one of the consolidated cases is finally decided, even if other cases remain pending..
 Background 
Samuel Hall had been serving as his mother Ethylene Hall's caretaker and legal adviser in association with his legal firm. After a falling out with Samuel, Ethyln transferred her property into a trust that was managed by her daughter, Elsa Hall. The trust filed a lawsuit in 2011 against Samuel, claiming he has misappropriated over one million dollars of Ethylene's property. While this case was ongoing, Ethyln died (d. May 5, 2012), and Elsa became the plaintiff in this case related to the trust. Samuel filed a counter suit against Elsa as an individual, claiming she had undue influence on Ethyln's testimony during the trust case trial.
The District Court of the Virgin Islands opted to consolidate the cases under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 42(a). The jury found against Elsa in both cases in separate judgements in early 2015. Within the month following the decision, Elsa requested a new trial in the individual case within the District Court, and on the following day submitted her appeal for the trust case to the Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit. Samuel argued that because of Elsa's request for a new trial, the individual case had not been resolved, and thus she could not appeal the trust case. The Third Circuit opted to put Elsa's appeal on hold until the District Court considered the request for a new trial, which it ended up granting about year later in March 2016. At this point, the Third Circuit decided to go ahead and hear Elsa's appeal, which including hearing oral arguments in late 2016.  By February 2017, the Third Circuit dismissed Elsa's appeal on lack of jurisdiction due to the ongoing actions for the individual case in the District Court.
 Supreme Court 
Elsa Hall petitioned the Supreme Court for writ of certiorari in early 2017. The petition noted that there had been a forty-five year long, four-way split among the Circuit Courts of how appeals should be handled in consolidated cases, and only one Supreme Court case, Gelboim v. Bank of Am. Corp. , had considered the nature of appeals in consolidated cases but only for those that were in multidistricts. The Court agreed to hear the case in November 2017 with oral arguments held on January 16, 2018.
The court ruled in a unanimous decision on March 27, 2018, written by Chief Justice John Roberts that reversed and remanded the Third Circuit's decision to dismiss Elsa's appeal. Roberts wrote "When one of several cases consolidated under Rule 42(a) is finally decided, that decision confers upon the losing party the immediate right to appeal, regardless of whether any of the other consolidated cases remain pending".
 References 
External links
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Halliburton Co. v. Erica P. John Fund, Inc." ==> """
Halliburton Co. v. Erica P. John Fund, Inc., 573 U.S. 258 (2014), is a United States Supreme Court case regarding class action certification for a securities fraud claim.  Under the fraud-on-the-market theory, the Court had to inquire as to if markets are economically efficient.  The Court presumed they are.
 Background 
Halliburton CEO Dick Cheney arranged a merger with competitor Dresser Industries, which had been directed for decades by Prescott Bush.  Halliburton publicly promoted the merger as a "win-win", and plaintiffs, including the Archbishop of Milwaukee, bought equity in Halliburton off the stock market.Archdiocese of Milwaukee Supporting Fund, Inc. v. Halliburton Co., 597 F.3d 330 (5th Cir. 2010) [2010 BL 36008]  What Halliburton did not reveal was that Dresser's asbestos liabilities nearly exceeded its purchase price.  Cheney then resigned, sold off $40 million of his Halliburton stock, and joined the Bush campaign.  When Halliburton publicly revealed its asbestos liabilities its stock dropped 72%  The Archbishop sued, bringing a class action in the Dallas federal district court, alleging securities fraud.
SEC Rule 10b-5 securities fraud requires a private plaintiff to prove that her economic loss was caused by reliance on the defendant's material misrepresentation.The Supreme Court, 2013 Term — Leading Cases, 128 Harv. L. Rev. 291 (2014).  Certification for a class action requires class members to have common questions of law or fact that predominate the controversy.  Common reliance on public information is presumed if plaintiffs bought off a well developed market under the fraud on the market theory developed in Basic Inc. v. Levinson.
Halliburton argued that before the class could be certified the plaintiffs also needed to prove their loss was caused by Halliburton's falsehoods.  The District Court agreed and denied class certification, meaning that the plaintiffs would each individually have to bring their claims.  The denial was affirmed by the Fifth Circuit.Archdiocese of Milwaukee Supporting Fund, Inc. v. Halliburton Co., 597 F.3d 330 (5th Cir. 2010) [2010 BL 36008]
In his first argument before the Court since Bush v. Gore, David Boies represented plaintiffs.  In Erica P. John Fund, Inc. v. Halliburton Co. the Supreme Court vacated and remanded.  Finding the fraud on the market presumption only addresses members’ common reliance, the Court held that plaintiffs did not need to prove loss causation when seeking class certification.Erica P. John Fund, Inc. v. Halliburton Co., 131 S. Ct. 2179, 563 U.S., 180 L. Ed. 2d 24 (2011).(Halliburton I)
On remand Halliburton argued that because its falsehoods had no effect on its stock price plaintiffs could not have commonly relied on the falsehoods.  The district court found that argument could only be made later during trial, granted class certification, and the Fifth Circuit affirmed.718 F.3d 423 (2013)  Halliburton petitioned the Supreme Court for another writ of certiorari, this time arguing that the fraud on the market precedent should be overruled, and the petition was granted.
 Opinion of the Court 
Chief Justice Roberts, joined by five other justices, finds no special reason to overrule Supreme Court precedent.  Addressing Halliburton's contention that the Basic presumption is a “judicial construct” that differs from fraud in securities filings, Roberts notes that because this point was made by the dissenters in Basic, it has already been rejected.  Furthermore, Roberts notes that stare decisis has special force because Congress is free to change the Basic presumption, and subsequently has chosen not to do so despite two major securities fraud reforms.
Roberts then turns to market capitalism’s fundamental economic theory.  The efficient market hypothesis holds that the ideal market price fully reflects all available information.  The Court in Basic Inc. v. Levinson (1988) had relied on the hypothesis to presume that any false information about a stock would be reflected in the stock’s market price and, therefore, be relied upon by investors that bought the stock off the market.  A contentious core tenet of the Chicago school of economics the hypothesis has proven difficult to disprove and, in 2013 the Nobel Prize in Economics was jointly awarded to Eugene Fama, the hypothesis’s creator, and Bob Shiller, the hypothesis’s primary critic.
Halliburton argued that its misrepresentations did not impact its stock price because the efficient market hypothesis is empirically false and capital markets are not fundamentally efficient.  Roberts rejects this contention, finding that information does, in fact, effect stock price.Halliburton II, 134 S. Ct. 2398 at 2410 citing Shiller, We’ll Share the Honors, and Agree to Disagree, N.Y. Times, Oct. 27, 2013, p. BU6 (“Of course, prices reflect available information”).  While Halliburton may not have traded in an ideal frictionless market, Roberts finds that “in making the presumption rebuttable, Basic recognized that market efficiency is a matter of degree and accordingly made it a matter of proof.”
Halliburton also argued that presuming reliance on market price is wrong because investors are actually indifferent to price. Value investing was offered as an example of traders who invest believing that the true value of a company is different from its market price.  Roberts rejects this, finding, no, value investors are not indifferent to price and, in fact, their investment strategy presupposes the market price will eventually move towards a more accurate valuation.
Other than overruling Basic, Halliburton had alternatively asked that instead of asking plaintiffs to prove the stock traded in a well developed market, plaintiffs should be required to directly prove price impacts from the falsehoods.  Roberts notes that the Basic presumption is actually a presumption of price impact and a presumption of reliance, and that the same reasons justify both presumptions.
Instead of burdening plaintiffs, Roberts decides that defendants should be able to rebut the reliance presumption with evidence of a lack of price impact before class certification.  Noting that the same evidence may already be proffered to show market efficiency and the publicity of misrepresentations, Roberts sees nothing gained and much lost by forbidding direct price impact evidence.  The case was then vacated and remanded to give Halliburton the opportunity to prove the absence of price impact.
 Concurrence and Concurrence in Judgment 
Concurring Justice Ginsburg, joined by Justice Breyer and Justice Sotomayor, note that moving the price impact inquiry to the class certification stage may broaden the scope of discovery.
Concurred in judgment only, Justice Thomas was joined by Justice Scalia and Justice Alito.  Deriding “Basic’s muddled logic and armchair economics,” Thomas believes he may overrule such precedent when it is “badly reasoned”.
The conservative justices then reject the efficient market hypothesis.  They find that ‘“overwhelming empirical evidence” now suggests that even when markets do incorporate information, they often fail to do so accurately”.134 S. Ct. at 2421 quoting Lev and de Villiers, Stock Price Crashes and 10b-5 Damages: A Legal, Economic and Policy Analysis, 47 Stan. L.Rev. 7, 20-21 (1994).  Deriding “the Court’s rather superficial analysis”, Thomas concludes that investment decisions are “made with indifference to price and thus without regard for price “integrity””.
Because false statements do not effect market prices and investors are indifferent to the price they pay anyway, Thomas sees the Basic presumption as doing no good and much harm.  Noting that on merits only six defendants have successfully rebutted individual plaintiffs’ reliance on price integrity, Thomas fears that the Basic presumption in practice is “largely irrebuttable”.134 S. Ct. at 2424 citing Grundfest, Damages and Reliance under Section 10(b) of the Exchange Act, 69 Bus. Lawyer 307, 360 (2014) What's worse for Thomas, the huge damages resulting from securities fraud creates “substantial in terrorem settlement pressures” for large publicly traded companies to pay deceived shareholders.134 S. Ct. at 2424 fn.7 citing Nagareda, Class Certification in the Age of Aggregate Proof, 84 N.Y.U.L. Rev. 97. 99 (2009).  Concluding that reliance in security fraud is “inherently individualized”, Thomas would overrule Basic and require every deceived shareholder to sue separately.
Subsequent developments
White-collar defense lawyers decried the ruling, while it was viewed as good for witness economists.Reuters  Academics blamed the ruling on a status quo bias and complained that shareholders' rights were being entrenched.Eric C. Chaffee, An Oak is an Oak is an Oak is an Oak: The Disappointing Entrenchment in Halliburton Co. v. Erica P. John Fund of the Implied Private Right of Action Under Section 10 (b) and Rule 10b-5. 9 NYU JL & Liberty 92 (2015).
U.S. Appeals Courts would not find the fraud-on-the-market presumption rebutted again until April 12, 2016.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 573
 References 
External links
 http://www.scotusblog.com/case-files/cases/halliburton-co-v-erica-p-john-fund-inc/
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:United States class action case law
Category:United States securities case law
Category:Economic efficiency
Category:Dick Cheney
Category:Halliburton
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Halo Electronics, Inc. v. Pulse Electronics, Inc." ==> """
Halo Electronics, Inc. v. Pulse Electronics, Inc., 579 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the two-part Seagate test, used to determine when a district court may increase damages for patent infringement, is not consistent with Section 284 of the Patent Act..SCOTUSblog coverage
Background
Halo and Pulse were manufacturers of electronic components that could be mounted on circuit boards used in, among other things, network routers. In 2002, Halo approached Pulse regarding licensing its patents. In response, Pulse's president asked an engineer to review Halo's patents to determine whether Pulse had infringed them.  After studying the patents, Pulse's engineer believed that Halo's patents were invalid and thus there was no need to license them. In 2007, Halo filed suit against Pulse in the United States District Court for the District of Nevada for patent infringement. At trial, a jury found that Pulse had infringed Halo's patents, that Pulse's infringement was willful, and that Pulse should pay Halo $1.5 million in reasonable royalty damages. The district court allowed the verdict to stand as to infringement and damages but subsequently overturned the jury's finding of willfulness, believing that it was contrary to the Federal Circuit's Seagate test, which allowed willful infringement only in cases where a defendant had been "objectively reckless" in infringing a plaintiff's patents. Here, the district court concluded that Pulse's belief that the patents were invalid precluded any finding of willful infringement.
Halo appealed the district court's reversal of the willfulness verdict to the Federal Circuit. The Federal Circuit subsequently affirmed the district court's decision to overturn the willfulness verdict, holding that Pulse had presented evidence at trial that its belief in the invalidity of the patents was reasonable and not objectively reckless.
Halo appealed the Federal Circuit's decision to the United States Supreme Court. On October 19, 2015, the Court agreed to hear Halo's appeal. Oral argument took place on February 23, 2016, and the Court issued its opinion on June 13, 2016.
 Opinion of the Court 
thumb|Chief Justice John Roberts issued the opinion for a unanimous court.
Writing for a unanimous court, Chief Justice John Roberts issued an opinion reversing the Federal Circuit and overruling the Seagate test. After surveying the history of the willful infringement statute, Chief Justice Roberts observed that the text of Section 284, which states that, if a defendant is found to infringe, "the court may increase the damages up to three times the amount found or assessed." The Court held that this broad standard was incompatible with the narrow, specific requirement of the Seagate test that the infringer have acted in an "objectively reckless" manner. The Court criticized the Seagate test as incentivizing infringers to concoct defenses with the goal of appearing reasonable, even if those defenses were weak or created solely for the purposes of avoid a willfulness verdict. The Court also criticized the Seagate test as requiring "clear and convincing evidence" of willfulness given that this heightened standard of proof did not appear in the text of Section 284. The Court also directed the Federal Circuit to adopt a more deferential standard of review towards district court findings of willfulness.
thumb|Justice Stephen Breyer issued a concurring opinion.
Justice Stephen Breyer issued a concurring opinion, which was joined by Justices Anthony Kennedy and Samuel Alito.  Justice Breyer wrote separately to emphasize three points.  First, Justice Breyer observed that evidence showing only knowledge of a patent would likely not meet the standard for willful infringement.  Rather, in Justice Breyer's view, willful infringement would require both knowledge of the patent and some additional evidence of egregious conduct by the defendant.  Second, Justice Breyer noted that Section 298 of the Patent Act prevents a fact-finder (such as a jury or judge) from considering evidence that a defendant failed to obtain the advice of counsel prior to infringing the patent. Third, Justice Breyer noted that any damages awarded for willful infringement should not be used to compensate a plaintiff for the cost of bringing suit as those costs are already subject to being awarded under Section 285 of the Patent Act.  Justice Breyer explained that he was raising these points to emphasize that a finding of willful infringement should only occur in cases of "egregious misconduct" and that courts should be wary of plaintiffs seeking to use the threat of willful infringement to coerce a settlement or otherwise deter lawful conduct by defendants.
Subsequent proceedings
Following the Supreme Court's ruling, the case was remanded to the Federal Circuit for further proceedings. On August 5, 2016, the Federal Circuit subsequently vacated the district court's prior order overturning the willfulness verdict and remanded the case to the district court for reconsideration of that decision. On September 6, 2017, the district court again denied Halo's request for enhanced damages, determining that there was insufficient evidence to prove that Pulse had acted in an egregious manner or like a "pirate."
Reactions to the Supreme Court's decision
Reaction to the Supreme Court's decision was mixed with some commentators praising the Court's decision to eliminate the Federal Circuit's restrictive Seagate test, while others expressed concern at the lack of clarity about when willfulness findings would be warranted going forward. Writing for IPWatchdog on the decision's fifth anniversary, Michael Cicero noted that subsequent decisions applying the Supreme Court's opinion had "lacked consistency" and that the Court's decision had only generated new questions surrounding when willfulness claims were warranted. Finally, at SCOTUSBlog, Ronald Mann interpreted the Court's decision as emblematic of the Supreme Court's repeated frustration with the Federal Circuit and its overeagerness to construct tests that were not reflected in controlling statutory language.
 References 
External links
 SCOTUSblog coverage
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:United States patent case law
"""

From "Halter v. Nebraska" ==> """
Halter v. Nebraska, 205 U.S. 34 (1907), was a United States Supreme Court case involving a Nebraska statute that prevented and punished desecration of the flag of the United States and prohibited the sale of articles upon which there is a representation of the flag for advertising purposes. The court held that the statute was not unconstitutional either as depriving the owner of such articles of his property without due process of law, or as denying him the equal protection of the laws because of the exception from the operation of the statute of newspapers, periodicals, or books upon which the flag may be represented if disconnected from any advertisement..
A long established, adhered to principle of constitutional construction prevents a judicial tribunal from holding a legislative enactment, federal or state, unconstitutional and void unless it is manifestly so.
Except as restrained by its own fundamental law or by the supreme law of the land, a state possesses all legislative power consistent with a republican form of government, and it may by legislation provide not only for the health, morals and safety of its people, but for the common good as involved in their wellbeing, peace, happiness and prosperity.
There are matters which, by congressional legislation, may be brought within the exclusive control of the national government but over which, in the absence of such legislation, the state may exert some control in the interest of its own people, and although the national flag of the United States is the emblem of national sovereignty and a congressional enactment in regard to its use might supersede state legislation in regard thereto, until Congress does act, a state has power to prohibit the use of the national flag for advertising purposes within its jurisdiction.
The privileges of citizenship and the rights inhering in personal liberty are subject in their enjoyment to such reasonable restraints as may be required for the public good, and no one has a right of property to use the nation's emblem for individual purposes.
A state may consistently make a classification among its people based on some reasonable ground which bears a just and proper relation to the classification and is not arbitrary.
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1907 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Nebraska
Category:Flag controversies in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Ham v. South Carolina" ==> """
Ham v. South Carolina, 409 U.S. 524 (1973), was a United States Supreme Court decision concerning examinations of prospective jurors during voir dire. The Court held that the trial court's failure to "have the jurors interrogated on the issue of racial bias" violated the petitioner's due process right under the Fourteenth Amendment.Ham v. South Carolina, .  This right does not extend to any question of bias, but it does not preclude questions of relevant biases.
Background of the case
Gene Ham was a black man who was arrested on May 15, 1970, in Florence, South Carolina, due to four outstanding warrants that charged him with possession of drugs. After his arrest, police took Ham to the Florence city jail and searched him.  This search produced marijuana, but Ham claimed that police had framed him because of his involvement with the civil rights movement.  Nonetheless, Ham was subsequently charged with a fifth arrest warrant.  Before Ham's trial, during voir dire, Ham sought to ask the following four sets of questions of the potential jurors:
 Would you fairly try this case on the basis of the evidence and disregarding the defendant’s race?
 You have no prejudice against negroes? Against black people? You would not be influenced by the use of the term ’black’?
 Would you disregard the fact that this defendant wears a beard in deciding this case?
 Did you watch the television show about the local drug problem a few days ago when a local policeman appeared for a long time? Have you heard about that show? Have you read or heard about recent newspaper articles to the effect that the local drug problem is bad? Would you try this case solely on the basis of the evidence presented in this courtroom? Would you be influenced by the circumstances that the prosecution’s witness, a police officer, has publicly spoken on TV about drugs? 
The trial judge refused to ask these questions, ruling that they were not relevant. Instead, the judge asked the jurors only the following three basic questions specifically required by South Carolina State Law, S.C. Code § 38-202 (1962):
 Have you formed or expressed any opinion as to the guilt or innocence of the defendant, Gene Ham?
 Are you conscious of any bias or prejudice for or against him?
 Can you give the State and the defendant a fair and impartial trial?
At the conclusion of his trial, Ham was found guilty of possession of marijuana, which was a violation of South Carolina State Law, S. C. Code § 32-1506 (1962).  Ham was sentenced to eighteen months in prison. 
Ham appealed his conviction to the Supreme Court of South Carolina in State v. Ham, 256 S.C. 1 (1971). One of the twelve issues that Ham raised on appeal was that the trial judge erred by refusing to ask Ham’s proposed voir dire questions. The South Carolina Supreme Court determined that the three basic questions asked were in compliance with South Carolina state law, S.C. § 38-202 (1962) at the time. The court stated that Ham failed to carry his burden of showing that other questions should have been asked to assure a fair and impartial jury. The court also found that there was no abuse of discretion by the trial judge.  Ham then petitioned the United States Supreme Court to review of the decision of the South Carolina Supreme Court, and the United States Supreme Court, 404 U.S. 1057, 92 S. Ct. 744, 30 L. Ed. 2d 745 (1972), granted certiorari.
 Majority opinion 
Writing for the majority, Justice William Rehnquist first addressed the South Carolina Supreme Court's dissent that concluded that Ham should have been allowed to question the jury based on precedent set forth in Aldridge v. United States, 283 U.S. 308 (1931). The Court agreed that Aldridge stood for the proposition that trial judges must allow interrogation of veniremen with respect to racial prejudice because of “essential demands of fairness."  The majority, however, found that Aldridge lacked any constitutional grounding.  As such, the Court conducted an analysis under the Fourteenth Amendment. According to the Court, the principal purpose of the Fourteenth Amendment was to prohibit the States from invidiously discriminating on the basis of race. This purpose, combined with the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause, properly ensures the “essential demands of fairness.”
Turning to the particulars of Ham's case, the Court noted that voir dire, although subject to the Fourteenth Amendment, is governed by the discretion of the trial court.  As such, the trial judge was not required to put the question of racial bias in any particular form or to ask potential jurors any number of questions.  For example, the Court addressed the jury instruction concerning beards and determined that such a question was well within the trial court's discretion to allow or disallow.  However, given the context of the case, the Court found that the questions regarding racial prejudice were appropriate and necessary.
 Concurrence and dissent 
Justice William Douglas concurred that the trial judge was constitutionally required to ask about the racial prejudice among the jurors. However, Justice Douglas believed that the trial judge abused his discretion by not allowing the petitioner to ask potential jurors about their prejudice to hair growth.  Justice Douglas stated that denying the petitioner the ability to make such an inquiry precluded a trial by a neutral and impartial jury and thereby constituted reversible error.  He cited two analogous cases where such reversal was warranted; in Morford v. United States, 339 U.S. 258 (1950), and Dennis v. United States, 339 U.S. 162 (1950), the petitioners were held to have the right question juries about their potential ties to the Communist Party and the trial court's failure to permit such questions constituted reversible error.
Justice Douglas also referenced Aldridge and concluded that the goal of voir dire was to disclose “prejudices of a serious character”. He then associated hair growth with prejudice of a serious character.  He points out that “hair growth is symbolic to many of rebellion against traditional society and disapproval of the way the current power structure handles social problems,” and he further acknowledged that for some “people, nonconventional hair growth symbolizes an undesirable lifestyle characterized by unreliability, dishonesty, lack of moral values, communal (communist) tendencies, and the assumption of drug use.”  Douglas concluded that denying a petitioner the right to examine this aspect of prejudice was to also deny him an effective means of voir dire. 
Justice Thurgood Marshall concurred that the trial court was constitutionally required to ask about a potential juror's racial prejudice. He further agreed, based on the record, that questions regarding pre-trial publicity were not required. However, he dissented against barring other avenues of inquiry against possible prejudice that are reasonable and relevant.  He reasoned that a right to an impartial jury has been fundamental to the American system of justice all the way back to the founding of the United States.See . This right to impartiality and fairness, he reasoned, was never meant to be limited to certain classes of prejudice, and a juror should avoid prejudging a party based on any factor that is detrimental to that party's position.  According to Justice Marshall, this right to an impartial jury carries with it a right to take reasonable steps to ensure that the jury is indeed unprejudiced. The most important of these is the jury challenge. Here Justice Marshall looked to Pointer v. United States, 151 U.S. 396 (1894), where a unanimous Court thought that the right to challenge was "one of the most important of the rights secured to the accused" and that "any system for the empanelling of a jury that [prevents] or embarrasses the full, unrestricted exercise by the accused of that right, must be condemned."
Justice Marshall took care to caution that a party should not be allowed to ask any and every possible question. Nor should a party be given an unlimited opportunity to conduct preliminary voir dire. He recognized the countervailing interests of the state with regard to speedy trials and the avoidance of jury intimidation.  Nonetheless, in Justice Marshall’s opinion, the additional fifteen minutes needed to ask the petitioner's questions concerning racial bias would not have greatly burdened the trial court, and thus the trial court abused its discretion.
Aftermath
Since the Ham decision, two cases have further clarified the adequacy of federal voir dire when there is a heightened risk of racial bias: Ristaino v. Ross, 424 U.S. 589 (1976), and Rosales-Lopez v. United States, 451 U.S. 182 (1981).  Ristaino revealed that Ham'''s constitutional rule is narrow in scope.  It held that the "mere fact that the victim of the crimes alleged was a white man and the defendants were Negroes" did not constitutionally compel an examination of racial bias. Rosales-Lopez has since clarified the federal standard. The plurality in Rosales-Lopez'' held that in federal court, refusal to pose questions submitted by the defendant would be "reversible error only where the circumstances of the case indicate that there is a reasonable possibility that racial or ethnic prejudice might have influenced the jury."
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1973 in United States case law
Category:United States due process case law
Category:United States jury case law
Category:Florence, South Carolina
"""

From "Hamdan v. Rumsfeld" ==> """
Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 548 U.S. 557 (2006), is a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that military commissions set up by the Bush administration to try detainees at Guantanamo Bay violated both the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) and the Geneva Conventions ratified by the U.S.Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, Supreme Court Syllabus , pg. 4., point 4.
Hamdan raises several legal issues: Whether the United States Congress may pass legislation preventing the Supreme Court from hearing the case of an accused combatant before his military commission takes place; whether the special military commissions established by the executive branch violated federal law (including the UCMJ and treaty obligations); and whether courts can enforce the articles of the Geneva Conventions.Hamdan v. Rumsfeld , Duke Law's Supreme Court Online, 2005.
After hearing oral arguments on March 28, 2006, on June 29, 2006, the Court issued a 5–3 decision holding that it had jurisdiction; that the administration lacked either the constitutional power or congressional authorization to establish these particular military commissions; that, absent such authority, the military commissions had to comply with the "ordinary laws" of the U.S. and of war, which include the UCMJ and the Geneva Conventions incorporated therein; and that Hamdan's trial, having violated the rights and procedures under both bodies of law, was illegal."In Loss for Bush, Supreme Court Blocks War-Crimes Trials at Guantanamo", Associated Press, as reported by The New York Times, June 29, 2006.
Background
The plaintiff was Salim Ahmed Hamdan, a citizen of Yemen who worked as a bodyguard and chauffeur for Osama bin Laden. Hamdan had formerly worked in Afghanistan on an agricultural project that Bin Laden had developed. Hamdan was captured by militia forces during the invasion of Afghanistan in the fall of 2001 and turned over to the United States. In 2002, he was sent by the U.S. to its new Guantanamo Bay detention camp at its naval base in Cuba.
In July 2004, Hamdan was charged with conspiracy to commit terrorism,Charge Sheets for Salim Ahmed Hamdan, United States Department of Defense and the Bush administration made arrangements to try him before a military commission, established by the Department of Defense under Military Commission Order No. 1 of March 21, 2002. He was assigned a defense counsel, LCDR Charles D. Swift from the Navy JAG, who with a legal team filed a petition for Hamdan in US District Court for a writ of habeas corpus, challenging the constitutionality of the military commission, and saying that it lacked the protections required under the Geneva Conventions and United States Uniform Code of Military Justice.
Following the U.S. Supreme Court ruling in Hamdi v. Rumsfeld (2004), which established that detainees had the right of habeas corpus to challenge their detention, Hamdan was granted a review before the Combatant Status Review Tribunal. It determined that he was eligible for detention by the United States as an enemy combatant or person of interest.
The defendants in this case included many United States government officials allegedly responsible for Hamdan's detention; the short name of the case includes only the first-named defendant, then-Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld.
District and Appeals Court rulings
After reviewing Hamdan's habeas petition, Judge James Robertson of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia ruled in the detainee's favor. He found that the United States could not hold a military commission unless it was first shown that the detainee was not a prisoner of war.Bin Laden's driver outmanoeuvres Guantanamo trials, Sydney Morning Herald, November 9, 2004.Court bars efforts to try terrorist before military commissions, Washington Legal Foundation, November 9, 2004.High Court Sidesteps Guantanamo Bay Case, Los Angeles Times, January 19, 2005.
On July 15, 2005, a United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit three-judge panel: A. Raymond Randolph, John Roberts and Stephen F. Williams, unanimously reversed the decision of the District Court.Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, July 18, 2005. Judge Randolph, who wrote the decision, cited the following reasons for the legality of the military commission:
 Military commissions are legitimate forums to try enemy combatants because they have been approved by Congress.
 The Geneva Convention is a treaty between nations and as such it does not confer individual rights and remedies.
 Even if the Geneva Convention could be enforced in U.S. courts, it would not be of assistance to Hamdan at the time because the war against al-Qaeda was not between two countries, and the Convention guarantees only a certain standard of judicial procedure—a "competent tribunal"—without speaking to the jurisdiction in which the prisoner must be tried.
 Under the terms of the Geneva Convention, al Qaeda and its members are not covered.
 Congress authorized such activity by statute.
 The judicial branch of the United States government cannot enforce the Convention, thus invalidating Hamdan's argument that he cannot be tried until after his prisoner-of-war status is determined.
Supreme Court decision
On November 7, 2005, the Supreme Court granted certiorari to hear the case."Supreme Court to hear challenge to Gitmo tribunals" , Jurist, University of Pittsburgh School of Law, November 7, 2005. The petition was filed on behalf of Hamdan by Neal Katyal of Georgetown University Law Center and Lt. Commander Charles Swift of the U.S. Navy, an alumnus of Seattle University School of Law. The Seattle law firm Perkins Coie provided the additional legal counsel for Hamdan.
The case was argued before the court on March 28, 2006. Katyal argued on behalf of Hamdan, and Paul Clement, the Solicitor General of the United States, argued on behalf of the government.Hamdan, Salim v. Rumsfeld, Donald (Secy. of Defense)  Medill, Northwestern University, November 11, 2005. Chief Justice Roberts recused himself because he had previously ruled on this case as part of the three judge panel on the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. Critics called for Justice Antonin Scalia to recuse himself, since he had made allegedly improper comments about the decision of the case prior to hearing oral arguments ("I'm not about to give this man who was captured in a war a full jury trial. I mean it's crazy")USA Today (AP) March 26, 2006. but he chose not to do so.
The Supreme Court announced its decision on June 29, 2006. The Court reversed the ruling of the Court of Appeals, holding that President George W. Bush did not have authority to set up the war crimes tribunals and finding the special military commissions illegal under both military justice law and the Geneva Conventions.
Stevens' opinion for the Court
150px|thumb|Justice Stevens, the author of the Court's opinion.
Associate Justice John Paul Stevens wrote the opinion for the Court, which commanded a majority only in part.
The Stevens opinion began with the issue of jurisdiction, denying the U.S. government's motion to dismiss under Section 1005 of the Detainee Treatment Act of 2005 (DTA), which gave the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals "exclusive" jurisdiction to review decisions of cases being tried before military commissions. Congress did not include language in the DTA that might have precluded Supreme Court jurisdiction, making the government's argument to the Court unpersuasive. The government's argument that Schlesinger v. Councilman 420 U.S. 738 (1975) precludes Supreme Court review was similarly rejected. Councilman applied to a member of the U.S. military who was being tried before a military "court-martial". In contrast, Hamdan is not a member of the U.S. military, and would be tried before a military "commission", not a court-martial. To the court, the more persuasive precedent was Ex parte Quirin, in which the court recognized its duty to enforce relevant Constitutional protections by convening a special Term and expediting review of a trial by military convention. The opinion explicitly stated that, because DTA did not bar it from considering the petition, it was unnecessary to decide whether laws unconditionally barring habeas corpus petitions would unconstitutionally violate the Suspension Clause.
The opinion then addressed the substantive issues of the case. It explicitly did not decide whether the President possessed the Constitutional power to convene military commissions like the one created to try Hamdan. Even if he possessed such power, those tribunals would either have to be sanctioned by the "laws of war", as codified by Congress in Article 21 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), or authorized by statute. As to the statutory authorization, there is nothing in the Authorization for Use of Military Force (AUMF) "even hinting" at expanding the President's war powers beyond those enumerated in Art. 21. Instead, the AUMF, the UCMJ, and the DTA "at most acknowledge" the President's authority to convene military commissions only where justified by the exigencies of war, but still operating within the laws of war.
As to the laws of war, to the majority these necessarily include the UCMJ and the Geneva Conventions, each of which require more protections than the military commission provides. The UCMJ, Art. 36 (b), requires that rules applied in courts-martial and military commissions be "uniform insofar as practicable".  Stevens found several substantial deviations, including:
 The defendant and the defendant's attorney may be forbidden to view certain evidence used against the defendant; the defendant's attorney may be forbidden to discuss certain evidence with the defendant;
 Evidence judged to have any probative value may be admitted, including hearsay, unsworn live testimony, and statements gathered through torture; and
 Appeals are not heard by courts, but only within the Executive Branch (with an exception not here relevant).
These deviations made the commissions violate the UCMJ.
The majority also found that the procedures in question violate the "at least" applicable Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions. It found that the D.C. Court of Appeals erred in concluding that the Conventions did not apply:
 It erroneously relied on Johnson v. Eisentrager, which does not legally control in Hamdan's case because there was then no deviation between the procedures used in the tribunal and those used in courts-martial;
 It erroneously ruled that the Geneva Conventions do not apply because Art. 3 affords minimal protection to combatants "in the territory of" a signatory; and
 Those minimal protections include being tried by a "regularly constituted court", which the military commission is not.
Because the military commission does not meet the requirements of the Uniform Code of Military Justice or of the Geneva Convention, it violates the laws of war and therefore cannot be used to try Hamdan.
The Court did not hear the question that had decided the district court opinion, namely that Hamdan was entitled to a GCIII Art. 5 hearing instead of a Combatant Status Review Tribunal.
Plurality sections
Because Justice Anthony Kennedy did not join Stevens' opinion as to several parts, largely on the grounds of judicial parsimony (that is, having decided that the military commissions had no foundation, the core question of the case was decided and the Court did not need to go further), those sections were without a majority in support.
In one of these sections, Stevens addressed the issue of whether military commissions can try conspiracy charges. He argued that military commissions are not courts of general jurisdiction, which are able to try any crime; that the court has traditionally held that offenses against the law of war are triable by military commission only when they are clearly defined as war crimes by statute or strong common law precedent (cf. Quirin). Finally, he found that there was no support in statute or court precedent for law-of-war military commissions trying charges of "conspiracy", either in the Geneva Conventions, in the earlier Hague Conventions or at the Nuremberg Trials.
Addressing the dissents
As is common in opinions to which there are dissents, Stevens' opinion addressed the major arguments in dissent. For example:
 The majority opinion says that Justice Scalia's argument concerning the jurisdiction-stripping statute (section 1005e(1)) ignores the effective date provision of that very statute (section 1005(h)).
 The majority opinion says that the government's contention that the war started on September 11, 2001, undercuts Justice Thomas' argument that it started in 1996.
 The majority opinion notes that language in the Congressional Record that the Scalia dissent cites was inserted into the Record after the legislation had been enacted, by Senators Lindsey Graham (R-SC) and Jon Kyl (R-AZ), and includes falsified quotations attributed to other persons."Not Live From Capitol Hill", slate.com, by Emily Bazelon, June 29, 2006.
Breyer's concurrence
Justice Breyer wrote a one-page concurring opinion, joined by Justices Kennedy, Souter, and Ginsburg.126 S. Ct. at 2799. Breyer contended that the commissions are not necessarily categorically prohibited, as long as Congress approves them:
Kennedy's concurrence
150px|thumb|Justice Kennedy
Justice Kennedy wrote an opinion concurring in part, joined as to parts I and II by Justices Souter, Ginsburg, and Breyer.Id. at 2799–2809.
In Part One of Kennedy's concurrence, he raises his concern for the separation of powers; specifically, how one branch can control all the elements of a case, including avenues of review and appeal.
Part Two describes the differences between the procedures of the military commissions and the procedures prescribed by the UCMJ (fewer jury members, different rules of evidence, etc.).Id. at 2804.  These differences demonstrate that the commissions do not operate under the rules of military courts-martial, and raise issues of neutrality with respect to the military judges involved. The negation of fairness safeguards renders the commission a judicial entity which is not a "regularly constituted court", as required in the Geneva Convention. In sum, Kennedy writes that the commission exceeds congressional bounds, though the Congress is free to re-write the law as they see fit.
The third and final Part lists some of Kennedy's reservations.Id. at 2808. He would not say that the defendant must be present at all stages of the trial. There should be a reluctance to consider the applicability of Article 75 of Protocol I, since the U.S. never signed it and thus it is not binding. Kennedy writes that he feels it was not necessary to delve into the validity of the conspiracy charge, and he expresses no view on the merits of the other limitations of the commission noted in Part V of the Decision.
Scalia's dissent
Justice Scalia wrote a dissenting opinion that focuses primarily on issues of jurisdiction, and was joined by Justices Thomas and Alito.Id. at 2810–2823.
Scalia calls the Court's conclusion to hear the case "patently erroneous". His first argument relies on the part of the Detainee Treatment Act (DTA) (effective December 30, 2005) that states "[N]o court, justice, or judge shall have jurisdiction to hear or consider an application for a writ of habeas corpus filed by or on behalf of an alien detained by the Department of Defense at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba." §1005(e)(1), 119 Stat. 2742. Scalia's opinion is that this clause suffices to deny the Supreme Court jurisdiction over the case, calling the majority's reading  of the effectiveness provisions of §1005(h), a "mess". He cites Bruner v. United States and other cases granting "immediate effect in pending cases, absent an explicit statutory reservation". He wrote that in interpreting the language in the DTA, the majority ignored Supreme Court precedents which established that a statute excluding jurisdiction applies to pending cases unless it has clear language saying it does not. Scalia claimed that the majority had made this interpretation "for the flimsiest of reasons".Mahler, Jonathan (2008). The Challenge: Hamdan v. Rumsfeld and the Fight Over Presidential Power. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, p. 285.  He was referring to the majority's use of Senate floor debate records to bolster their interpretation, writing that it "makes no difference" that the language in support of his position was inserted into the Congressional Record after the law was voted upon. He also accuses the majority of ignoring the President's signing statement.
Furthermore, he anticipates that expanding the jurisdictions able to hear writs of habeas corpus from Guantanamo Bay would create excessive load on the court system.
In addition, Scalia states that the original military tribunal was not shown to be inadequate. Regarding the application of the Suspension Clause of the Constitution, Scalia points to Johnson v. Eisentrager.
In its second major argument, Scalia's opinion argues that petitioners such as Hamdan held outside the territorial jurisdiction of the United States lack the right to the writ of habeas corpus.  He points in a footnote to Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, under which he claims Hamdan "is already subject to indefinite detention" "after an adverse determination by his CSRT".
Finally, Justice Scalia chastises the Court for taking equity jurisdiction of the case and draws an analogy with Schlesinger v. Councilman, 420 U.S. 738 (1975). In that case, the Supreme Court declined passing judgment on the decision of a military court-martial before it finished its work; Scalia argues that likewise, the military commissions in Cuba have not yet ended their work regarding Hamdan and therefore should not be subject to judicial oversight.
Thomas's dissent
Justice Clarence Thomas read his dissent from the bench when the decision was announced, the first time he did so since his dissent in Stenberg v. Carhart, 530 U.S. 914 (2000).
In his dissent he asserted that the courts had no jurisdiction for this case for the reasons described in Scalia's dissent above; that Hamdan is an illegal combatant and therefore not protected by the Geneva convention; that the Geneva convention does not prohibit the special court council proposed; and that the President already had authority to set up the special court council proposed.126 S. Ct. at 2823–49.
Citing his dissent in Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, Thomas briefly reprised the roles granted by the Constitution to the three different branches in time of war. He argued that under the framework established in Ex parte Quirin and Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer, President Bush's decision to try Hamdan before a military commission "is entitled to a heavy measure of deference", inasmuch as Congress had authorized the President to use all necessary and appropriate force to prevent future acts of terrorism when it passed the Authorization for Use of Military Force.
Thomas disagreed strongly with the plurality's determination that the legality of the charges against Hamdan are doubtful because he was charged "not with an overt act for which he was caught redhanded ... but with an 'agreement' the inception of which long predated ... the [relevant armed conflict]". He lambasted the plurality for second-guessing the Executive's judgment, arguing that the Court's disagreement was based upon "little more than its unsupported assertions" and constituted "an unprecedented departure from the traditionally limited role of the courts with respect to war and an unwarranted intrusion on executive authority". Thomas further disagreed with the plurality's assumption that the date of the enactment of the AUMF constituted the start of war, suggesting that Osama bin Laden's declaration of jihad in August 1996 could be considered a declaration of war. Under this view, the enactment by Congress of the AUMF did not mark the beginning of the conflict with al Qaeda, but rather authorized the Executive to use force to combat it. Additionally, Thomas wrote that under the common law of war, which is "flexible and evolutionary in nature", war courts are permitted a degree of latitude in their jurisdiction. In holding otherwise, the plurality failed to properly defer to the judgment of the Executive and military commanders.
Referring to the Court's recent decision in Rapanos v. United States, Thomas noted with some incredulity that while the Justices in the instant decision "disregard[ed] the commander-in-chief's wartime decisions", they had no trouble deferring to the judgment of the Corps of Engineers in upholding the agency's "wildly implausible conclusion that a storm drain is a tributary of the waters of the United States". He added that "It goes without saying that there is much more at stake here than storm drains."
Thomas likewise disagreed with the plurality's holding that even if the government had charged Hamdan with a crime that was clearly cognizable by military commission, the commission would still lack power to proceed because it does not comply with the terms of the UCMJ and the four Geneva Conventions signed in 1949. He again emphasized that the jurisdiction of military commissions is not prescribed by statute but is rather "adapted in each instance to the need that called it forth". Thomas argued that the Court's conclusion that Article 36 of the UCMJ amounts to an attempt by Congress to curb the Executive's power is "contrary to the text and structure of the UCMJ" and also inconsistent with prior decisions of the Court. Addressing Hamdan's claims under the Geneva Convention, Thomas argued that these are foreclosed by the Court's holding in Johnson v. Eisentrager, where the majority noted that the respondents could not assert "that anything in the Geneva Convention makes them immune from prosecution or punishment for war crimes". Further, even if Hamdan's claim under Common Article 3 was not foreclosed by Eisentrager, it is nevertheless meritless insofar as the President has accepted the determination of the Department of Justice that Common Article 3 of Geneva does not extend to al Qaeda detainees. Thomas asserted that the Court's duty in this instance to "defer to the President's understanding of the provision at issue" is made even more acute by the fact that he is acting pursuant to his authority as Commander-in-Chief.
Alito's dissent
In a seven page dissent, Alito sided with Thomas and Scalia's explanation of why they believe the courts had no jurisdiction for this case.Id. at 2849–55. He explained why he believed the military commission in this case was legal. Alito disagreed with the holding of the Court which found that military commissions did not meet the definition of "a regularly constituted court" as required in Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions. Alito argued that Common Article 3 was satisfied in Hamdan because the military commissions:
 qualify as courts,
 were appointed and established in accordance with domestic law, and
 any procedural improprieties that might occur in particular cases can be reviewed in those cases.
Alito specifically disagreed with the opinions supporting the judgment which held that the military commission before which Hamdan would be tried is not "a regularly constituted court", and that the military commission is "illegal", because the commission's procedures allegedly would not comply with . Alito wrote that the military commission was "regularly" or "properly" constituted, using the example of the various types of local, state, federal and international courts and how "although these courts are 'differently constituted' and differ substantially in many other respects, they are all 'regularly constituted.'"
Alito stated that Geneva Convention Common Article 3 does not specifically rule out military commissions, and further points to the commentary in Article 66, which was the article the Court used in support of its opinion.  Alito argued that even if Common Article 3 recognizes a prohibition on "special tribunals", which Article 66 does prohibit, such a prohibition is not applicable to Hamdan's tribunal because the military commissions were "regular".Citing Webster's Third New International Dictionary, Alito relied on the definition of "special", "relating to a single thing"; and the definition of "regular", "uniform in course, practice, or occurrence". Further, because the Bush Administration might conduct the hundreds of such tribunals according to the same procedures, Alito concluded that "it seems that petitioner's tribunal, like the hundreds of others respondents propose to conduct, is very much regular and not at all special."
Alito wrote that "the commissions were appointed, set up, and established pursuant to an order of the President, just like the commission in Ex parte Quirin, 317 U. S. 1 (1942), and the Court acknowledges that Quirin recognized that the statutory predecessor of  'preserved' the President's power 'to convene military commissions.'" Alito disagreed with Kennedy's assertion that "an acceptable degree of independence from the Executive is necessary to render a commission 'regularly constituted' by the standards of our Nation's system of justice", arguing that Kennedy "offers no support for this proposition (which in any event seems to be more about fairness or integrity than regularity)", and further arguing that the commission in Quirin was no different from the present case.
Finally, Alito wrote that the commission procedures as a whole do not provide a basis for deeming the commissions to be illegitimate.  He points to two procedural rules, which the Court found fault with: First, the rule "allowing the Secretary of Defense to change the governing rules 'from time to time; and second, the rule that "permits the admission of any evidence that would have 'probative value to a reasonable person.  Alito asserts these rules cannot make the commissions illegitimate.
On the first rule Alito argued that not all changes during the course of a trial prejudice the defendant, and that some may even help the defendant. In addition, "If a change is made and applied during the course of an ongoing proceeding and if the accused is found guilty, the validity of that procedure can be considered in the review proceeding for that case."
On the second rule, Alito argued that this rule does not violate the international standard incorporated into Common Article 3, because "rules of evidence differ from country to country" and "much of the world does not follow aspects of our evidence rules, such as the general prohibition against the admission of hearsay".
Reaction to the decision
The impact of the decision on the petitioner, Hamdan, was that he can still be tried; however, his trial must be in a court, such as a military court-martial, or possibly a commission that has court-like protections.
Shortly thereafter, the Military Commissions Act of 2006 may have raised again the issue of which court would hear cases such as Hamdan's. The U.S. Department of Justice has filed notice with several federal judges, and given notice to hundreds of detainees, that the habeas petitions of alien unlawful enemy combatants (or those whose status is to be determined) are not within the jurisdiction of those courts.US: Courts No Longer Open to Detainees, October 20, 2006, Matt Apuzzo, Associated Press Writer, retrieved October 20, 2006.
The passage and signing of the Act follows through on President Bush's expressed intention to get explicit Congressional authorization to use military tribunals.President Bush and Japanese Prime Minister Koizumi Participate in a Joint Press Availability, June 29, 2006, White House Archives. Press Secretary Tony Snow echoed the plan to appeal to Congress.Press Gaggle by Tony Snow, June 30, 2006, White House Archives.
However, even among Senate Republicans, there were conflicting views. Senators Arlen Specter and Lindsey Graham (the latter a former military prosecutor) indicated Congress would work quickly to authorize tribunals, while influential Senator John Warner suggested a cautious and deliberative response. 
On July 7, 2006, the Secretary of Defense issued a memo "Application of Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to the Treatment of Detainees in the Department of Defense"."Geneva-22 on slate.com, from Timothy Noah, July 11, 2006. This may be the basis of a July 11, 2006, statement by the Bush administration that all detainees at Guantanamo Bay and in U.S. military custody everywhere are entitled to humane treatment under the Geneva Conventions."U.S. will give detainees Geneva rights ", by Anne Plummer Flaherty, AP. This declaration appears not to cover CIA detainees and is ambiguous with respect to the interpretation of Common Article 3 and the definition of "humane treatment".Newsflash: Pentagon Agrees to Abide by Supreme Court Ruling – Or Does It? Marty Lederman, July 11, 2006.
There were some indications that the other detainees being held at facilities throughout the world (e.g., Bagram Air Base and black sites), might use the Supreme Court's ruling to challenge their treatment. Their reasoning may be that since the Geneva Conventions afforded protection to Hamdan, its other protections might be effective for them as well. Commentators expressed mixed opinions about the strength of this argument.
Implications for theories of executive power
The decision may have important implications for other disputes relating to the extent of executive power and the unitary executive theory. In particular, it may undermine the Bush administration's legal arguments for domestic wiretapping by the National Security Agency without warrants as required by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act.Supreme Court's Ruling in Hamdan Means Warrantless Eavesdropping is Clearly Illegal , Glenn Greenwald, July 9, 2006.
Charges dismissed/new charges
On June 5, 2007, Hamdan and Canadian youth Omar Khadr, had all charges against them dismissed. The judges presiding over their military commissions ruled that the Military Commissions Act did not give them the jurisdiction to try Hamdan and Khadr, because it only authorized the trial of "unlawful enemy combatants". Hamdan and Khadr's Combatant Status Review Tribunals, like those of all the other Guantanamo captives, had confirmed them as "enemy combatants".
In December 2007, a tribunal determined that Hamdan was an "unlawful enemy combatant". In August 2008, he was convicted by the military commission of the lesser of two charges and received a sentence of 66 months, reduced by time served to five and a half months. In November 2008, the US transferred him to Yemen, where he served his last month. After release, he joined his family in Sana. In October 2012, the US Appeals Court for the District of Columbia, overturned Hamdan's conviction, acquitting him of the charge.The Eyes of the World: Charges, Challenges, and Guantánamo Military Commissions After Hamdan II, by: Frohock, Christina M., National Security & Armed Conflict Law Review, 2015, Vol. 6, p1-24.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 548
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Rasul v. Bush
 Boumediene v. Bush
References
Further reading
 National Security Law for Policymakers and Law Students
 Human Rights First: 
 .
 .
 Testimony of Scott Silliman on Hamdan v. Rumsfeld: Establishing a Constitutional Process", U.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary, July 11, 2006.
External links
Court documents
 Groups File Amicus Briefs in Case Involving Osama Bin Laden's Driver, Physicians for Human Rights
 Petition for a writ of certiorari: Brief for the respondents in opposition, US Department of Justice, December 2004.
  , U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, July 15, 2005.
  BRIEF OF LEGAL SCHOLARS AND HISTORIANS AS AMICI CURIAE IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONER, SALIM AHMED HAMDAN, v DONALD H. RUMSFELD, SECRETARY OF DEFENSE, et al., No. 05-184.
Pentagon documents
 Department of Defense Military Commission Order No. 1, March 21, 2002
News reports, commentary
 High Court Rejects Detainee Tribunals, Washington Post, June 29, 2006.
 Hamdan v. Rumsfeld: The Supreme Court Affirms International Law, JURIST, June 30, 2006.
 Hamdan, Common Article 3 and the True Spirit of the Law of War, JURIST, July 3, 2006.
 U.S. Charges Yemeni Described as Bin Laden Bodyguard, Washington Post, July 14, 2004.
 Fourth Guantanamo Detainee Is Charged, Washington Post, July 14, 2004.
 Bin Laden driver charged in first Guantanamo hearing, USA Today, August 25, 2004.
 Court permits terrorists to be tried by military commissions, Washington Legal Foundation, July 15, 2005.
 Protecting America's Freedom: National Security and Defense, Washington Legal Foundation, July 15, 2005.
 "The Nation's Second-Highest Court" Upholds Military Commissions, FindLaw, July 20, 2005.
 Understanding Hamdan v. Rumsfeld
 Why Hamdan is Right about Conspiracy Liability, JURIST
 Why the Court Said No, David D. Cole, New York Review of Books, August 10, 2006.
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:Donald Rumsfeld litigation
Category:Extrajudicial prisoners of the United States
Category:George W. Bush administration controversies
Category:Guantanamo Bay captives legal and administrative procedures
Category:Human rights case law
Category:United States military case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Hamdi v. Rumsfeld" ==> """
Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, 542 U.S. 507 (2004), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court recognized the power of the U.S. government to detain enemy combatants, including U.S. citizens, but ruled that detainees who are U.S. citizens must have the rights of due process, and the ability to challenge their enemy combatant status before an impartial authority.
It reversed the dismissal by a lower court of a habeas corpus petition brought on behalf of Yaser Esam Hamdi, a U.S. citizen who was being detained indefinitely as an illegal enemy combatant after being captured in Afghanistan in 2001. Following the court's decision, on October 9, 2004, the U.S. government released Hamdi without charge and deported him to Saudi Arabia, where his family lived and he had grown up, on the condition that he renounce his U.S. citizenship and commit to travel prohibitions and other conditions.
 Background 
left|150px|thumb|Hamdi during his detention at Guantanamo Bay.
Early life and capture
Yaser Esam Hamdi was born in Louisiana as a citizen of the United States in 1980. That same year, he and his family moved to Saudi Arabia."This case arises out of the detention of a man whom the Government alleges took up arms with the Taliban during this conflict. His name is Yaser Esam Hamdi. Born an American citizen in Louisiana in 1980, Hamdi moved with his family to Saudi Arabia as a child." p. 1
According to his father, Hamdi went to Afghanistan in the late summer of 2001 as a relief worker. He was then captured less than two months after his arrival by the Afghan Northern Alliance. They turned him over to U.S. military authorities during the U.S. invasion."By 2001, the parties agree, [Hamdi] resided in Afghanistan. At some point that year, he was seized by members of the Northern Alliance, a coalition of military groups opposed to the Taliban government, and eventually was turned over to the United States military." p.2 He was classified as an enemy combatant by the U.S. armed forces and detained in connection with ongoing hostilities."The U.S. armed forces in Afghanistan determined that Hamdi is an enemy combatant who should be detained in connection with the ongoing hostilities." p. 1
Hamdi's father claimed that Hamdi had gone to Afghanistan to do relief work and was trapped there when the U.S. invasion began, citing his young age and lack of travel experience as reasons for his being trapped."Hamdi's father has asserted in documents found elsewhere in the record that his son went to Afghanistan to do 'relief work,' and that he had been in that country less than two months before September 11, 2001, and could not have received military training. The 20-year-old was traveling on his own for the first time, his father says, and '[b]ecause of his lack of experience, he was trapped in Afghanistan once that military campaign began.'" p. 3-4
Detention and legal challenge
After his capture in 2001, Hamdi was detained and interrogated in Afghanistan."The Government asserts that it initially detained and interrogated Hamdi in Afghanistan before transferring him to the United States Naval Base in Guantanamo Bay in January 2002. In April 2002, upon learning that Hamdi is an American citizen, authorities transferred him to a naval brig in Norfolk, Virginia, where he remained until a recent transfer to a brig in Charleston, South Carolina." p. 2 In January 2002, the Americans transferred Hamdi to Guantanamo Bay. In April 2002, when officials discovered that he held U.S. (as well as Saudi) citizenship, they transferred him to a Naval brig in Norfolk, Virginia and finally to the Naval Consolidated Brig in Charleston, South Carolina. In June 2002, Hamdi's father, Esam Fouad Hamdi, filed a habeas corpus petition in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia to challenge his detention."In June 2002, Hamdi's father, Esam Fouad Hamdi, filed a petition for writ of habeas corpus, naming as petitioners both Hamdi and himself as next friend." p. 17
The Bush administration claimed that because Hamdi was caught in arms against the U.S., he could be properly detained as an enemy combatant,Kathleen M. Sullivan and Gerald Gunther, Constitutional Law: Sixteenth Edition (Foundation Press: New York, 2007) 273. without any oversight of presidential decision making, and without access to an attorney or the court system.  The administration argued that this power was constitutional and necessary to effectively fight the War on Terror, declared by the Congress of the United States in the Authorization for Use of Military Force passed after the September 11 terrorist attacks.  The government used its detention authority to ensure that terrorists were no longer a threat while active combat operations continued and to ensure suspects could be fully interrogated.
District case
Judge Robert G. Doumar ruled that Hamdi's father was a proper "next friend" having standing to sue on behalf of his son, and ordered that a federal public defender be given access to Hamdi.  On appeal, however, the Fourth Circuit reversed the District Court's order, ruling that the District Court had failed to give proper deference to the government's "intelligence and security interests," and that it should proceed with a properly deferential investigation.
The case was sent back to the District Court, which denied the government's motion to dismiss Hamdi's petition. Judge Doumar found the government's evidence supporting Hamdi's detention "woefully inadequate," and based predominantly on hearsay and bare assertions.  The District Court ordered the government to produce numerous documents for in camera review by the court that would enable it to perform a "meaningful judicial review," such as the statements by the Northern Alliance regarding Hamdi's capture, the dates and circumstances of his capture and interrogations, and a list of all the officials involved in the determination of his "enemy combatant" status.
 Appellate case 
The government appealed Judge Doumar's order to produce the evidence, and the Fourth Circuit again reversed the District Court. Because it was "undisputed that Hamdi was captured in a zone of active combat in a foreign theater of conflict," the Fourth Circuit said that it was not proper for any court to hear a challenge of his status. It ruled that the broad warmaking powers delegated to the President under Article Two of the United States Constitution and the principle of separation of powers prohibited courts from interfering in this vital area of national security.
After the Fourth Circuit denied a petition for rehearing en banc, Hamdi's father appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court. It granted certiorari review and reversed the Fourth Circuit's ruling. Hamdi was represented before the Court by the late Federal Public Defender Frank W. Dunham, Jr., and the Government's side was argued by the Principal Deputy Solicitor General, Paul Clement.
 Opinion of the Court 
Though no single opinion of the Court commanded a majority, six of the nine justices of the Court agreed that the executive branch does not have the power to hold a U.S. citizen indefinitely without basic due process protections enforceable through judicial review.
 Plurality opinion 
Justice O'Connor wrote a plurality opinion representing the Court's judgment, which was joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justices Breyer and Kennedy.  O'Connor wrote that although Congress had expressly authorized the detention of enemy combatants in its Authorization for Use of Military Force (AUMF) passed after 9/11, due process required that Hamdi have a meaningful opportunity to challenge his enemy combatant status.
Justice O'Connor used the three-part test of Mathews v. Eldridge to limit the due process to be received.  This required notice of the charges and an opportunity to be heard, though because of the burden of ongoing military conflict upon the executive, normal procedural protections, such as placing the burden of proof on the government or the ban on hearsay, need not apply.  O'Connor suggested the Department of Defense create fact-finding tribunals similar to the AR 190-8 to determine whether a detainee merited continued detention as an enemy combatant.
In response, the United States Department of Defense created Combatant Status Review Tribunals, modeling them after the AR 190-8. O'Connor did not write at length on Hamdi's right to an attorney, because by the time the Court rendered its decision, Hamdi had been granted access to one.  But O'Connor wrote that Hamdi "unquestionably has the right to access to counsel in connection with the proceedings on remand." The plurality held that judges need not be involved in reviewing these cases, rather only that an "impartial decision maker" was required. Justice O'Connor also limited the reach of the Court's conclusion regarding the executive authority to detain enemy combatants:
The plurality asserted that the Judiciary must not defer to the executive with respect to detentions. Instead the constitution empowers the judiciary to act as a check on executive power in this realm. Justice O'Connor wrote:
 Souter concurrence and dissent
Justice David Souter, joined by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, concurred with the plurality's judgment that due process protections must be available for Hamdi to challenge his status and detention, providing a majority for that part of the ruling.  However, he dissented from the plurality's ruling that AUMF established Congressional authorization for the detention of enemy combatants.
 Scalia dissent 
Justice Antonin Scalia's dissent, joined by Justice John Paul Stevens, went the furthest in restricting the executive power of detention. Scalia asserted that based on historical precedent, the government had two options to detain Hamdi: Congress could suspend the right to habeas corpus, or Hamdi could be tried under normal criminal law. Scalia wrote that the plurality, though well-meaning, had no basis in law for trying to establish new procedures that would be applicable in a challenge to Hamdi's detention - it was only the job of the Court to declare it unconstitutional and order his release or proper arrest, rather than to invent an acceptable process for detention.  Scalia and Stevens also suggested that there is a time-limited exception to the ancient right of habeas corpus:
Where the commitment was for felony or high treason, the [Habeas Corpus Act of 1679] did not require immediate release, but instead required the Crown to commence criminal proceedings within a specified time…. [T]he practical effect of this provision was that imprisonment without indictment or trial for felony or high treason under §7 would not exceed approximately three to six months.
 Thomas dissent 
Justice Clarence Thomas was the only justice who sided entirely with the executive branch and the Fourth Circuit's ruling, based on his view of the security interests at stake and the President's broad war-making powers.  Thomas wrote that the Court's rationale would also require due process rights for bombing targets: "Because a decision to bomb a particular target might extinguish life interests, the plurality's analysis seems to require notice to potential targets."  Thomas also wrote that Congress intended that the AUMF authorize such detentions. Thomas would later make use of this dissent in Turner v. Rogers in 2011.
 Subsequent developments 
Although by the terms used in the Court's holdings, they were apparently limited to "citizen-detainees," the last paragraph of section III, D of the O'Connor plurality (four justices: O'Connor, Rehnquist, Kennedy, and Breyer) relies on the Geneva Convention and states that habeas corpus should be available to an "alleged enemy combatant."
On the same day, the Court held in Rasul v. Bush (2004) that U.S. courts have jurisdiction to hear habeas corpus petitions filed by the Guantanamo detainees, and other foreign nationals.
The government conceded that some very limited due process rights, allowing for hearings to determine the detainees' status as enemy combatants and the right to legal counsel, would be extended to all of the Guantanamo detainees, citizen and non-citizen alike. The application of the Court's decisions in these cases is consistent with the fact that the other two justices in the Hamdi majority, as well as two of the dissenting justices (Scalia and Stevens), were more restrictive in their willingness to concede any of the detention powers requested by the government for Guantanamo detainees in the Hamdi case.
In regard to the detention of detainees without charge, in section I of the O'Connor plurality opinion, the plurality relied on the time-honored traditions of war, the Geneva Convention, and a long list of other international treaties, to hold that the government had authority under the Authorization for Use of Military Force (2001) to hold any enemy combatants, provided enemy combatants had been seized on the battlefield participating in active hostilities, for the sole objective of preventing an enemy combatant from returning to the battlefield, and then only so long as there continued to be "active hostilities." The plurality held that such protective detention could be applied to both citizen and non-citizen enemy combatants.
The plurality opinion stated:
The U.S. government had argued that it had the right to detain enemy combatants indefinitely for the two purposes of interrogation and to prevent a return to the battlefield. Justice O'Connor rejected the first purpose by stating definitively that "indefinite detention for the purpose of interrogation is not authorized." With regard to the second purpose, the plurality held "Necessary and appropriate force" amounted to authorization to detain "for the duration of the relevant conflict," in order to prevent enemy combatants from rejoining the fight.
Of the four justices outside the plurality, Justices Ginsburg and Souter limited their opinions to their position that Section 4001(a) of Title 18 of the United States Code (the Non-Detention Act; enacted to prevent the sort of detention that occurred when the United States placed Japanese-American citizens in concentration camps during World War II), prevented the detention of U.S. citizens.  Justice Scalia (whose opinion was joined by Justice Stevens), restricted his holding to citizen-detainees and implied that anyone held outside of United States' territory might be beyond the reach of the Court altogether. Again, the Rasul case did not directly address the detention issue, and any hearings would be limited to the determination of enemy combatant status.
 In Hamdan v. Rumsfeld (2006), the Court decided that the "military commissions" created to try unlawful combatants for war crimes suffered from certain fatal procedural defects under the Uniform Code of Military Justice and the Geneva Convention, and were without other legal authority to proceed. They overruled Congress' attempt to deprive the Court of jurisdiction to decide that issue by passing the Detainee Treatment Act.  Justices in the majority (particularly Justices Kennedy and Breyer) disagreed with Justice Stevens as to whether the "charge" of conspiracy could be maintained to justify the determination of unlawful combatant status.  Although the Court struck down the military commissions as created by the Executive Branch, they did not provide the detainees with direct access to the federal courts, but only with access to a fair and impartial hearing to a tribunal constitutionally authorized by Congress and proceeding with certain due process guarantees (such as one operated under terms similar to those provided by Article I courts under the UCMJ or according to the terms of the Third Geneva Convention of 1949).
On October 17, 2006, the president signed the Military Commissions Act, passed by Congress and authorizing a type of military tribunal to be used at Guantanamo Bay detention camp, as requested by the Bush administration. That fall, the administration transferred fourteen high-value detainees to Guantanamo Bay from black sites overseas.
 In Boumediene v. Bush (2008), the Court ruled that detainees, and other foreign nationals, do have the right to direct access to federal courts to challenge their detentions.
 See also 
 Donald Rumsfeld
 Center for Constitutional Rights, a New York City–based legal nonprofit organization that legally represents over 150 of the Guantanamo Bay detainees
 Terrorism
 Donald Vance
 Footnotes 
 References 
External links
NPR audio on the decision
The Center for Constitutional Rights section on Hamdi v. Rumsfeld with detailed documents and insight
FindLaw "war on terror" section
The Supreme Court, the Detainees, and the "War on Terrorism" (FindLaw)
Hamdi v. Rumsfeld: U.S. Supreme Court Brief Resource Center, U.S. Supreme Court Amici Curiæ Briefs (Jenner and Block Law Firm)
Yaser Esam Hamdi v. Donald Rumsfeld Settlement Agreement (FindLaw)
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Donald Rumsfeld litigation
Category:Guantanamo captives' habeas corpus petitions
Category:United States civil commitment case law
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Hamer v. Neighborhood Housing Servs. of Chicago" ==> """
Hamer v. Neighborhood Housing Services of Chicago, 583 U.S. ___ (2017), is a decision by the United States Supreme Court, holding that failure to comply with the deadline for filing a notice of appeal, established by Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure, Rule 4(a)(5)(C), does not necessitate dismissal of a case., slip op. at 1, 10 (2017).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2017 in United States case law
"""

From "Hamilton v. Alabama (1961)" ==> """
Hamilton v. Alabama, 368 U.S. 52 (1961), was a case heard by the Supreme Court of the United States. Hamilton was charged in an Alabama court with breaking and entering a dwelling at night with intent to ravish, and had pleaded not guilty. He had then been convicted and sentenced to death. The Court ruled unanimously that the absence of counsel at the time of his arraignment violated Hamilton's due process rights under the Fourteenth Amendment.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 368
Alabama State Mercenaries
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Sixth Amendment appointment of counsel case law
Category:1961 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Alabama
Category:1961 in Alabama
"""

From "Hamilton v. Alabama (1964)" ==> """
Hamilton v. Alabama, 376 U.S. 650 (1964), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the court held that an African-American woman, Mary Hamilton, was entitled to the same courteous forms of address customarily reserved solely for whites in the Southern United States, and that calling a black person by their first name in a formal context was "a form of racial discrimination". 
 Background 
Mary Hamilton (October 13, 1935—November 11, 2002) was a field secretary for the Congress of Racial Equality in Alabama. In 1963, along with hundreds of others, she was arrested during civil rights protests in Gadsden.
At a habeas corpus hearing on June 25 challenging the legitimacy of those arrests, she refused to answer questions on the witness stand until she was addressed with the same courtesy accorded white witnesses. At that time, in the South and in many other parts of the U.S., it was customary for judges and prosecutors to address white witnesses by last names and courtesy titles, such as "Mr. Jones" or "Mrs. Smith", while addressing all nonwhite witnesses by the first name without honorific. When the county prosecutor addressed Hamilton by her first name only, she said she would not answer any questions unless she were addressed as "Miss Hamilton". When she persisted in her demand to be addressed in this manner, the judge held her in contempt of court and sentenced her to five days in jail and a $50 fine.
After serving the five days, she refused to pay the fine and was allowed out on bond to appeal the contempt conviction. After the Alabama Supreme Court denied her appeal, the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund asked the Supreme Court to review Hamilton's case. Her lawyers argued that the first-name form of address used by the prosecutor was part of a "racial caste system" that violated Hamilton's equal protection guarantees.
 Opinion of the Court 
In a 6–3 per curiam opinion, the Supreme Court granted certiorari (agreed to consider the case) and, without hearing any oral arguments, found in Hamilton's favor, reversing the judgment of the Alabama Supreme Court. In support of its summary decision, the court cited its 1963 ruling in Johnson v. Virginia, in which it had unanimously held that "a State may not require racial segregation in a courtroom".Johnson v. Virginia, .
Associate Justices Tom C. Clark, John M. Harlan II, and Byron White dissented from the majority's decision to grant certiorari.
 References 
 External links 
 Mary Hamilton and the "Miss Mary" Case : Civil Rights Movement Archive
 The Supreme Court, race, and civil rights by Abraham L. Davis, Barbara Luck Graham, (1995) , p. 155
Category:1964 in Alabama
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:Movements for civil rights
Category:Legal history of Alabama
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Gadsden, Alabama
Category:Honorifics
Category:Styles (forms of address)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Hamilton v. Regents of the University of California" ==> """
Hamilton v. Regents of the University of California, 293 U.S. 245 (1934), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld the "right of California to force its university students to take classes in military training" and reiterated that "[i]nstruction in military science is not instruction in the practice or tenets of a religion.". The Religious Freedom Page summary , Library of the University of Virginia It was also held that the University of California constituted a corporation created by the state to administer the University, its president, and its provost,Hamilton, 293 U.S. at 250. and as held  is a constitutional department or function of the state government and as such an order by the regents is in effect a statute or law of the state.Hamilton, 293 U.S. at 265.
 Background 
On March 23, 1868, the California State Legislature passed the Organic Act creating the University "in order to devote to the largest purposes of education the benefaction made to the State" by the Morrill Land-Grant Colleges Act. The act stated:Hamilton, 293 U.S. at 255.Stats. 1867-8 , ch. 244, section 6, p. 250
[I]n order to fulfil the requirements of the said Act of Congress, all able-bodied male students of the University, whether pursuing full or partial courses in any college, or as students at large, shall receive instruction and discipline in military tactics in such manner and to such extent as the Regents shall prescribe, the requisite arms for which shall be furnished by the State.
On September 15, 1931, the Board of Regents promulgated an order requiring students to take the course in military science and tactics in the Reserve Officers Training Corps as prescribed by the War Department.Hamilton, 293 U.S. at 250-51. The order prescribed the following:Hamilton, 293 U.S. at 256.
Every able-bodied student of the University of California who, at the time of his matriculation at the University, is under the age of twenty-four years and a citizen of the United States and who has not attained full academic standing as a junior student in the University and has not completed the course in military science and tactics offered to freshmen and sophomore students at the University shall be and is hereby required as a condition to his attendance as a student to enroll in and complete a course in not less than one and one-half units of instruction in military science and tactics each semester of his attendance until such time as he shall have received a total of six units of such instruction or shall have attained full academic standing as a junior student.
In October, 1933, several minors belonging to the Methodist Episcopal Church and of the Epworth League enrolled in the University of California system. The students at the beginning of the fall term in 1933 petitioned the University for exemption from military training and participation in the activities of the training corps, upon the ground of their religious and conscientious objection to war and to military training.Hamilton, 293 U.S. at 252. The regents refused to make military training optional or to exempt these students.
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:1934 in United States case law
Category:University of California litigation
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:1934 in religion
Category:Conscription in the United States
"""

From "Hammer v. Dagenhart" ==> """
Hammer v. Dagenhart, 247 U.S. 251 (1918), was a United States Supreme Court decision in which the Court struck down a federal law regulating child labor. The decision was overruled by United States v. Darby Lumber Co. (1941).
During the Progressive Era, public sentiment in the United States turned against what was perceived as increasingly intolerable child labor conditions. In response, Congress passed the Keating–Owen Act, prohibiting the sale in interstate commerce of any merchandise that had been made either by children under the age of fourteen, or by children under sixteen who worked more than sixty hours per week. In his majority opinion, Justice William R. Day struck down the Keating–Owen Act, holding that the Commerce Clause did not give Congress the power to regulate working conditions. In his dissenting opinion, Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. argued that goods manufactured in one state and sold in other states were by definition interstate commerce, and thus Congress should have power to regulate the manufacturing of those goods.
Background
During the Progressive Era, public sentiment in the United States turned against what was perceived as increasingly intolerable child labor conditions. Activities of such groups as the National Child Labor Committee, investigative journalists, and labor groups called attention to unhealthy and unsafe working conditions. Historical material presented by the Smithsonian Institution provides a sense of the motivation behind these concerns in an electronic exhibit on the work of the photographer Lewis Hine:
Over and over, Hine saw children working sixty and seventy-hour weeks, by day and by night, often under hazardous conditions. He saw children caught in a cycle of poverty, with parents often so ill-paid that they could not support a family on their earnings alone, and had to rely on their children's earnings as a supplement for the family's survival. He saw children growing up stunted mentally (illiterate or barely able to read because their jobs kept them out of school) and physically (from lack of fresh air, exercise, and time to relax and play). He saw countless children who had been injured and permanently disabled on the job; he knew that, in the cotton mills for example, children had accident rates three times those of adults.
Responding to the growing public concern, many states sought to impose local restrictions on child labor.   In many states, however, the attempt to regulate was ineffective. In addition, manufacturers argued that where restrictions were imposed only in selected states, it placed them at a competitive disadvantage with competitors from states which still placed no restrictions.  
Unable to regulate hours and working conditions for child labor within individual states, Congress sought to regulate child labor by banning the product of that labor from interstate commerce. The Keating-Owen Act of 1916 prohibited interstate commerce of any merchandise that had been made by children under the age of fourteen, or merchandise that had been made in factories where children between the ages of 14 and 16 worked for more than eight hours a day, worked overnight or worked more than sixty hours a week. 
Roland Dagenhart, who worked in a cotton mill in Charlotte, North Carolina with his two sons, sued, arguing that this law was unconstitutional. A district court ruled the statute unconstitutional, which caused United States Attorney William C. Hammer to appeal to the Supreme Court. At issue was the question: Does Congress have the authority to regulate commerce of goods that are manufactured by children under the age 14, as specified in the Keating–Owen Act of 1916, and is it within the authority of Congress in regulating commerce among the states to prohibit the transportation in interstate commerce of manufactured goods by the child labor description above?
Majority opinion
Justice Day, for the majority, said that Congress does not have the power to regulate commerce of goods that are manufactured by children and that the Keating-Owen Act of 1916 was therefore unconstitutional. Drawing a distinction between the manufacture of goods and the regulation of certain goods themselves "inherently evil", the Court maintained that the issue did not concern the power to keep certain immoral products out of the stream of interstate commerce, distinguishing previous cases upholding Congress's power to control lottery schemes, prostitution, and liquor. The Court reasoned that in those cases, the goods themselves were inherently immoral and thus open to congressional scrutiny. In this case, however, the issue at hand was the manufacture of cotton, a good whose use is not immoral. The Court further held that the manufacture of cotton did not in itself constitute interstate commerce. The Court recognized that disparate labor regulations placed the various states on unequal ground in terms of economic competitiveness, but it specifically stated that Congress could not address such inequality, as it was within the right of states to enact differing laws within the scope of their police powers: 
The court reasoned that "The commerce clause was not intended to give to Congress a general authority to equalize such conditions". The Court added that the federal government was "one of enumerated powers" and could not go beyond the boundary drawn by the 10th Amendment, which the Court misquotes by inserting the word "expressly":
Dissenting opinion
Justice Holmes dissented strongly from the logic and ruling of the majority. He maintained that Congress was completely within its right to regulate interstate commerce and that goods manufactured in one state and sold in other states were, by definition, interstate commerce. That placed the entire manufacturing process under the purview of Congress, and the constitutional power "could not be cut down or qualified by the fact that it might interfere with the carrying out of the domestic policy of any State".Hammer v. Dagenhart, 247 U.S. at 271 (Holmes, J., dissenting).
Holmes also took issue with the majority's logic in allowing Congress to regulate goods themselves regarded as immoral, while at the same time disallowing regulation of goods whose use may be considered just as immoral in a more indirect sense: "The notion that prohibition is any less prohibition when applied to things now thought evil I do not understand ... to say that it is permissible as against strong drink but not as against the product of ruined lives."Hammer v. Dagenhart, 247 U.S. at 280 (Holmes, J., dissenting). At the time, the Eighteenth Amendment, banning the sale, manufacture and transport of alcoholic drink, had been approved by Congress and was being ratified by the states.
Holmes also commented on the court's rejection of federal restrictions on child labor: "But if there is any matter upon which civilized countries have agreed—it is the evil of premature and excessive child labor."
Subsequent developments
thumb|left|alt=1918 cartoon The Liberator SCOTUS protest|1918 cartoon from The Liberator protesting against this ruling
In 1922, another ruling, Bailey v. Drexel Furniture, banned Congress from levying a tax on goods produced through child labour entered into interstate trade; both rulings caused the introduction of the Child Labor Amendment.
The ruling of the Court was later overturned and repudiated in a series of decisions handed down in the late 1930s and early 1940s. Specifically, Hammer v. Dagenhart was overruled in 1941 in the case of United States v. Darby Lumber Co., . The Court in the Darby case sided strongly with Holmes' dissent, which they called "classic". They also recast the reading of the Tenth Amendment, regarding it as a "truism" that merely restates what the Constitution had already provided for, rather than offering a substantive protection to the States, as the Hammer ruling had contended.
 References 
Further reading
.
 Sawyer, Logan E., III, “Creating Hammer v. Dagenhart,” William and Mary Bill of Rights Journal, 21 (Oct. 2012), 67–124.
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:1918 in United States case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:History of Charlotte, North Carolina
Category:History of the textile industry in the United States
"""

From "Hampton v. United States" ==> """
Hampton v. United States, 425 U.S. 484 (1976), is a United States Supreme Court decision on the subject of Entrapment. By a 5–3 margin, the Court upheld the conviction of a Missouri man for selling heroin even though all the drug sold was supplied to him, he claimed, by a Drug Enforcement Administration informant who had, in turn, gotten it from the DEA. The majority held that the record showed Hampton was predisposed to sell drugs no matter his source..
The case came before the court when the defendant argued that while he was predisposed, it was irrelevant since the government's possible role as sole supplier in the case constituted the sort of "outrageous government conduct" that Justice William Rehnquist had speculated could lead to the reversal of a conviction in the court's last entrapment case, United States v. Russell.. Rehnquist was not impressed and rejected the argument in his majority opinion.
The dissents agreed that the government's purported action was outrageous and that the conviction should be overturned on those grounds. The justices were among those who had said in Russell that the "subjective" entrapment standard adopted by the Court since it first recognized entrapment as a valid defense in Sorrells v. United States,. was less fair and appropriate than the "objective" standard of evaluating official conduct, which dissents and concurrences in entrapment cases over the years had argued for. However, this was the last entrapment case to feature that conflict.
Background of the case
In late February 1974, Hampton and a DEA informant known as Hutton were playing pool at the Pud bar in St. Louis when Hampton noticed the needle marks on Hutton's arms. He said he needed money and could obtain heroin to sell. Hutton responded that he could find a buyer. After the conversation, he called his handler, DEA agent Terry Sawyer, and reported the proposal.
At 10 p.m. on February 25, Hampton and Hutton met the undercover Sawyer and another DEA agent, McDowell, and sold him a tiny packet of heroin for $145. Hampton told the agents that he could get more and gave him his phone number. Sawyer called the next day and arranged another deal. Later, in a parked car, Hampton gave Sawyer another packet, whereupon he said he had to get the money from the trunk. When he opened it, other agents moved in to arrest Hampton.
Lower courts
Trial
Hampton's story was very different from the one presented by federal prosecutors. He claimed Hutton had, in response to his cash flow problems, come up with the idea to sell not heroin but a fake, perfectly legal, he thought. Previous to the deals with the DEA the two had, he said, already sold it to one gullible buyer and that he solicited the agents in order to make more money. At no time had he ever believed the two were actually selling heroin, he claimed. He raised the entrapment defense but proposed an alternate to the standard entrapment instruction.
The jury chose not to believe him and convicted.
Appeal
The Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the conviction, relying on the Supreme Court's Russell holding. The Court thereby rejected Hampton's argument that, whatever his predisposition, the conduct of the government operatives in his narrative was outrageous enough to trump it. 
 Supreme Court case
The Supreme Court granted certiorari on the entrapment question alone.
Decision
Majority
Rehnquist said that Hampton had misunderstood his comments about outrageous government conduct in Russell, and then said it didn't apply here. "Admittedly petitioner's case is different from Russell's but the difference is one of degree, not of kind". He conceded that the government's role, at least in the defense case, was more significant but stuck with the admitted predisposition towards drug dealing in rejecting any entrapment claim. Again, he decisively rejected any effort to assert the objective standard.
"The limitations of the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment come into play only when the Government activity in question violates some protected right of the defendant", he wrote, in a comment read as scaling back his Russell aside. "(T)he police conduct here no more deprived defendant of any right secured to him by the United States Constitution than did the police conduct in Russell deprive Russell of any rights."
Concurrence
While likewise rejecting Hampton's defense, Lewis Powell and Harry Blackmun took issue with what they saw as Rehnquist's overly broad assertion that (as they put it), "the concept of fundamental fairness inherent in the guarantee of due process would never prevent the conviction of a predisposed defendant, regardless of the outrageousness of police behavior in light of the surrounding circumstances."
"I do not understand Russell or earlier cases delineating the predisposition-focused defense of entrapment to have gone so far", Powell wrote. He noted that the jurisprudence was very limited, and that the Court had, for one, not yet had the opportunity to consider an entrapment claim from some source other than controlled-substance enforcement. "In these circumstances, I am unwilling to conclude that an analysis other than one limited to predisposition would never be appropriate under due process principles".
Dissent
William Brennan made the argument once again for the "objective" entrapment standard from previous concurrences and dissents, and said that this would necessitate overturning the conviction. He also said that he did not find the defendant predisposed to commit the crime either. "(T)he Government's role in the criminal activity involved in this case was more pervasive than the Government involvement in Russell ...  In my view, the police activity in this case was beyond permissible limits."
He contrasted the two cases, noting that in the earlier case the government agent had merely supplied an ingredient for the manufacture of methamphetamine that was legal yet difficult to obtain, and one the defendant in that case had demonstrably been able to obtain from other sources than the government undercover agent. As well, in Russell the illegal manufacturing operation had been producing the drug well before the federal operation began.
But in the instant case, not only was the heroin a completely illegal substance, it had been supplied wholly by the DEA. There was also no evidence introduced beyond his admission as such that Hampton had been dealing drugs prior to Hutton's approach. "The beginning and end of this crime thus coincided exactly with the Government's entry into and withdrawal from the criminal activity involved in this case, while the Government was not similarly involved in Russell's crime".
He responded quite strongly to Rehnquist:
Whether the differences from the Russell situation are of degree or of kind ... I think they clearly require a different result. Where the Government's agent deliberately sets up the accused by supplying him with contraband and then bringing him to another agent as a potential purchaser, the Government's role has passed the point of toleration ... The Government is doing nothing less than buying contraband from itself through an intermediary and jailing the intermediary ... There is little, if any, law enforcement interest promoted by such conduct; plainly it is not designed to discover ongoing drug traffic. Rather, such conduct deliberately entices an individual to commit a crime. That the accused is "predisposed" cannot possibly justify the action of government officials in purposefully creating the crime. No one would suggest that the police could round up and jail all "predisposed" individuals, yet that is precisely what set-ups like the instant one are intended to accomplish.
In any case where an individual was prosecuted for selling drugs provided to him by a government operative, he said, conviction should be barred as a matter of law.
Justice John Paul Stevens, then newly appointed to the Court, took no part in the case.
Subsequent jurisprudence
Jacobson v. United States, . The Court finally does consider an entrapment case from outside drug enforcement, and narrowly overturns the conviction of a Nebraska man for ordering child pornography after two years of being cajoled by material created by postal inspectors. Held: the government must show that predisposition existed before the government became involved, and legal behavior does not constitute a predisposition to violate the law after such conduct becomes illegal.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 425
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States entrapment case law
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:Drug Enforcement Administration litigation
Category:History of St. Louis
Category:Heroin
"""

From "Handly's Lessee v. Anthony" ==> """
Handly's Lessee v. Anthony, 18 U.S. (5 Wheat.) 374 (1820), is a ruling by the Supreme Court of the United States which held that the proper boundary between the states of Indiana and Kentucky was the low-water mark on the western and northwestern bank of the Ohio River. Motion by the plaintiff, Handly's lessee, to eject inhabitants of a peninsula in the Ohio River (which was at times temporarily cut off from Indiana by high water) was denied.
Background
thumb|150px|left|Map of North America c. 1606, depicting original land grants given to the Virginia Company.
thumb|150px|Map of North America c. 1609, depicting land grants given to the Virginia Company.
In 1606, shortly before colonization began, James I of England granted the Charter of 1606 to the newly established Virginia Company, asserting royal title to Native American-occupied land between the 34th and 45th parallels of latitude and  inland, and permitting the Virginia Company to establish colonies there.Hubbard, American Boundaries: The Nation, the States, the Rectangular Survey, 2009, pp. 7–9. The Virginia Company's subsidiary, the Plymouth Company, was given title to land between the 38th and 45th parallel, while another subsidiary, the London Company, was given title to land between the 34th and 41st parallels.Hubbard, American Boundaries: The Nation, the States, the Rectangular Survey, 2009, pp. 8–9. The charter created a conflicting title to the overlapping area between the 38th and 41st parallels, but since no colonies were planned for the area the conflict did not initially create problems. In 1609, James I redefined the Colony of Virginia's boundaries so that the northern boundary projected northwest from the coast, as well as asserting title to all land west to the Pacific Ocean.Hubbard, American Boundaries: The Nation, the States, the Rectangular Survey, 2009, pp. 10–11.
Conflicting land claims as well as claims that land grants extended to the Pacific Ocean proved highly contentious issues after the American Revolution. To help resolve the issue, in 1781 Virginia agreed to surrender to the United States federal government all title to its land claims west of the Ohio River.Ayers, Gould, Oshinsky, and Soderland, American Passages: A History of the United States, 2009, p. 174. In making its cession, Virginia defined as its border the Ohio River, and required that Congress use the river as a border between the nascent state of Kentucky and any states fashioned out of the unsettled territory to the north.Handly's Lessee v. Anthony, 18 U. S. 374, 376–377. Title was transferred in 1784, and the United States Congress passed the Land Ordinance of 1784, Land Ordinance of 1785, and the Northwest Ordinance of 1787 to turn these lands into territories and (eventually) states.Miller, Native America, Discovered and Conquered: Thomas Jefferson, Lewis & Clark, and Manifest Destiny, 2006, p. 62. The Northwest Ordinance created the Northwest Territory, which encompassed the modern states of Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, Michigan, Wisconsin, and a portion of Minnesota.Ayers, Gould, Oshinsky, and Soderland, American Passages: A History of the United States, 2009, p. 176. Kentucky remained unorganized, but its statehood was considered imminent. After 10 constitutional conventions and three statehood enabling acts passed by the Virginia legislature, Kentucky was admitted as a state on June 1, 1792.Harrison, Kentucky's Road to Statehood, 1992, pp. 19–90 In preparation for Ohio statehood, the area encompassed by the modern state of Ohio was separated from the Northwest Territory on July 4, 1800, and the remaining territory renamed the Indiana Territory.Esarey, A History of Indiana From Its Exploration to 1850, 1915, p. 154. The area that is now the modern state of Michigan was separated from the Indiana Territory in 1805 and incorporated as the Territory of Michigan.Utley, Cutcheon, and Burton, Michigan as a Province, Territory and State, 1906, pp. 141–144. But with settlement of the area rapidly increasing, the area comprising the modern state of Indiana was reorganized in 1809 as the "Indiana Territory," with the remainder of the old Indiana Territory to the west organized as the Territory of Illinois.Esarey, A History of Indiana From Its Exploration to 1850, 1915, pp. 158–159. Indiana was admitted to statehood on December 9, 1816.Esarey, A History of Indiana From Its Exploration to 1850, 1915, pp. 214–219.
The Ohio River forms the border between Indiana and Kentucky. At one point, the westward-flowing Ohio River formed a sharp meander, and across the narrowest point of the neck of land ran a dry channel that filled with water only when the river was about  above flood stage. Two creeks emptied this channel (flowing northwest), and two other creeks ran eastward and westward along the channel to empty into the Ohio River. The peninsula formed by the meander was settled, and the individuals living there long believed themselves to be under the jurisdiction of the state of Indiana.Except for the first parenthetical note, this description is taken from the undisputed facts as described by Chief Justice Marshall. Handly's Lessee v. Anthony, 18 U. S. 374, 375–376. On January 27, 1810, the state of Kentucky enacted legislation asserting title over the river bed and all islands in the river up to the northwest bank of the Ohio River. Consequently, Kentucky granted to Handly title to the peninsula in question. Handly subsequently leased this land to a tenant, who brought suit against Anthony, a citizen of Indiana who had been granted title to the land by that state. Handly's lessee sought to have Anthony ejected from the land.
The district court held for the defendant Anthony, and plaintiff Handly's lessee appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
Decision
thumb|right|250px|Overview of the Ohio River, as claimed by Kentucky
thumb|right|250px|Map of the meander in question, now Union Township, Vanderburgh County, Indiana.
Chief Justice John Marshall delivered the opinion of the court.
Marshall first reviewed the facts of the case, including the various land grants of Virginia, the geography of the land in question, competing requests for instructions to the jury in the trial court, and the trial court's decision.Handly's Lessee v. Anthony, 18 U. S. 374, 374–378. The plaintiff had appealed on the basis of two questions: First, whether the land did, in fact, lie within the jurisdiction of Kentucky and, second, as to the trial court's instruction to the jury defining what the "river" constituted (e.g., did it include meanders).  Marshall argued the two questions are essentially the same, and addressed them as such.Handly's Lessee v. Anthony, 18 U. S. 374, 378–379.
The issue was that Virginia's cession to the United States declared the river, not a bank of the river, to be the proper boundary.Handly's Lessee v. Anthony, 18 U. S. 374, 379. In a major statement about interstate boundaries, Marshall declared:
When a great river is the boundary between two nations or states, if the original property is in neither, and there be no convention respecting it, each holds to the middle of the stream. But when, as in this case, one State is the original proprietor, and grants the territory on one side only, it retains the river within its own domain, and the newly created State extends to the river only. The river, however, is its boundary.
It was well established, Marshall said, that the creation of new land on the Indiana side of the river would clearly belong to Indiana.Handly's Lessee v. Anthony, 18 U. S. 374, 379–380. But the issue in the instant case was land delineated by the ebb and flow of the river.Handly's Lessee v. Anthony, 18 U. S. 374, 380. "Common consent" and "common convenience," Marshall said, had long established that the low water mark was the border mark, for otherwise states and nations would find their jurisdiction expanding and contracting with the seasons and the tides.Handly's Lessee v. Anthony, 18 U. S. 374, 380–381.
Based on this fact, Virginia must have intended for the Ohio River itself to be the boundary between Indiana and Kentucky and not a strip of land which was subject to the rise and fall of the water levels.Handly's Lessee v. Anthony, 18 U. S. 374, 378.  The majority refused to consider Kentucky's request that the Court define what constitutes an island, for not only was that request asking the Court to rule on a hypothetical question but to ask the Court to rule on an issue not based on the facts before it.Handly's Lessee v. Anthony, 18 U. S. 374, 381–382. Marshall noted that Kentucky itself had made this question moot in its Act of January 27, 1810, by asserting that the state's border only extended to the low-water mark of the northwestern side of the Ohio River (clearly limiting its claim only to that and not to land the river might cut off from Indiana during high water).  This proved critical to the Court.  Marshall concluded:Handly's Lessee v. Anthony, 18 U. S. 374, 382.
If a river, subject to tides, constituted the boundary of a State, and at flood the waters of the river flowed through a narrow channel, round an extensive body of land, but receded from that channel at ebb, so as to leave the land it surrounded at high water, connected with the main body of the country; this portion of territory would scarcely be considered as belonging to the State on the opposite side of the river, although that State should have the property of the river. The principle that a country bounded by a river extends to low water mark, a principle so natural, and of such obvious convenience as to have been generally adopted, would, we think, apply to that case. We perceive no sufficient reason why it should not apply to this.
Marshall admitted that the case involved highly complex, technical details. But "public convenience, and the avoidance of controversy... ought not to be defeated by those technical perplexities which may sometimes influence contracts between individuals."Handly's Lessee v. Anthony, 18 U. S. 374, 383. Marshall also briefly noted that the inhabitants of the peninsula had long been considered by both states to be citizens of Indiana, and the Court held that the recent disturbance of these assumptions should not hold as much weight as the longer-held views.Handly's Lessee v. Anthony, 18 U. S. 374, 384.
The judgment of the district court was affirmed, and the land held to belong to the state of Indiana.Handly's Lessee v. Anthony, 18 U. S. 374, 385.
Assessment
Handly's Lessee v. Anthony is considered a key ruling in the law of borders. However, its utility in American case law today is not clear. In 1966, the state of Ohio sued Kentucky, seeking to have it granted joint jurisdiction over the Ohio River with Kentucky.Zimmerman, Interstate Disputes: The Supreme Court's Original Jurisdiction, 2007, p. 74. In 1971, Ohio filed a motion to have the middle of the river set as the boundary. In Ohio v. Kentucky, 410 U.S. 641 (1973), the Supreme Court permitted Ohio to present its new materials, but nonetheless ruled against the state.Zimmerman, Interstate Disputes: The Supreme Court's Original Jurisdiction, 2007, p. 75. Associate Justice William O. Douglas wrote a stinging dissent in which he argued the Court had improperly made a determination regarding the law of demurrer. Ohio continued to pursue its suit, and in Ohio v. Kentucky, 444 U.S. 335 (1980) the Supreme Court largely disregarded the decision in Handly's Lessee regarding accretion of new land and held that 1792 low-water mark was the only correct boundary between the two states (giving Kentucky part of the Ohio River shoreline on the north side of the Ohio River).
References
Bibliography
Ayers, Edward L.; Gould, Lewis L.; Oshinsky, David M.; and Soderland, Jean R. American Passages: A History of the United States. Boston, Mass.: Wadsworth/Cengage Learning, 2009.
Esarey, Logan. A History of Indiana From Its Exploration to 1850. Indianapolis: W.K. Stewart Co., 1915.
Harrison, Lowell Hayes. Kentucky's Road to Statehood. Lexington, Ky.: University Press of Kentucky, 1992.
Hubbard, Bill. American Boundaries: The Nation, the States, the Rectangular Survey. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009.
Miller, Robert J. Native America, Discovered and Conquered: Thomas Jefferson, Lewis & Clark, and Manifest Destiny. Westport, Conn.: Praeger Publishers, 2006.
Utley, Henry M.; Cutcheon, Byron M.; and Burton, Clarence Monreo. Michigan as a Province, Territory and State. New York: Publishing Society of Michigan, 1906.
Zimmerman, Joseph F. Interstate Disputes: The Supreme Court's Original Jurisdiction. Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press, 2007.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:Internal territorial disputes of the United States
Category:Legal history of Indiana
Category:Legal history of Kentucky
Category:1820 in United States case law
Category:1820 in Indiana
Category:1820 in Kentucky
Category:Borders of Indiana
Category:Borders of Kentucky
"""

From "Hanna v. Plumer" ==> """
Hanna v. Plumer, 380 U.S. 460 (1965), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States, in which the Court further refined the Erie doctrine regarding when and by what means federal courts are obliged to apply state law in cases brought under diversity jurisdiction. The question in the instant case was whether Federal Rules of Civil Procedure governing service of process should yield to state rules governing the service of process in diversity cases. The Court ruled that under the facts of this case, federal courts shall apply the federal rule. The decision was drafted by John Hart Ely, who was then a law clerk for Earl Warren. 
Background of the case
On February 6, 1963, petitioner, a citizen of Ohio, filed her complaint in the District Court for the District of Massachusetts, claiming damages in excess of $10,000 for personal injuries resulting from an automobile accident in South Carolina, allegedly caused by the negligence of one Louise Plumer Osgood, a Massachusetts citizen deceased at the time of the filing of the complaint. Respondent, Mrs. Osgood's executor and also a Massachusetts citizen, was named as defendant. The Massachusetts rule at the time required personal service of process on the executor of an in-state defendant, while Fed. R. Civ. P. 4 (d)(1) required only that service be made on a competent adult who resides at the residence of the defendant. The plaintiff left process at the residence of the executor, and so complied with the federal rule but not the state rule. The District Court granted summary judgment to the executor for the plaintiff's failure to make adequate service of process, ruling that the state rule applied based on the Supreme Court's prior precedents. The United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit affirmed.
The Court's decision
Chief Justice Earl Warren delivered the majority opinion, which held that the adoption of rule 4(d)(1) did not overstep the constitutional boundaries or the legislative intent of Congress in enacting the Rules Enabling Act (28 U.S.C. 2072) noting that "...the test must be whether a rule really regulates procedure..." Thus it was appropriate to apply Rule 4(d)(1) (now FRCP (4)(e)(2)) and not Massachusetts law in the Federal District Court. In reaching this decision the Court stated that the rule that state and federal courts should reach outcomes substantially the same was not a "talisman" and that there were more basic principles governing Erie Railroad Co. v. Tompkins and its progeny (that is, cases dealing with how Federal courts should apply state law). The purpose of Erie was to 1) discourage "forum shopping" and 2) avoid inequitable administration of laws. The instant case must be viewed in this light. While the outcome of the current case is determined by which law is applied, the rights in question are not substantial enough to create problems of unequal protection and because in Erie and its progeny there was no explicit conflict between state and federal rules. Thus, in those cases the Court held not that state rules trumped federal rules but that the federal rules, narrowly construed, did not cover the dispute whereas in the current case the federal and state laws are in direct conflict and the court has been instructed to follow the Federal Rule in these cases and there is no constitutional reason not to do so. In short, outcome determinative judgments are important under the American legal system for deciding if a state or federal rule applies but in the current case denying the federal rule would remove any power whatsoever the federal courts have over their procedures. Harlan argued that forum shopping and equitable administration of laws were not the only concerns in Erie because public uncertainty over which laws govern would be debilitating and therefore state law controls where it is an issue of affecting "primary decisions respecting human conduct." Under this understanding federal laws could be trumped by a state law, whether substantive or procedural law, meaning that Harlan's test is somewhere in between the "outcome determinative test" which gives extreme deference to state laws and the "forum shopping/equitable administration test" given in the case at hand, which states that a party must "substantially" raise equal protection issues.
See also
 Erie Doctrine
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 380
 John Hart Ely
 Walker v. Armco Steel Corp. (applying Hanna's analysis to Fed. R. Civ. P. 3's effect on the tolling of statutes of limitations)
 Burlington Northern Railroad Co. v. Woods (applying Hanna's analysis to Fed. R. Civ. P. 38's grant of discretion to judges in administering penalties for frivolous appeals in light of Alabama's mandatory penalty)
 Stewart Organization, Inc. v. Ricoh Corp. (applying Hanna's analysis to 28 USC 1404 (change of venue) in light of Alabama's policy against forum selection clauses)
Further reading
External links
Rule 4(d)(1)
Rule 4(e)(2)(b)
Rules Enabling Act
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Diversity jurisdiction case law
Category:1965 in United States case law
Category:Conflict of laws case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Erie Doctrine
"""

From "Hannegan v. Esquire, Inc." ==> """
Hannegan v. Esquire, Inc., 327 U.S. 146 (1946), was a U.S. Supreme Court case argued between the United States Postal Service and Esquire magazine. In a unanimous decision, the Supreme Court ruled that the USPS was without statutory authority to revoke a periodical's second class permit on the basis of objectionable material that was not obscene.. 
 Background 
Hannegan v. Esquire, Inc. was the culmination of a bitter legal battle between Esquire magazine and the USPS that began in 1943. Taking offense to the Varga Girl and other pin-up style imagery, Postmaster General Frank Comerford Walker convened a hearing board in October 1943 to determine whether Esquire contained obscenity. A host of national figures were called in as witnesses to offer their "expertise" on whether the Varga Girl and other Esquire content was obscene, among them H. L. Mencken and Rev. Peter Marshall. The press had a field-day covering the affair and ridiculing the Postmaster General and his department. When the hearing board ruled 2–1 in favor of Esquire, Postmaster General Walker refused to accept their decision, and revoked Esquire's second-class mailing privileges. Esquire then filed suit in federal district court to enjoin the revocation order. Visiting Judge T. Whitfield Davidson ruled in favor of the Post Office in Esquire vs. Walker. Esquire appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals where Judge Thurman Arnold reversed the decision. Postmaster General Frank Walker (who was succeeded by Robert Hannegan in June 1945) appealed the case to the Supreme Court. In 1946 the Supreme Court handed down a unanimous decision in favor of Esquire.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice William O. Douglas wrote the opinion for the court:
To uphold the order of revocation would, therefore, grant the Postmaster General a power of censorship. Such a power is so abhorrent to our traditions that a purpose to grant it should not be easily inferred ... To withdraw the second-class rate from this publication today because its contents seemed to one official not good for the public would sanction withdrawal of the second-class rate tomorrow from another periodical whose social or economic views seemed harmful to another official ... Congress has left the Postmaster General with no power to prescribe standards for the literature or the art which a mailable periodical disseminates.Hannegan, 327 U.S. at 151-58.
The Hannegan v. Esquire, Inc. decision had important social implications for postwar society. The decision sanctioned the pin-up as a socially acceptable cultural symbol, and helped spur an unprecedented increase in pornographic magazines during the 1950s.
References
External links
Category:1946 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Postal Service litigation
Category:Esquire (magazine)
"""

From "Hans v. Louisiana" ==> """
Hans v. Louisiana, 134 U.S. 1 (1890), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court determining that the Eleventh Amendment prohibits a citizen of a U.S. state to sue that state in a federal court.. Citizens cannot bring suits against their own state for cases related to the federal constitution and federal laws.  The court left open the question of whether a citizen may sue his or her state in state courts. That ambiguity was resolved in Alden v. Maine (1999), in which the Court held that a state's sovereign immunity forecloses suits against a state government in state court..
Facts
The plaintiff, Hans, was a citizen of the state of Louisiana. Hans owned bonds issued by the state, and was concerned that a recent change to the state constitution would render the bonds invalid. Hans filed a suit against the state in the United States District Court, asserting that Louisiana was impairing the obligations of a contract, which was forbidden by Article I, Section 10 of the United States Constitution.
Issue
The question facing the Court was "whether a state can be sued in a Circuit Court of the United States by one of its own citizens upon a suggestion that the case is one that arises under the Constitution or laws of the United States."134 U.S. 1, at 9. The Court noted that the Constitution does not specifically provide for federal jurisdiction in suits between a citizen and a state, but Article III does give the federal courts jurisdiction over "all cases" arising under the Constitution and laws of the United States. Here, Hans was asserting a violation of the federal Constitution as his cause of action.
Furthermore, the Court was well aware that nearly a century earlier, in the Supreme Court decision in Chisholm v. Georgia, , holding that states could be sued in federal courts by citizens of other states, had sparked negative reaction, and two years later Congress and the states expressed their will in the Eleventh Amendment. That Amendment expressly forbade citizens of one state from suing another state, but said nothing about citizens suing their own state. Thus the Court was left to resolve the issue of whether such a suit was therefore allowed.
Result
thumb|alt=The Fuller Court in 1890.|The Fuller Court in 1890.
Justice Joseph Bradley, writing for the Court, first examined the discussions surrounding the ratification of the Constitution. He noted that Alexander Hamilton had written a passage in The Federalist Papers, in  Federalist No. 81, assuring his audience that the Constitution would not remove the states' traditional immunity from lawsuits. The Court then examined similar language in statements made by James Madison and John Marshall in the Virginia convention held to ratify the Constitution. Both asserted that the federal power to hear claims brought by a state against a citizen of another state would not apply in the reverse, hence that one state could not be sued in federal court by citizens of another.
The Court suggested that the framers of the Constitution had not addressed the possibility of a citizen suing his own state because such a thing would simply be inconceivable to them. At the time the Constitution was written, states had always been immune from such suits, unless the state itself consented to be sued. Furthermore, the Judiciary Acts of 1789 and 1802 had granted the federal courts jurisdiction "concurrent with the courts of the several states," indicating that the Congress had not contemplated the possibility that the federal courts would have any powers unknown to the state courts.
Finally, the Court noted the argument made by Justice Marshall in another case, that the Supreme Court could hear appeals of a state's successful suit against a citizen precisely because this was not the same thing as a citizen's suit against the state. Instead, Marshall compared them to suits against the United States, which were clearly forbidden at the time.
Harlan's concurrence
Justice John Marshall Harlan wrote a brief concurring opinion, agreeing with the outcome in the case, but asserting that the Court's criticism of the Chisholm case was misplaced. Harlan thought that Chisholm had been decided correctly, based on the language of the Constitution at the time of the decision.
Later developments
Ex parte Young (1908) determined that a citizen could sue a state official to prevent that official from carrying out a state policy that was deemed unconstitutional. Fitzpatrick v. Bitzer found that the Fourteenth Amendment gave the Congress the power to abrogate state immunity from suit to the extent that this was necessary to protect Constitutional rights protected by the Amendment.
In 1987, Welch v. Texas Department of Highways led to a 5–4 decision in the U.S. Supreme Court, with Justice Antonin Scalia "concurring in part and concurring in the judgment." Four justices upheld Hans, while Justice Antonin Scalia concluded that Congress had assumed Hans when enacting the Jones Act and the Federal Employer's Liability Act.
In the late 1990s, the Rehnquist court issued a series of decisions reinforcing state immunity from suit under the Eleventh Amendment, starting with Seminole Tribe v. Florida (1996).
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 134
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:1890 in United States case law
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:Legal history of Louisiana
Category:1890 in Louisiana
Category:Government bonds issued by the United States
"""

From "Hansberry v. Lee" ==> """
__NOTOC__
Hansberry v. Lee, 311 U.S. 32 (1940), is a famous and commonly-used case in civil procedure classes for teaching that res judicata does not apply to an individual whose interests were not adequately represented in a prior class action. The case was successfully argued by the civil rights attorney Earl B. Dickerson.
The facts of the case dealt with a racially-restrictive covenant, which barred African Americans from purchasing or leasing land in the Washington Park Subdivision of Chicago's Woodlawn neighborhood. A prior class action lawsuit, Burke v. Kleiman, named as class members all homeowners who had signed the covenant or whose preceding owners had signed the covenant, and the suit sought to enforce the covenant against an individual who was attempting to lease his home to an African American. The defendant in that class action argued that the covenant should not be enforced because of changed conditions. Rejecting that argument, the Illinois state court held that the covenant was enforceable.
Years later, a homeowner who had signed the restrictive covenant sold his home to Carl Augustus Hansberry, the father of Lorraine Hansberry. Lee sought to enforce the racially restrictive covenant and void the sale. The defendants, which included Carl Hansberry as well as the seller, argued that the restrictive covenant was not enforceable because owners of only 54% of the subdivision frontage had signed it, and the terms of the covenant established that it would go into effect only if owners of at least 95% of subdivision frontage had signed the covenant. Relying on the principle of res judicata, the Illinois courts refused to consider the new argument. Noting that the covenant had been judged valid in the prior class action and that the seller had been a member of the class, the Illinois courts held that the seller was bound by that judgment. Accordingly, he could not sell his home to Hansberry.
The United States Supreme Court reversed, holding that the state courts' application of res judicata violated the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The Court stated that members of the class in Burke v. Kleiman would have had conflicting interests: some signatories to the covenant would have wanted it to be enforced, and some signatories would not have wanted it to be enforced. The Court explained:
Without a sufficiently identical interest, the Court held that the interests of the class members could not have been adequately represented and that binding them to a judgment in a case in which they were not adequately represented would violate their due process rights.
Later, racially-restrictive covenants were held by Shelley v. Kraemer,  to be unconstitutional under the Fourteenth Amendment, a case in which the private plaintiffs seeking to enforce such a covenant were invoking the power of the state courts.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 311
 A Raisin in the Sun
Earl B. Dickerson
References
External links
Category:Covenant (law)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States civil due process case law
Category:United States class action case law
Category:United States res judicata case law
Category:1940 in United States case law
"""

From "Hanson v. Denckla" ==> """
Hanson v. Denckla, 357 U.S. 235 (1958), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States regarding personal jurisdiction in the context of assets held in trust.
Factual background
A family trust was created by Mrs. Donner, who lived in Pennsylvania.  The trust was incorporated in Delaware, and a Delaware bank was the trustee.  Donner later changed her state of domicile upon moving to Florida where she eventually died.  The will was admitted to probate in Florida, and the court addressed the question of whether the Florida court or the Delaware trustee had jurisdiction over the trust.
Decision
The Court decided that the Florida court lacked jurisdiction based on the minimum contacts test that had developed over the course of several decades of Supreme Court Jurisprudence.  The trust company had no substantial business with Florida and no offices in Florida.  The only contact with Florida was the fact that Donner moved there, which was ruled insufficient to support jurisdiction.Yeazell, C.  Civil Procedure, Seventh Edition.  Aspen Publishers, New York, NY: 2008.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 357
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1958 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Harbison v. Bell" ==> """
Harbison v. Bell, 556 U.S. 180 (2009), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States that held that federal law gave indigent death row inmates the right to federally appointed counsel to represent them in post-conviction state clemency proceedings, when the state has declined to do so. Certiorari was granted by the Supreme Court on June 23, 2008.
 Opinion 
Justice Stevens delivered the judgment of the court, stating:
 Subsequent developments 
The death sentence of Edward Harbison was commuted to life imprisonment without parole by Tennessee Governor Phil Breseden in January 2011, shortly before Breseden left office.
Justice Scalia dissented in substance:
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court decisions on capital punishment
 References 
External links
 Harbison v. Bell at SCOTUS blog
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States death penalty case law
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Capital punishment in Tennessee
"""

From "Hardin v. Boyd" ==> """
Hardin v. Boyd, 113 U.S. 756 (1885), was a motion to dismiss a lawsuit on county bonds issued in aid of a railroad. Judgment below for the plaintiff. The defendant brought a writ of error to reverse it. Subsequently, to the judgment, the county settled with the plaintiff and other bondholders, by giving them new bonds bearing a less rate of interest, and the old bonds, which were the cause of action in this suit, were surrendered and destroyed. Fraud and collusion was alleged in the handling of a will which transferred ownership of property in Crittenden County, Arkansas. These facts were brought before this Court by affidavits and transcripts from the county records, accompanied by a motion to dismiss the writ of error..
The court saw no reason to impeach the transaction by which the new bonds were substituted for the old, and for the judgment it was asked to reverse, so the writ of error was dismissed.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Crittenden County, Arkansas
"""

From "Harlow v. Fitzgerald" ==> """
Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800 (1982), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court involving the doctrines of qualified immunity and absolute immunity.
Background
Arthur Ernest Fitzgerald was a deputy for management systems in the Office of the Secretary of the Air Force. He discovered $2 billion in cost overruns and technical problems in the Lockheed C5-A program that had been concealed by the officials at the Pentagon. He testified before the Joint Economic Committee in Congress and was then blacklisted from roles of any significance.
Following the release of the Watergate tapes, Fitzgerald was mentioned by President Richard Nixon, who boasted that he had been responsible for firing Fitzgerald.
Fitzgerald filed a lawsuit against government officials claiming that he lost his position as a contractor with the US Air Force because of his whistleblower testimony made before Congress in 1969. Absolute immunity was claimed by the officials involved, including Nixon and several of his aides, which generated several additional cases that made their way to the Supreme Court. Nixon was named in the lawsuit but was found to have absolute immunity in his role as president, as decided in Nixon v. Fitzgerald.
Harlow v. Fitzgerald examined whether that degree of immunity extended to the President's aides.
Opinion
In an 8–1 decision, the Court held that government officials other than the President were generally entitled to qualified immunity. An official can obtain absolute immunity but must "first show that the responsibilities of his office embraced a function so sensitive as to require a total shield from liability. He must then demonstrate that he was discharging the protected function when performing the act for which liability is asserted."
Despite its immediate application to White House aides, the case is regarded as most important for its revision of the qualified immunity standard that is applicable to government actors, more generally. The Court held that "government officials performing discretionary functions, generally are shielded from liability for civil damages insofar as their conduct does not violate clearly established statutory or constitutional rights of which a reasonable person would have known."
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1982 in United States case law
Category:Second Enforcement Act of 1871 case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Harman v. Forssenius" ==> """
Harman v. Forssenius, 380 U.S. 528 (1965), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that Virginia's partial elimination of the poll tax violated the Twenty-fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Virginia attempted to avoid the effect of the 24th Amendment by creating an "escape clause" to the poll tax. In lieu of paying the poll tax, a prospective voter could apply for a certificate establishing a place of residence in Virginia. The application had to be made six months prior to an election, a measure expected to decrease the number of eligible voters.
In the 1965 Supreme Court decision of Harman v. Forssenius, the Court unanimously found such measures unconstitutional and declared that, for federal elections, "the poll tax is abolished absolutely as a prerequisite to voting, and no equivalent or milder substitute may be imposed."Harman v. Forssenius, majority opinion.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Twenty-fourth Amendment case law
Category:1965 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
"""

From "Harmelin v. Michigan" ==> """
Harmelin v. Michigan, 501 U.S. 957 (1991), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States under the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The Court ruled that the Eighth Amendment's Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause allowed a state to impose a life sentence without the possibility of parole for the possession of  of cocaine.. 
The Court's narrow ruling left a major question of Eighth Amendment law unresolved.  Since the Court's decision in Gregg v. Georgia,. the Court had incorporated a detailed proportionality analysis into the cruel and unusual punishment analysis required in capital cases. The defendant Ronald Harmelin directly asked the Court to extend the reach of that analysis to noncapital cases such as his. Although five Justices agreed that Harmelin's sentence was not unconstitutionally cruel and unusual, six Justices agreed that the Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause bore some kind of proportionality analysis. Yet among those six, three supported a proportionality principle that is highly deferential to legislative judgments, while three others supported a more searching proportionality analysis that would have struck down Michigan's mandatory life-without-parole sentence for possessing more than  of cocaine ().
The State of Michigan was represented by Richard Thompson and Michael Modelski. Thompson's other credits include serving as a prosecutor of Dr. Jack Kevorkian. Various state attorneys general, as well as the United States Solicitor General, filed amicus curiae briefs on behalf of the State of Michigan. The Court-appointed counsel for Harmelin, the ACLU and a group of criminal defense attorneys filed briefs in support of the defendant's position.
The majority ruling
The only aspect of the decision that garnered the vote of five Justices was the ultimate conclusion that the mandatory life without parole sentence required by the Michigan law forbidding the possession of more than 650 grams of cocaine was not cruel and unusual punishment.  "Severe, mandatory penalties may be cruel, but they are not unusual in the constitutional sense, having been employed in various forms throughout our Nation's history."  Nor did the Eighth Amendment require a sentencing court to consider mitigating factors in noncapital cases. It was enough that Michigan law allowed for executive clemency, or that the legislature might at some later date retroactively reduce the sentence for Harmelin's crime.
The proportionality debate
The Justices could not agree, however, whether and to what extent the Eighth Amendment imposed a proportionality requirement in noncapital sentencing proceedings. Justice Antonin Scalia, as is typical of his originalist interpretation of the Constitution, introduced historical evidence in support of his argument that the Eighth Amendment imposes no proportionality requirement at all. Justice Anthony Kennedy argued in favor of a vague proportionality principle that allowed the Court to uphold Harmelin's sentence. And Justice Byron White argued that Harmelin's sentence was the sort of "excessive" sentence forbidden by the Eighth Amendment.
Scalia's originalist argument
Through his opinion in Harmelin, Justice Scalia voiced his disagreement with the Court's decision in Solem v. Helm, , which was decided before he was appointed to the Court. He first identified the English Bill of Rights of 1689 as the source of the Eighth Amendment's ban on cruel and unusual punishment.  According to Scalia, Solem assumed that the Americans who adopted the Eighth Amendment in 1791 understood that language in the same way as the English of 1689. Scalia disputed this hypothesis. He pointed to a dispute among historians about which royal abuses the Declaration was intended to combat. Some historians contend that these abuses were the harsh punishments for treason—drawing and quartering, beheading, disemboweling—meted out by the Bloody Assizes. Other historians contend that the Declaration was meant to rein in the enormously arbitrary sentencing power the king had exercised in sentencing a notorious perjurer. Regardless, Scalia argued that those who wrote the Declaration considered a punishment to be "cruel and unusual" only if it were outside of the judge's power to impose.  The phrase "'cruel and unusual' is treated as interchangeable with 'cruel and illegal.'"  For this reason, the English of the 17th century did not believe a "cruel and unusual" punishment was a disproportionate one.
For Scalia, though, the more important question was what the words "cruel and unusual" meant to the Framers of the Bill of Rights in 1791 when the Eighth Amendment was adopted. "Even if one assumes that the Founders knew the precise meaning of that English antecedent..., a direct transplant of the English meaning to the soil of American constitutionalism would in any case have been impossible." Because federal common law incorporated no common-law crimes, the Framers could only have meant to check legislative power. They understood the word "unusual" to refer to things that were "not regularly or customarily employed."  Furthermore, if the Framers had meant to outlaw 'disproportional' punishments, they would have used that word, as many contemporary state constitutions did. "There is little doubt that those who framed, proposed, and ratified the Bill of Rights were aware of such provisions [outlawing disproportional punishments], yet chose not to replicate them."  Finally, the scant direct evidence available from state ratifying conventions confirmed for Scalia the view that an "unusual punishment" was a particular mode of punishment that was infrequently imposed, not one that was excessively lengthy in comparison to other punishments imposed for similar crimes.
For these reasons, Scalia argued that the proportionality test from Solem should be overruled.  Solem had held that a particular punishment was unconstitutionally disproportional if (1) the crime was relatively minor in comparison to the punishment, (2) the sentence imposed in the jurisdiction for similarly grave offenses was less, and (3) other jurisdictions impose a lesser sentence for the same crime. Scalia argued that (1) it was difficult to assess the gravity of a particular crime, and thus (2) it would be difficult to determine whether similarly grave crimes carried a lesser sentence. As for whether other jurisdictions imposed a lesser sentence for the same crime, Scalia conceded that it is easy to figure this out, but that this inquiry has "no conceivable relevance to the Eighth Amendment." If a mode of punishment was "unusual" because it was infrequently imposed, the three factors of the Solem test hardly mattered to Scalia. In a federal system, moreover, some state will always have the distinction of imposing the harshest punishment for a particular crime. "The Eighth Amendment is not a ratchet, whereby a temporary consensus on leniency for a particular crime fixes a permanent constitutional maximum, disabling the States from giving effect to altered beliefs and responding to changed social conditions." Because the proportionality requirement was of recent vintage, "issued 185 years after the Eighth Amendment was adopted," and then only in capital cases, Scalia reasoned it should be abandoned entirely, or at least limited only to capital cases.
White's proportionality argument
Justice White's point of departure was the fact that "the Amendment does not refer to proportionality in so many words, but it does forbid 'excessive' fines, a restraint that suggests that a determination of excessiveness should be based at least in part on whether the fine imposed is disproportionate to the crime committed." Accordingly, the Eighth Amendment imposed a strong proportionality requirement not simply on fines, but on all criminal punishments, including prison terms.
White took issue with three premises of Scalia's argument. First, for White, the fact that the Framers were not as plain-spoken as Scalia would have preferred was no obstacle to concluding that the Eighth Amendment did indeed contain a proportionality requirement. Second, although the newly formed federal government did not, in 1791, have any "track record with respect to criminal law," they had lived under the regime of the several states for some time, and so there would be some benchmarks by which to evaluate proportionality of punishments. Third, even if the original understanding of the Eighth Amendment did not include a proportionality requirement, 20th-century decisions of the Court had imposed one. White takes Scalia to task for claiming at once that the Eighth Amendment must have no proportionality guarantee whatsoever and then that that guarantee can apply only in capital cases.
White's argument proceeds from the premise that "the scope of the prohibition against cruel and unusual punishments has long understood the limitations of a purely historical analysis." In other words, when it comes to the Eighth Amendment, the Court must employ a flexible and dynamic interpretation.  
The Court therefore has recognized that a punishment may violate the Eighth Amendment if it is contrary to the evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society.  In evaluating a punishment under this test, we have looked not to our own conceptions of decency, but to those of modern American society as a whole in determining what standards have evolved, and thus have focused not on the subjective views of individual Justices, but on objective factors to the maximum possible extent."  It is this type of objective factor which forms the basis for the tripartite proportionality analysis set forth in Solem.
Finally, White argued that the Solem test works well in practice. Simply because courts will be reviewing sentences for proportionality does not mean that courts will strike them down with great frequency. Solem requires a certain amount of deference to the legislature, and courts have proven able to apply that amount of deference. And although Scalia concedes that an egregious prison term—such as life in prison for overtime parking—would be unconstitutional, White faults him for striking such extreme punishments down in a principled manner. White also argues that adopting Scalia's view of the proportionality requirement would strike at the foundation of the Court's capital punishment jurisprudence, much of which would then "rest on quicksand".
Kennedy's "narrow proportionality principle"
Justice Kennedy, joined by Justices O'Connor and Souter, attempted to forge a middle ground between the positions of Justices Scalia and White. Justice Kennedy argued that "stare decisis counsels our adherence to the narrow proportionality principle that has existed in our Eighth Amendment jurisprudence for 80 years." Under Kennedy's formulation of the proportionality principle, Harmelin's sentence could stand, along with the possibility that an equally harsh sentence for a less severe crime might not.
As an initial matter, Kennedy identified four principles that undergird the Eighth Amendment's proportionality principle as he understood it. First, "the fixing of prison terms for specific crimes involves a substantive penological judgment that, as a general matter, is properly within the province of legislatures, not courts." Second, the Eighth Amendment does not mandate the adoption of one theory of punishment over another—states are free to tailor their punishments to meet the needs of either a deterrence rationale, a retribution rationale, or both or some other rationale. Third, in light of these first two principles, there is bound to be some variation of punishments between and within particular jurisdictions. Thus, the intra- and interjurisdictional comparison required by the Solem test would frequently prove unworkable. Fourth, any proportionality analysis required by the Eighth Amendment should be informed by objective factors to the maximum possible extent.
Justice Kennedy pointed to the two aspects of Harmelin's sentence that might cause difficulty under the Eighth Amendment—the severity of the sentence, along with its mandatory nature.  Life without parole is the second most severe sentence known to American law, after the death penalty. Yet Harmelin's crime was more severe than the crime at issue in Solem. In Solem, the Court struck down a life-without-parole sentence imposed for the crime of uttering a no-account check; Harmelin, however, was convicted of possessing 650 grams of cocaine. Uttering is "one of the most passive felonies a person could commit." The illegal drug trade, by contrast, begets a tremendous amount of violence. In view of these observations, a legislature could rationally conclude that a life sentence without parole is appropriate to deter others from distributing cocaine and to achieve an appropriate amount of retribution. Because Harmelin's crime was more serious than the crimes involved in other cases where the Court had confronted the constitutionality of a life sentence, Kennedy reasoned that it might be appropriate to dispense with the detailed Solem analysis. "A better reading of our cases leads to the conclusion that intrajurisdictional and interjurisdictional analyses are appropriate only in the rare case in which a threshold comparison of the crime committed and the sentence imposed leads to an inference of gross disproportionality."
The mandatory nature of Harmelin's sentence also did not require setting it aside. First, as Scalia agreed, the Eighth Amendment did not require the trial court to allow Harmelin to present mitigating evidence. Second, if the Court were to set Harmelin's sentence aside, it would necessarily have to reject the judgment of the legislature, where the initial responsibility for making the substantive judgment about appropriate punishments rests. Third, Michigan's system did not entirely lack mechanisms for considering the individual circumstances of a particular defendant. Prosecutors have discretion in bringing charges, the governor has the power to grant clemency post hoc, and the legislature has the power to retroactively modify the sentence for all persons convicted of Harmelin's crime.
White's criticism of Kennedy's argument
For Justice White, Kennedy's narrow proportionality principle effectively "eviscerates" Solem, leaving only an "empty shell" in its place.  How could the inter- and intrajurisdictional comparisons required by Solem be anything but objective?  And if, as Kennedy conceded, proportionality analysis should be informed by objective factors as much as possible, how else could those objective factors come into play except through the Solem test?  See the lengthy discussion in support of the Solem test in chapters 1 and 2 in Dennis J. Baker, The Right Not to be Criminalized: Demarcating Criminal Law's Authority (Ashgate, 2011)
Because White disagreed that Solem should be abandoned, he proceeded to apply it to Harmelin's sentence, and concluded that Harmelin's sentence was unconstitutional. First, because Michigan has no death penalty, the life-without-parole sentence for possession of  of cocaine was the most severe available under Michigan law.  Second, it reserved the sentence for only one other crime—first-degree murder. Third, no other jurisdiction imposed such a severe sentence for possession of 650 grams of cocaine. Alabama came close, White observed, but only when the defendant possessed  of cocaine. Thus, White concluded, Solem required the Court to strike down Harmelin's sentence.
Aftermath
In 1998, the Michigan legislature revised the law to make "650-lifer" offenders eligible for parole after 17-20 years in prison. The change was applied retroactively to people like Harmelin. 
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 501
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause case law
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:1991 in United States case law
Category:Cocaine in the United States
Category:Legal history of Michigan
"""

From "Harmon v. Tyler" ==> """
Harmon v. Tyler, 273 U.S. 668 (1927), was a unanimous United States Supreme Court decision addressing racial segregation in residential areas. The Court held that a New Orleans, Louisiana ordinance requiring residential segregation based on race violated the Fourteenth Amendment.  The Court relied on the authority of Buchanan v. Warley.Casner, A.J. et al.  Cases and Text on Property.  Aspen Publishers, New York, NY: 2004, p. 788
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:1927 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:20th century in New Orleans
Category:United States racial desegregation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
"""

From "Harper & Row v. Nation Enterprises" ==> """
Harper & Row v. Nation Enterprises, 471 U.S. 539 (1985), was a United States Supreme Court decision in which public interest in learning about a historical figure's impressions of a historic event was held not to be sufficient to show fair use of material otherwise protected by copyright..  Defendant, The Nation, had summarized and quoted substantially from A Time to Heal, President Gerald Ford's forthcoming memoir of his decision to pardon former president Richard Nixon. When Harper & Row, who held the rights to A Time to Heal, brought suit, The Nation asserted that its use of the book was protected under the doctrine of fair use, because of the great public interest in a historical figure's account of a historic incident. The Court rejected this argument holding that the right of first publication was important enough to find in favor of Harper.
Facts
Former President Gerald Ford had written a memoir, A Time to Heal, including an account of his decision to pardon Richard Nixon. Ford had licensed his publication rights to Harper & Row, which had contracted for excerpts of the memoir to be printed in Time magazine. Instead, The Nation magazine published 300 to 400 words of verbatim quotes from the 500-page book without the permission of Ford, Harper & Row, or Time. Based on this prior publication, Time withdrew from the contract (as it was permitted to by a clause therein), and Harper & Row filed a lawsuit against The Nation for copyright infringement. The Nation asserted as a defense that Ford was a public figure, and his reasons for pardoning Nixon were of vital interest, and that appropriation in such circumstances should qualify as a fair use.
The federal trial judge, Richard Owen, ruled in favor of Harper & Row and awarded damages. The Second Circuit Court of Appeals reversed the ruling, finding that The Nations actions in quoting the memoirs were protected by fair use privilege. Harper & Row appealed this ruling to the Supreme Court.
Issue
The issue before the Court was whether a fair use existed where the purported infringer published a public figure's unpublished work on an important public event.
 Majority and minority opinions 
The Court, in an opinion by Justice O'Connor noted that the right of first publication is a particularly strong right, and held that there was no 'public figure' exception to copyright protection, asserting that "the promise of copyright would be an empty one if it could be avoided merely by dubbing the infringement a fair use 'news report' of the book." The Court applied the statutory four factor test to determine if the use was fair, and made the following findings:
 The purpose or character of the use weighed against a finding of fair use because, "The Nations use had not merely the incidental effect but the intended purpose of supplanting the copyright holder's commercially valuable right of first publication." The Nations intent to benefit by depriving the copyright holders of their right to first publication suggest that this use was not "fair."
 Although the nature of A Time to Heal was primarily informative or factual, and thus deserving of less copyright protection, the work had substantial expressive value. If The Nation had limited themselves to only reporting the factual descriptions in the work, the second factor would have weighed in favor of finding fair use. (Justice Brennan, dissenting, suggests that the Court does not take enough account of how much of The Nations report was factual.) However, The Nation "did not stop at isolated phrases and instead excerpted subjective descriptions and portraits of public figures whose power lies in the author's individualized expression."
 The amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the copyrighted work as a whole weighed against a finding of fair use. Although the "amount" was small, it constituted a "substantial" portion of the work because the excerpt was the "heart of the work". The Court noted that an infringer could not defend infringing copying by pointing to how much else they could have copied, but did not.
 The effect of the use on the potential market for the value of the copyrighted work also weighed against a finding of fair use. The Nations infringement led to actual, particular harm, Time'''s cancellation of their publishing contract.
Justice Brennan dissented, joined by Justices White and Marshall. Citing the text of the law under which Harper's brought their lawsuit ("The enactment of copyright legislation by Congress under the terms of the Constitution is not based upon any natural right that the author has in his writings ... but upon the ground that the welfare of the public will be served and progress of science and useful arts will be promoted by securing to authors for limited periods the exclusive rights to their writings."H.R.Rep. No. 2222, 60th Cong., 2d Sess., 7 (1909)), Brennan found that the importance of "the robust debate of public issues" here outweighed the limited power of copyright ownership.  He stated that the descriptions of the work were non-copyrightable, and the direct quotations were so few, compared to the size of the work as a whole, that The Nation's article did not constitute an appropriation of Harper's copyright.  Brennan criticized the court for finding copyright infringement technically based on the 300 words that were quoted in order to protect Harper's interest in being the first to publish the non-copyrightable historical information in the work.
Later treatment
The opinion was later cited by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit hearing the case of Salinger v. Random House (1987), in which J.D. Salinger had objected to the publication of his unpublished letters. The court noted that the Supreme Court ruling on Harper & Row v. Nation Enterprises (1985) had observed "the scope of fair use is narrower with respect to unpublished works," but denied that the unpublished nature of Salinger's letters was decisive. ("[The Supreme Court] stressed the tailoring of fair use analysis to the particular case... It neither stated nor implied a categorical rule barring fair use of unpublished works."Salinger v. Random House, Inc., 650 F. Supp. 413, 421 (S.D.N.Y. 1986), rev'd, 811 F.2d 90 (2d Cir. 1987), opinion supplemented on denial of rehearing, 818 F.2d 252 (2d Cir. 1987)
The court went on to note that the meaning of Harper is somewhat ambiguous. Either, they reasoned, there are fewer cases in which fair use may be found when the original work is unpublished or less material may be copied from unpublished works. The court ultimately decided that the first was true, and that unpublished works normally have complete protection against any copying of protected expression.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 371
 List of United States Supreme Court copyright case law 
 Nation Magazine v. United States Department of Defense''
 Brooks Thomas
References
Further reading
.
.
.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:Fair use case law
Category:Gerald Ford
Category:The Nation
"""

From "Harper v. Virginia State Board of Elections" ==> """
Harper v. Virginia State Board of Elections, 383 U.S. 663 (1966), was a case in which the U.S. Supreme Court found that Virginia's poll tax was unconstitutional under the equal protection clause of the 14th Amendment.. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, eleven southern states established poll taxes as part of their disenfranchisement of most blacks and many poor whites. The Twenty-fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution (1964) prohibited poll taxes in federal elections; five states (Alabama, Arkansas, Mississippi, Texas and Virginia) continued to require poll taxes for voters in state elections. By this ruling, the Supreme Court banned the use of poll taxes in state elections.
Background
The case was filed by Virginia resident Annie E. Harper, who was unable to register without having to pay a poll tax.  She brought the suit against the Virginia State Board of Elections on behalf of other poor residents and herself. Harper had previously argued the case before a U.S. district court on October 21, 1964, where it was consolidated with a similar case filed by Evelyn Thomas Butts, Butts v. Harrison, Governor of Virginia and argued under the name Harper v. Virginia State Board of Elections. In the initial case lawyers for Harper and Butts argued against the constitutionality of the poll tax, but on November 12 the courts dismissed the case, citing 1930s precedents established by the United States Supreme Court.
Harper quickly appealed this decision to the Supreme Court, but in a separate case from Butts. Butts later appealed in a separate suit, but the two cases were argued together during late January 1966.
Decision
In a 6 to 3 vote, the Court ruled in favor of Ms. Harper.  The Court noted that "a state violates the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution whenever it makes the affluence of the voter or payment of any fee an electoral standard. Voter qualifications have no relation to wealth."
This ruling reversed a prior decision by the Court, Breedlove v. Suttles, , which upheld the state's ability to impose poll taxes as within its powers. There had been no relevant change in the text of the Constitution between 1937 and 1966. The 24th Amendment, adopted in 1964, outlawed the poll tax in federal elections, but did not speak to the question of state elections, which was the question involved in the Harper case. The Court membership had changed, and the justices examined the issue from a different point of view.
Dissents
Joined by Justice Potter Stewart, Justice John Marshall Harlan II dissented, arguing that the Court had allowed some forms of discriminatory voting qualifications without violating the equal protection clause, e.g., Lassiter v. Northampton County Board of Elections (literacy test), Breedlove v. Suttles (poll tax on men), as long as it was rational. In this case, Virginia's poll tax could be deemed rational because of the state's desire to collect revenue and the belief that people who pay to vote might have more interest in the state's policies.
Justice Hugo Black filed a separate dissent. Black based his dissent mainly on stare decisis basis. As a textualist, he also criticized the majority for expanding the meaning of the Fourteenth Amendment by using what he called the old "natural law due process formula". He emphasized that new meanings can be added to the Constitution only through amendments.
Justice Black tended to have a complicated approach to the fourteenth amendment, as he had vehemently defended and joined the court's decision in Brown v. Board of Education (1954), which ordered the desegregation of public schools in the nation.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 383
 Joseph A. Jordan Jr.
References
 External links 
The Voting Rights Act of 1965, USDOJ.gov
John C. Bonifaz, "Not the Rich, More Than the Poor: Poverty, Race, and Campaign Finance Reform"
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:History of voting rights in the United States
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Twenty-fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1966 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Virginia
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:African-American history of Virginia
Category:Virginia elections
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1966 in Virginia
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Harris v. Alabama" ==> """
Harris v. Alabama, 513 U.S. 504 (1995), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that allowing the judge to impose a death sentence and making the jury recommendation non-binding even when it calls for life imprisonment is constitutional.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court decisions on capital punishment
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1995 in United States case law
"""

From "Harris v. Arizona Independent Redistricting Commission" ==> """
Harris v. Arizona Independent Redistricting Commission, 578 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the one person, one vote principle under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment allows a state's redistricting commission slight variances in drawing of legislative districts provided that the variance does not exceed 10 percent.Harris v. Arizona Independent Redistricting Comm'n, . The Court found that the map, created by a bipartisan commission on the basis of the 2010 census, was constitutional.
See also
Evenwel v. Abbott 
Reynolds v. Sims — a United States Supreme Court case that ruled that state legislature districts had to be roughly equal in population.
 References 
External links
Scotusblog
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
Category:United States One Person, One Vote Legal Doctrine
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:Redistricting in the United States
Category:Congressional districts of Arizona
"""

From "Harris v. Balk" ==> """
Harris v. Balk, 198 U.S. 215 (1905), was a United States Supreme Court case that exemplified the bizarre types of jurisdiction state courts (and therefore plaintiffs) could assert through quasi in rem actions before International Shoe's (1945). "minimum contacts" test replaced Pennoyer's (1878). principles of "power and notice".
This case involved three parties:  Harris, Balk, and Epstein.  Harris owed Balk money and Balk owed Epstein money. Thus, there was no debt relationship between Harris and Epstein. Harris and Balk lived in North Carolina while Epstein lived in Maryland. Harris traveled to Maryland. While he was there, Epstein attached the debt Harris owed Balk in order for Epstein to obtain jurisdiction over Balk. Through this, Epstein hoped to obtain the debt that Balk owed him by accessing the debt Harris owed Balk.  Consequently, Epstein obtained a judgment against Balk which directed Harris to pay Epstein instead of Balk.
To understand the principles in this case, one must understand a little about quasi in rem actions and jurisdictional principles at the time. At that time, a state court could not assert in personam jurisdiction over someone who was not physically served process in that state. However, if a defendant, on whom in personam jurisdiction was unable to be asserted, owned property in the state in which plaintiff was situated, plaintiff could "attach" to the action whatever property defendant owned in that state. Such an action was labeled quasi-in rem and, when this occurred, state courts were permitted to assert jurisdiction over an out-of-state defendant on any matter, with the limitation that any remedy be limited to involving only the attached property.
Applying the above principles to this case, debt (money owed to someone) is considered actual property of the creditor. Importantly, at the time of Harris v. Balk, debt was considered to "follow the debtor" (i.e., wherever a debtor went, he brought along the debt he owed to his creditor). When Harris entered Maryland, he "brought along" the debt he owed to Balk (Harris's debt to Balk being Balk's property). This enabled Epstein to attach it in a quasi-in rem action and obtain jurisdiction over Balk.
The principles allowing the Maryland state court to assert jurisdiction in this case were subsequently overturned by the Supreme Court case in Shaffer v. Heitner (1977)..
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 198
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:United States civil procedure case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:1905 in United States case law
"""

From "Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc." ==> """
Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17 (1993), is a US labor law case in which the Supreme Court of the United States clarified the definition of a "hostile" or "abusive" work environment under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.  In a unanimous opinion written by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, the Court held that a determination about whether a work environment is hostile or abusive requires a consideration of all relevant circumstances..
Facts
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 states that it is "an unlawful employment practice for an employer . . . to discriminate against any individual with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, because of such individual's race, color, religion, sex, or national origin."
Teresa Harris claimed that the President of Forklift Systems, Inc, Charles Hardy, discriminated against her and subjected her to sexual innuendo at work on multiple occasions, including in front of other employees. She was a manager at the equipment rental company, between April 1985 and October 1987. Harris first complained directly to Hardy about his behavior in August 1987, and he claimed that he was kidding and apologized to Harris. After Harris complained, Hardy said that he would stop that kind of behavior, so Harris stayed at the job. However, in September, Hardy started harassing her again in front of other employees. Harris got her paycheck and quit her job at Forklift Systems, Inc. on October 1. After quitting, Harris sued Forklift Systems, Inc. Harris claimed that Hardy's behavior made an abusive work environment for her based on her gender under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. 
Judgment
District Court of Tennessee
The United States District Court for the District of Tennessee stated that Hardy's behavior did not make a cruel work environment for Harris. The District claimed that Hardy's conduct would have made any "reasonable woman" uncomfortable but would not have affected their psychological well being and performance at work. The District Court held that the evidence presented by Harris was not sufficient to show that Hardy's behavior actually affected the conditions of her employment; therefore, there was no Title VII violation.
Sixth Circuit, Court of Appeals
The United States Court of Appeals, Sixth Circuit, affirmed the District Court's decision. It said a ‘hostile environment’ had to ‘seriously affect psychological well-being’ or mean the plaintiff ‘suffer injury’. 
Supreme Court
The US Supreme Court, reversing the Courts below, held an abusive environment ‘that does not seriously affect employees’ psychological well-being can and often will detract from... job performance, discourage employees from staying on the job, or keep them from advancing in their careers.’ If the environment ‘would reasonably be perceived, and is perceived, as hostile or abusive’ this is enough. It remanded the case.Harris, 510 U.S. at 23. This suit was later settled outside of Court, and the terms were not released.
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor said the following:
See also
US labor law
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1993 in United States case law
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
Category:Sexual harassment in the United States
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States employment discrimination case law
Category:Harassment case law
Category:History of women in Tennessee
"""

From "Harris v. McRae" ==> """
Harris v. McRae, 448 U.S. 297 (1980), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that states participating in Medicaid are not required to fund medically necessary abortions for which federal reimbursement was unavailable as a result of the Hyde Amendment, which restricted the use of federal funds for abortion.. The Court also held that the funding restrictions of the Hyde Amendment did not violate the Fifth Amendment or the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment.
 Background 
In 1965, the US Congress amended Title XIX of the Social Security Act to create Medicaid, a voluntary program to provide federal funds to states that choose to provide reimbursement for certain medical expenses for the indigent.448 U.S. at 301.
In September 1976, Congress began to ban the use of federal funds to reimburse the cost of abortions under Medicaid.448 U.S. at 302. Initially, the only exception was if the life of the mother would be endangered by the fetus being carried to term.  The restrictions became known as the Hyde Amendment, after the measure's original sponsor, Illinois Representative Henry Hyde. The language of the 1980 Hyde Amendment provided:
In 1976, after the passage of the original Hyde Amendment, an action was brought in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York that sought to enjoin enforcement of its restrictions. The plaintiffs were Cora McRae, a New York Medicaid recipient who was in the first trimester of a pregnancy that she wished to abort; the New York City Health and Hospitals Corp., which operated hospitals providing abortion services; officers of the Women's Division of the Board of Global Ministries of the United Methodist Church; and the Women's Division itself.448 U.S. at 303. McRae sought to bring the action as a class action on behalf of other similarly-situated women. The District Court granted the class certification motion and permitted US Senators James L. Buckley and Jesse Helms as well as Hyde to intervene as defendants.
The district court granted the injunction on January 15, 1980 and found that the Hyde Amendment violated the Fifth Amendment's Due Process Clause and the First Amendment's Establishment Clause.
Supreme Court decision
Justice Stewart delivered the opinion of the Court in which Chief Justice Burger, Justice White, Justice Powell, and Justice Rehnquist joined. Justice White wrote an opinion concurring the judgment.  Justice Brennan wrote a dissent to which Justice Marshall and Justice Blackmun joined. Justice Marshall and Justice Blackmun also wrote separate dissents, and Justice Stevens did so as well.
The Court held that states participating in the Medicaid program were not obligated to fund medically-necessary abortions under Title XIX. The Court found that a woman's freedom of choice does not carry with it "a constitutional entitlement to the financial resources to avail herself of the full range of protected choices." The Court ruled that because the Equal Protection Clause is not a source of substantive rights and because poverty does not qualify as a "suspect classification," the Hyde Amendment does not violate the Fifth Amendment. Finally, the Court held that the coincidence of the funding restrictions of the statute with tenets of the Roman Catholic Church does not constitute an establishment of religion.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 448
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:1980 in United States case law
Category:Medicare and Medicaid (United States)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Harris v. Quinn" ==> """
Harris v. Quinn, 573 U.S. 616 (2014), is a US labor law case of the United States Supreme Court regarding provisions of Illinois state law that allowed a union security agreement. Since the Taft-Hartley Act of 1947 prohibited the closed shop, states could still choose whether to allow unions to collect fees from non-union members since the collective agreements with the employer would still benefit non-union members. The Court decided 5–4 that Illinois's Public Labor Relations Act, which permitted the union security agreements, violated the First Amendment. A similar case was decided by the Court in 2018, Janus v AFSCME,, overturning the Court's unanimous decision in Abood v. Detroit Board of Education (1977) which the appeals court had upheld in Harris.
Facts
The National Right to Work Legal Defense Foundation argued a claim against the Illinois's Public Labor Relations Act, on the ground that it violated the First Amendment. It allowed labor unions to collect fees for the union from non-union members since they would still receive the services of improved pay and conditions made through collective bargaining. Staff worked for Illinois's Home Services Program and were paid by federal Medicaid funding to work as a "personal assistant" to people who needed care. Both the patient receiving care and the state (as confirmed by executive order) were regarded as the employer. The trade union was SEIU Healthcare Illinois & Indiana, which bargained with the state, after it was awarded exclusive representation of the caregivers following a card check election in 2003. The election was made possible by an executive order  by then-Governor Rod Blagojevich, who had been heavily supported by SEIU in his 2002 election. The order reversed a 1985 ruling by a state labor board that said the workers were not state employees. While SEIU claimed to have signed cards representing majority support of the workers, the state has not been able to prove  that it ever properly verified the vote.
Eight home health care workers objected to paying union security fees, and challenged the law on this ground. Pamela Harris was the lead petitioner in the case, who was paid by the state to care for her own son. She objected to being obligated to pay dues to the SEIU Healthcare Illinois & Indiana union even though she chose not to join the union.
The District court dismissed their claim, and the Seventh Circuit affirmed the decision, following Abood v. Detroit Board of Education..
Judgment
The Court ruled that the workers could not be compelled to join the union since they were not fully-fledged state employees, as they are hired or fired by individual patients even if they are paid by Medicaid. The ruling did not invalidate compulsory union membership for the larger population of public employees, but Justice Samuel Alito's majority opinion argued that Abood v. Detroit Board of Education was erroneously decided.
Justice Elena Kagan wrote the dissenting opinion, joined by Ginsburg, Breyer, and Sotomayor, arguing that the principle in the Abood ruling should have been used in the case..
Significance
The majority's opinion in Harris v. Quinn was largely condemned by labor unions, worker rights organizations , and the Democratic Party for overturning established precedent since the Taft-Hartley Act of 1947.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
References
External links
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States public employment case law
Category:Service Employees International Union litigation
Category:United States trade union case law
"""

From "Harris v. Viegelahn" ==> """
Harris v. Viegelahn, 575 U.S. 498 (2015), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court clarified procedures for disposing wages after a debtor files for bankruptcy., slip op. at 1 (2015). In a unanimous opinion written by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, the Court held that if a debtor earns money after filing Chapter 13 bankruptcy proceedings, and converts to Chapter 7 bankruptcy before the money is sent to creditors, the debtor is permitted to keep those funds.Ronald Mann, Opinion: Tie goes to the debtor in consumer bankruptcy dispute about funds paid to trustee,  (May. 18, 2015).
 Opinion of the Court 
Associate Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg authored the unanimous opinion of the Court, which reversed the opinion of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit and remanded the case to that court for further proceedings.Harris, slip op. 1, 11.
 References 
External links
 SCOTUSblog coverage
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2015 in United States case law
"""

From "Harrison v. NAACP" ==> """
Harrison v. NAACP, 360 U.S. 167 (1959), is a 6-to-3 ruling by the Supreme Court of the United States which held that the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia should have abstained from deciding the constitutionality of three barratry, champerty, and maintenance laws in the state of Virginia until state courts had had a reasonable chance to construe them..
 Background 
On September 10, 1956, as part of the Massive Resistance movement, 16 bills were introduced in a special session of the Virginia General Assembly aimed at curbing the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in Virginia."Bills Aimed at NAACP Stir Va. Assembly Fight." Washington Post. September 11, 1956. Five of the bills expanded the state's definitions of barratry, champerty, and maintenance. Barratry is the "stirring up" of litigation by inducing individuals or organizations to sue when they otherwise would not.Dickson, p. 314.  Champerty occurs when a third party (not the plaintiff nor their legal counsel) assumes the risks and financial costs of a lawsuit in return for a portion of the monetary award.  Maintenance occurs when a third party supports or promotes a litigant's suit in such a way as to prolong litigation when the parties would otherwise have brought an end to litigation or settled the suit.  The eleven other bills collectively required the following groups to file a financial report and membership list annually with state: any group which promotes or opposes state legislation aimed at any race; any organization attempting to influence public opinion on behalf of any race; or any group raising funds to employ legal counsel in connection with racial litigation. By the end of the special session, these had been collapsed into six "legal business" bills."School, NAACP Bills Signed by Gov. Stanley." Washington Post. September 30, 1956.Baker, Robert E. "School Bills Go to Stanley." Washington Post. September 23, 1956. They were significantly amended in committee to meet the constitutional concerns of a number of legislators. The bills were merged so that only five were reported from the committee and passed by the Assembly.
Governor Thomas B. Stanley signed these legal business bills into law on September 29, 1956. They went into effect immediately.
The Virginia NAACP filed suit in federal court in 1956 against the Attorney General of Virginia to have the five barratry, champerty, and maintenance laws thrown out as an unconstitutional infringement of the  1st Amendment rights of freedom of speech and freedom of assembly.Dickson, p. 315. In 1957, Virginians elected Albertis S. Harrison, Jr. Attorney General, so he was the named defendant when the three judge panel of the U.S. District Court of the Eastern District of Virginia issued its decision in NAACP v. Harrison, the panel agreed that three of the laws were unconstitutional, but reserved judgment on the other two laws pending interpretation by state courts (which had not yet ruled on the laws' legality).
The state appealed, and the U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari. Thurgood Marshall argued for the NAACP; David J. Mays and J. Segar Gravatt argued for the state (attorney general Harrison having delegated the responsibility of defending the statute to private attorney Mays).
 Opinion of the Court 
 Majority 
Associate Justice John Marshall Harlan II wrote the majority opinion, joined by Associate Justices Hugo Black, Felix Frankfurter, Tom C. Clark, Charles Evans Whittaker, and Potter Stewart.
The Supreme Court had, 18 years earlier, confronted the issue of how to avoid constitutional rulings where a resolution in state court might make such decisions unnecessary.  This rule had been laid down in Railroad Comm'n of Tex. v. Pullman Co., 312 U. S. 496 (1941).
Under this rule, Harlan concluded that the issue was not yet ripe for federal action.  Federal courts, he wrote, should not address the constitutionality of state laws, especially those laws which were new or open to reasonable interpretation, until state courts had a reasonable period of time to interpret them.Harrison, 360 U.S. at 176–177. To meet this test, the Supreme Court had to determine whether the laws in question could be reasonably interpreted in more than one way.  Harlan said that there was reasonable room for alternative legal construction by state courts.Harrison, 360 U.S. at 177–178.  State courts, he said, needed to generate a complete record (which included the possibility of limiting interpretation) so that federal courts could more accurately rule on the issues raised.Harrison, 360 U.S. at 178.
The judgment was vacated and the case remanded back of the district court, with instructions that the federal court should retain jurisdiction over the cases until such time as Virginia courts had construed them.Harrison, 360 U.S. at 179.
 Dissent 
Associate Justice William O. Douglas dissented, joined by Chief Justice Earl Warren and Associate Justice William J. Brennan, Jr.
Douglas did not dispute that Railroad Comm'n was an appropriate precedent.  However, he argued that in certain cases, the precedent could be used as a tactic to delay justice.Harrison, 360 U.S. at 179–180 (Douglas, J., dissenting). The case at hand presented unique, pressing issues regarding fundamental civil rights, he said,Harrison, 360 U.S. at 180. "It seems plain to me that it was the District Court's duty to provide this remedy," he concluded.Harrison, 360 U.S. at 181. "Where state laws made such an assault as these do on our decisions and a State has spoken defiantly against the constitutional rights of the citizens, reasons for showing deference to local institutions vanish."Harrison, 360 U.S. at 182.
Douglas would have upheld the lower court's ruling against the three laws, and also thought that the majority erred by remanding the other two laws back to state courts for interpretation (rather than holding them unconstitutional).Harrison, 360 U.S. at 184.
 References 
 Bibliography 
Dickson, Del. The Supreme Court in Conference, 1940–1985: The Private Discussions Behind Nearly 300 Supreme Court Decisions. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001.
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:Virginia law
Category:1959 in United States case law
Category:1959 in Virginia
Category:Adequate and independent state ground
Category:NAACP
Category:Civil rights movement case law
"""

From "Harte-Hanks Communications, Inc. v. Connaughton" ==> """
Harte-Hanks Communications Inc. v. Connaughton, 491 U.S. 657 (1989), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States supplied an additional journalistic behavior that constitutes actual malice as first discussed in New York Times Co. v. Sullivan (1964).. In the case, the Court held that departure from responsible reporting and unreasonable reporting conduct alone were not sufficient to award a public figure damages in a libel case. However, the Court also ruled that if reporters wrote with reckless disregard for the truth, which included ignoring obvious sources for their report, plaintiffs could be awarded compensatory damages on the grounds of actual malice..
Background
In November 1983, Daniel Connaughton unsuccessfully ran for the position of Municipal Judge of Hamilton, Ohio, losing to incumbent James Dolan. A local newspaper, the Hamilton JournalNews, supported the incumbent Dolan. About a month before the election, Dolan's Director of Court Services resigned his position and was subsequently arrested on perjury charges. On November 1, 1983, while a grand jury investigation of the charges was taking place, the JournalNews ran a front page article quoting Alice Thompson, a witness in the trial. Thompson was quoted as saying Connaughton had used "dirty tricks" and had offered both Thompson and her sister tangible benefits (including employment opportunities and a trip to Florida) "in appreciation" for Thompson's testimony in the trial.
Lower court proceedings
Connaughton filed suit against Harte-Hanks Communications, the publisher of the JournalNews, alleging that its article had defamed him. He claimed the article was false, had injured his personal and professional and political reputation and was published on the grounds of actual malice. Harte-Hanks pushed for summary judgment, arguing that even if Thompson's statements were false, the article was protected under the neutral reportage privilege. The District Court denied their motion, saying it could not be proven the article was written with disinterest.
The case moved to trial, in which jurors listened to three separate interviews—two by JournalNews reporters and a third by Connaughton. The jury found that the reporting fulfilled three special verdicts for public figure libel: the article was defamatory, the article was false and the article was published with actual malice. The court awarded Connaughton $5,000 in compensatory damages and also $195,000 in punitive damages.
Harte-Hanks appealed, again citing the First Amendment defense against libel. The Sixth Circuit affirmed the lower court's decision however, writing that the court's ruling did not encroach upon the First Amendment rights of the publisher, and that the lower court was not incorrect in labeling the article as defamatory and false.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court decided the case unanimously in favor of Connaughton. Justice Stevens delivered the opinion of the Court, joined by all members of the Court except Justice Scalia, who wrote an opinion concurring in the judgment. Separate concurring opinions were written by Justices White, Blackmun and Kennedy.
Justice Stevens began his opinion by referencing New York Times Co. v. Sullivan (1964) and Curtis Publishing Co. v. Butts (1967),. which state that public figures, such as Connaughton, must definitively prove actual malice to be awarded damages in libel suits. 
He then referenced the case Hustler Magazine v. Falwell (1988), which had occurred the year before, and had ruled that public figures "may not recover for the tort of intentional infliction of emotional distress . . . without showing . . . that the publication contains a false statement of fact which was made . . . with knowledge that the statement was false or with reckless disregard as to whether or not it was true.".
However, citing St. Amant v. Thompson (1968),. Stevens ruled that the reporters had acted with "reckless disregard for the truth." Stevens focused on Patsy Stephens, the elder sister of Alice Thompson. Stephens had been present when Connaughton had allegedly played "dirty" tricks with the sisters, and Thompson reported that Stephens could confirm the accusations against Connaughton. The editor of the JournalNews then instructed his employees to interview every witness to Connaughton and Thompson's conversation—except Patsy Stephens. Every other witness to the exchange denied Stephens' accusations. Justice Stevens wrote that a responsible newspaper would and should corroborate with obvious sources, particularly since Thompson had earlier assured that Stephens could confirm her charges, and Stephens would be the only witness to do so. Justice Stevens also wrote that "if the Journal News had serious doubts concerning the truth of Thompson's remarks, but was committed to running the story, there was good reason not to interview Stephens."
Additionally, Justice Stevens noted that Jim Blount, editorial director for the JournalNews, had penned an editorial on October 30, two days before the article in question surfaced. This editorial predicted that more information concerning the impropriety and integrity of the candidates might surface in the next few days. Stevens wrote that this can be taken to be mean that the JournalNews had already decided to publish the article on October 30, well before it had verified its sources.
Justice Stevens then explains that while public figures can legally endure more defamation than private persons, they are not completely unprotected by the courts, provided they can prove the defendants acted with actual malice. 
He finished his opinion by stating that, because of the inconsistencies with the JournalNews' reporting, and because they deliberately ignored sources that would have either affirmed or denied Stephens' allegations, the JournalNews was guilty of reckless disregard for the truth and, by extension, actual malice.
Aftermath
After the case was remanded to the lower court, Connaughton won the retrial, and the Supreme Court affirmed the decision by the Sixth Circuit.
References
External links
Category:1989 in United States case law
Category:United States defamation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Hartford Fire Insurance Co. v. California" ==> """
Hartford Fire Insurance Co. v. California, 509 U.S. 764 (1993), was a controversial United States Supreme Court case which held that foreign companies acting in foreign countries could nevertheless be held liable for violations of the Sherman Antitrust Act if they conspired to restrain trade within the United States, and succeeded in doing so.Hartford Fire Ins. Co. v. Cal., .
Facts
Various reinsurance companies in the United Kingdom had conspired through Lloyd's of London to coerce U.S. insurers into abandoning certain policy practices that were beneficial to consumers, but costly to the reinsurers. When U.S. states (including the named plaintiff, California) filed a lawsuit alleging antitrust violations, the defendant companies raised a number of defenses, asserting that the United States lacked jurisdiction over their acts, that various statutes exempted them from liability, and that principles of comity dictated that they should not be brought before a U.S. court. The United States district court in which the case was brought accepted these arguments and dismissed the case. The Court of Appeals reversed the dismissal.
Result
The Supreme Court, in an opinion by Justice Souter, stated that "it is well established by now that the Sherman Act applies to foreign conduct that was meant to produce and did in fact produce some substantial effect in the United States."Hartford Fire Ins. Co., 509 U.S. at 796.
The defendants raise, and the Court rejects the applicability of § 402 of the Foreign Trade Antitrust Improvements Act of 1982 (FTAIA),, . which states that the Sherman Act does not apply to conduct involving foreign trade or commerce (other than import trade or import commerce), unless "such conduct has a direct and reasonably foreseeable effect" on domestic or import commerce.Hartford Fire Ins. Co., 509 U.S. at 796 n. 23. The Court found that the conduct at issue here clearly had such an effect.
The Court also found that, in enacting the FTAIA, the U.S. Congress did not intend to write principles of comity into the Sherman Act - but even if they had, this would not affect the outcome. Both the defendant and Hartford argued that the conduct in which the reinsurers had engaged was lawful in the United Kingdom. Nevertheless, the Court looked to the Restatement (Third) Foreign Relations Law, § 415, Comment j for the principle that:
The fact that conduct is lawful in the state in which it took place will not, of itself, bar application of the United States antitrust laws, even where the foreign state has a strong policy to permit or encourage such conduct.
Furthermore, the Court cited Restatement (Third) Foreign Relations Law, § 403, Comment e for the proposition that no conflict exists "where a person subject to regulation by two states can comply with both."
Dissent
Justice Scalia dissented, joined in part by Justices O'Connor, Kennedy, and Thomas. Scalia acknowledged that the federal courts had jurisdiction over this case, and that the Sherman Act could be applied extraterritorially, so long as the foreign acts complained of were directed into the United States. Nevertheless, Scalia contended that the actions of the U.S. courts showed a lack of judicial respect for the comprehensive regulatory scheme enacted by the UK. Although Congress may have intended the Sherman Act to apply to acts originating abroad, it was unreasonable to assume that Congress intended to apply the antitrust laws where they would be disruptive of another country's legislative scheme.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 509
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:1993 in United States case law
Category:1993 in California
Category:Legal history of California
Category:ITT Inc.
Category:Reinsurance
"""

From "Hartford-Empire Co. v. United States" ==> """
Hartford-Empire Co. v. United States, 323 U.S. 386 (1945), was a patent-antitrust case that the Government brought against a cartel in the glass container industry.. Upon the Government's petition for reconsideration or  clarification, the Court adhered to the earlier ruling but added to it. . The cartel, among other things, divided the fields of manufacture of glass containers, first, into blown glass (allocated to Corning Glass Works) and pressed glass, which was subdivided into: products made under the suction process (allocated to Owens-Illinois Glass Co.), milk bottles (allocated to Thatcher Mfg. Co.), and fruit jars (allocated to Ball Bros. plus a fixed production quota for Owens-Illinois, and Hazel-Atlas Co.).United States v. Hartford-Empire Co., 46 F. Supp. 541, 615 (N.D. Ohio 1942); Hartford-Empire v. United States: Integration of the Anti-Trust and Patent Laws, 45  601, 614 (1945). The trial court found the cartel violative of the antitrust laws and the Supreme Court agreed that the market division and related conduct were illegal. The trial court required royalty-free licensing of present patents and reasonable royalty licensing of future patents. A divided Supreme Court reversed the requirement for royalty-free licensing as "confiscatory," but sustained the requirement for reasonable royalty licensing of the patents.
Background
thumb|right|300px|Hartford gob feeder
The technology involved in this case concerned the manufacture of glass containers—notably, the "gob feeder" machinery for manufacturing jars, bottles, and other glass containers. The gob feed type of machine automatically makes glass containers by dropping a gob of molten glass through a hole into molds in a forming machine, the size and shape of the glass delivered being controlled by a mechanism known as a feeder machine; the feeder and the forming machine together constitute one fully automatic unit. At the time of the suit, Hartford-Empire Company owned or controlled all of the gob feeding patents in the glass container industry, and its business was the exploitation of these patents. Another type of machine is known as the "suction" machine, and it automatically sucks molten glass into a mold for blowing bottles.Hartford-Empire Co., 46 F. Supp. at 546–47.
The suction machinery was the first fully automatic glassware manufacturing machinery produced. Owens put it on the market in 1903 and controlled the patents on it. Owens licensed the use of the machinery to different manufacturers for only specific kinds of glassware, and thus set a market-division pattern that was later followed by Hartford in the licensing and leasing of its automatic feeders. For example, Owens licensed Ball Brothers to make fruit jars and licensed Hazel-Atlas to manufacture wide mouth glassware. After Hartford developed the gob feeder, which largely superseded the suction machinery, Hartford licensed and leased gob feeders in much the same manner that Owens had licensed its suction machines, that is, by issuing licenses to make only specific kinds of glassware. After patent interferences developed between Hartford and Empire, a subsidiary of Corning Glass, the companies settled their disputes by a 1916 agreement in which Hartford was granted an exclusive license by Corning's subsidiary to use the latter's patented glass making apparatus and processes for the production of glass containers while Corning obtained the exclusive right to Hartford's machinery and patents in Corning's lines of ware—the pressed and blown field or the non-container field. This gave Hartford a free hand in the glass container field.46 F. Supp. at 548.
From 1916 to 1924, competition arose between Hartford and Owens over gob feeder technology, including patent interferences and extensive litigation. In 1924, Hartford and Owens entered into an agreement giving Hartford an exclusive license on Owens's patents relating to feeders and forming machines, and giving Owens the right to use the Hartford patents for the manufacture of glassware. Owens was not to sell or license any of its gob feeding machinery and was not to engage in the pressed and blown glass fields that had previously been reserved to Corning. Owens received one-half of Hartford's licensing income over and above $600,000 per year. It was understood that Owens would be the only company operating with suction machinery. Hartford and Owen then proceeded to buy up the other patents in the glassware industry. Hazel-Atlas resisted Hartford and Owen until 1932, when Hartford, Owens and Hazel-Atlas entered into a series of agreements settling patent infringement litigation. Hartford granted to Hazel-Atlas the right to use Hartford patents and inventions, but Hazel-Atlas was not to license or sell such patents and inventions to anyone. Hazel-Atlas granted to Hartford the right to use Hazel-Atlas patents and inventions. Hazel-Atlas agreed to pay Hartford royalties for the use of the Hartford inventions. Hazel-Atlas was excluded from the pressed and blown field, which had previously been reserved to Corning. Hazel-Atlas and Owens were each to receive one-third of Hartford's licensing income over and above $850,000 per year. At this point the remaining opposition to Hartford collapsed and substantially everyone in the industry took a license from Hartford. By December 1939 when the Government brought this antitrust suit, only four small companies engaged in the manufacture of glassware were not under license and lease from Hartford; they represented less than 4% of the total production in the industry; and Hartford was suing three of them for patent infringement.46 F. Supp. at 549-50.
A series of purchases, agreements and mergers occurred that resulted in a situation where more than 94% of the total production of glassware on feeders was on feeders owned or controlled by Hartford, representing more than 96% of the total production on all types of glassware-making machinery. According to the district court, it was impossible for anyone to obtain glassware-making machinery except by virtue of a license from Hartford. Owens consistently refused to sell or license its suction machinery. The result was that no new concern could engage in the manufacture of glass containers except with the consent of Hartford, and that kept newcomers out of the industry.46 F. Supp. at 551-52.
Proceedings in district court
The United States sued the leading manufacturers of glass containers for violating the antitrust laws by "unlawfully conspiring, monopolizing, attempting to monopolize, and by unlawfully contracting, combining, and conspiring to restrain interstate and foreign trade and commerce, and more particularly by acquiring and maintaining monopolies of (a) patents covering the manufacture and licensing of glass-making machinery, (b) the manufacture and distribution of glass-making machinery, and (c) the manufacture, distribution, and sale of glass products, and by excluding others from the fair opportunity to engage freely and unrestrictedly in the interstate and foreign trade and commerce in said machinery and glass products."United States v. Hartford-Empire Co., 46 F. Supp. 541, 545 (N.D. Ohio 1942).
After 112 days of trial and a 12,000-page record, the district court found "that this violation of the laws was as deliberate as any that I can find in a review of anti-trust cases. The evidence is so conclusive that I can arrive at no other conclusion."46 F. Supp. at 553.
The court found that the 1916 agreement between Hartford and Empire to settle their patent interferences was a division of glassware markets "leaving the container field to Hartford and the non-container field to [Corning's subsidiary] Empire." In addition, the agreement "eliminated the impending competition between Hartford and the Corning interests in the glass making machinery field." The 1922 agreements "effectuated a merger of the Hartford-Fairmont and Empire companies into . . . the Hartford-Empire Company." In addition, "[t]he relations between Hartford and Corning were renewed and strengthened."46 F. Supp. at 555. The court stated of these agreements: "This plainly is an illegal, cooperative effort upon the part of Corning and Hartford to use the patent strength of each to protect the exclusive fields of the other. It is a cooperative effort for the purpose of maintaining monopolies."46 F. Supp. at 556. The court found that the parties' purpose and the result was monopolistic:
[I]t is plain that the purpose of entering into this contractual relationship, both in 1916 and 1922, was, from Hartford's viewpoint, to eliminate Empire as a possible competitor in automatic machinery, to obtain Corning's support in getting and maintaining a monopoly on automatic machinery, and to eliminate Corning as a manufacturer in the container field; and, from Corning's viewpoint, to obtain from Hartford a monopoly in the manufacture of non-container ware.
The result of these contracts was to give Corning the power to exclude all others from Corning's fields. During the years that followed down to the filing of the complaint herein, there are many instances where manufacturers were kept out of Corning's fields, either by Hartford alone or by Corning's refusal to consent to their entrance into its fields.
The court found that while defendant Hartford's monopolistic purpose was to maximize its patent royalty income, defendant Owens's "main purpose was different. Owens wanted stabilization of the industry in the marketing of glass products so that higher prices might be charged. A means to that end was the control of the [gob] feeder business in the hands of one concern, with enough control retained to enable it to keep everyone in line."46 F. Supp. at 558. The operational plan of the two defendants was:
The procedure to be followed in arriving at the ultimate goals of Hartford and Owens was the elimination of competition between themselves and their respective gob and suction processes, an attack against all outsiders until Hartford had complete control over all automatic machinery used in the production of glassware, and then the licensing by Hartford of every glassware manufacturer in the industry. Immediately after the agreement of April 9, 1924, the two companies began a systematic program for the elimination of all competition.46 F. Supp. at 564.
One of the purposes of the 1924 agreement between Hartford and Owens, the court found, "was the elimination of competition between the gob feed process and the suction process." There was no doubt, the court said, "that one of the primary purposes in entering into the agreement was to divide the industry into two branches, to wit, suction, to be controlled by Owens, and gob feed, to be controlled by Hartford. Furthermore, as a result of the elimination of competition in the gob feed process, the industry could be stabilized. It would, of course, be futile to eliminate competition in the gob feed process if competition between the suction and gob processes was to continue."46 F. Supp. at 567. A Hartford internal memorandum said: " H-F. shall restrict the issuance of further licenses in the container field in such manner . . . as shall preserve the general principle of preventing over plant-investment and over-production, as well as keeping the licenses out of the hands of objectionable and irresponsible parties. In like manner, Owens shall restrict the licensing of its suction feed and all developments thereof in such a way as to maintain a similar position." Another Hartford memorandum said that "this arrangement will practically divide the industry, so far as our two companies are concerned, into two branches—the suction process branch controlled by Owens and the gob feed branch controlled by H-F."46 F. Supp. at 566-67. Given these and similar documents, the court said, it was not necessary for it "to resort to inferences" to ascertain the defendants' monopolistic intent.46 F. Supp. at 568-69.
The court found similar market-allocation conspiracies for milk bottles and fruit jars. Defendants Thatcher and Owens manufactured from 65 to 70% of all milk bottles produced in the United States.46 F. Supp. at 581.  Defendant Ball Brothers manufactured substantially all the fruit jars in the United States except for annual quotas of 100,000 and 300,000 jars for defendants Owens and Hazel-Atlas. Because of counsel's stated concern that this would be an antitrust violation, the allocation was effectuated by oral rather than written agreement.46 F. Supp. at 583-84.
The court found, pointing "to a manifestation of conscious wrongdoing upon the part of the parties involved":
The record is replete, as disclosed by the contemporaneous writings of the principals in this case, of an apprehension upon their part of a violation of the antitrust laws, an apprehension that in some instances amounted to a conviction that the laws were being violated — convictions that led to the taking of anticipatory steps upon their part to forestall the full force and effect of the penalties that would follow proof of violation.46 F. Supp. at 597.
The court found that the patent licenses did not contain any price fixing clauses, but nonetheless an understanding existed in the industry as to prices, which Hartford policed by its ability to refuse access to its patented machinery:
A system of price leadership obtains in the industry based on the control that Hartford exercises over the glassware produced by virtue of its restrictive licenses and its retention of title to the machines which it licenses. A system of price leadership obtains in the industry whereby, for example, Owens publishes its price list chiefly covering narrow neck glassware; Hazel-Atlas operates as the price leader for wide mouth glassware; Ball Brothers serves as price leader for fruit jar output; and Thatcher serves as price leader for milk bottles. The record is replete with instances where some of Hartford's favored licensees complained that another company was engaged in price-cutting. The record also discloses that upon receipt of such complaints Hartford took positive action. . . . The limited term for which the licenses were issued permitted Hartford to retain such a measure of control over its licensees that it was unnecessary to more than warn them. While there was no compulsory following of these prices, the companies were able to apply moral sanctions, with the cooperation of Hartford, which amounted to the same thing.46 F. Supp. at 613.
The court quoted a Hartford internal memorandum explaining its policy:
(a) We licensed the machines only to selected manufacturers of the better type, refusing many licensees whom we thought would be price-cutters, and
(b) We restricted their fields of manufacture, in each case, to certain specific articles, with the idea of preventing too much competition.
(c) In order to retain more complete control of the situation, we retained title to the machines, and simply leased them for a definite period of years, usually 8 or 10 years, with the privilege of renewal of a smaller additional term.46 F. Supp. at 614.
The result of this policy, the court concluded, was to establish monopoly:
By the operation of the restrictive license plan, Hartford managed to protect the monopoly that Corning attained over the manufacture of the lines of ware particularly reserved to it; it was able to establish a milk bottle monopoly through its license to Thatcher, and a fruit jar monopoly through its license to Ball Brothers. . . . [W]here a restriction limited a licensee to the use of the glassware produced, this course of conduct virtually designated to the licensee the market in which he was to dispose of his unpatented product. If a licensee violated any of his restrictions, Hartford could cancel the license, repossess the machines, and put the licensee out of business. This put the licensees in a position where they had to so conduct themselves as that they might be in a favorable position, upon the expiration of their eight or ten year term, to receive a renewal license.
In sum:
 There has been a violation of the anti-trust laws through an illegal aggregation of patents upon the part of the Hartford and Owens companies; there has been an illegal combination resulting in an unreasonable restraint of trade in the glass container industry through the control of machinery used in the manufacture of glass; and there has been a domination and control of the glass container industry that has resulted in an undue and unreasonable restraint of trade. Until the court is satisfied that the illegal effects of those acts and things done have been dispelled and that the industry is freed from the domination and control of the defendants, and until the court is satisfied that these illegal acts and practices will not be resumed by the parties . . . it has a distinct duty to the public to . . . make such orders as the court deems are necessary and sufficient to remove the effects of the violations of the anti-trust laws.46 F. Supp. at 617.
The court found the problem of appropriate relief in a case such as this one to be difficult. It believed "that no half-way measures will suffice." The court said:
 There has been a deliberate violation of the law, and it is the duty of the court to do what he can to make certain that these violations of the law will cease and will not be resumed in the future and that competition will be restored in the industry. The record discloses that some of the individual defendants anticipated legal action by the Government, and went ahead in spite of that and violated the law. They also tried to anticipate the remedies that might be applied and did what they could to forestall the effect of such remedies and retain the benefits of their unlawful actions. The court intends to make certain that this does not occur.46 F. Supp. at 620.
The Government asked for dissolution of Hartford. The court refused to do that unless other measures could not be effective to restore competition in the industry. As a first step, the court would appoint receivers. "It is believed to be absolutely necessary that the receivers take over the management of Hartford forthwith." For example, Hartford transferred three important patents to Corning "for the obvious purpose of continuing Corning's monopolies regardless of the outcome of this suit." The court added, "If, after the expiration of a reasonable time, it appears to the court that the steps he is now taking are insufficient to restore a free and competitive status to the industry, the receivers shall be ordered to submit a plan or plans for the dissolution of Hartford."46 F. Supp. at 620-21.
The leasing system "must be abolished" because it has been abused to fix prices. Future distribution of machinery must be "put on a basis of outright sale at reasonable prices" to all comers, including all licensees and outsiders. Moreover, "all the defendants shall be required to license anyone, royalty free, in the manufacture of machines embodying these patent rights," and "any new agreements must be free of restriction and subject to the approval of the court. Hereafter any manufacturer of glassware may produce any item he desires." All defendants must "license anyone, royalty free, on all present patents and pending applications for patents for the life of the patents." Interlocking directorships and stock ownership are to be prohibited.
46 F. Supp. at 621.
Ruling of the Supreme Court
The Court unanimously affirmed the finding of an antitrust violation, but it divided closely on some aspects of the relief that the trial court ordered.The Court "set a modern record by allowing 19½ hours for argument. Myron W. Watkins and George W. Stocking, Patent Monopolies and Free Enterprise, 3  729, 752 n.66 (1950). Justice Owen Roberts wrote the majority opinion, reversing some relief ordered. Justices Hugo Black and Wiley Rutledge each filed dissenting opinions regarding the reversal of some of the relief. Justices William O. Douglas, Frank Murphy, and Robert Jackson took no part in the case. Upon the Government's petition for reconsideration or  clarification, the Court adhered to the earlier ruling but added to it.. Justice Roberts again delivered the opinion of the Court. Justice Rutledge again filed a dissenting opinion, in which Justice Black joined.
Majority opinion
thumb|150px|Owen J. Roberts delivered the majority opinion
Justice Owen Roberts delivered the opinion of the Court. He began: "Two questions are presented. Were violations proved? If so, are the provisions of the decree right?" The Court was unanimous that the answer to the first question was affirmative.Hartford-Empire Co. v. United States, 323 U.S. 386, 401-01 (1945). It summarized the facts as follows:
Hartford . . . had acquired . . . more than 600 patents. These, with over 100 Corning controlled patents, over 60 Owens patents, over 70 Hazel patents, and some 12 Lynch patents, had been, by cross-licensing agreements, merged into a pool which effectually controlled the industry.  This control was exercised to allot production in Corning's field to Corning, and that in restricted classes within the general container field to Owens, Hazel, Thatcher, Ball, and such other smaller manufacturers as the group agreed should be licensed. The result was that 94% of the glass containers manufactured in this country on feeders and formers were made on machinery licensed under the pooled patents.323 U.S. at 400.
The Court then turned to the issue of the proper relief, on which the Court was divided. Justice Roberts, writing for himself, Chief Justice Harlan Stone, and Justices Stanley Reed, and Felix Frankfurter, held that substantial parts of the judgment should be reversed, but Justices Hugo Black and Wiley Rutledge dissented to such modifications. Justices William O. Douglas, Frank Murphy, and Robert Jackson took no part in consideration or decision of the case.
Reasonable royalty licensing vs. royalty-free licensing
The majority found the relief decreed to be confiscatory of the defendants' property rights in their patents. It found paragraph 24(b), under which a defendant hereafter acquiring a patent could not set the price for its use by others, refuse to license it, or to retain it and neither use nor license it. The Court said:
That a patent is property, protected against appropriation both by individuals and by government, has long been settled. In recognition of this quality of a patent the courts, in enjoining violations of the Sherman Act arising from the use of patent licenses, agreements, and leases, have abstained from action which amounted to a forfeiture of the patents.323 U.S. at 415.
The majority added that Congress had failed to enact proposals for forfeiture or cancellation of patents used as an instrument to violate the antitrust laws.323 U.S. at 416. Accordingly, the decree was limited to a requirement of reasonable royalty licensing on patents covering the kind of equipment involved in the illegal conspiracy, but not patents on other equipment, such as "a bottle-capping machine or for a composition of glass."323 U.S. at 417-18.
License restrictions
Paragraph 29 prohibited, as to all patents:
 licensing restrictions on the kind of product made with a machine (such as only bottles, or not bottles);
 what the product could be used for;
 "the character, weight, color, capacity, or composition of the product"
 the quantity of product made;
 the price;
 "the market, either as to territory or customers in or to which the product may be sold or distributed";
 license clauses forbidding validity challenges;
 use of exclusive grant-back clauses.
The majority insisted that such a prohibition "sets such limitations upon the reward of a patent as to make it practically worthless except for use by the owner." The Court therefore limited this provision to patents on the equipment involved in the illegal conspiracy.323 U.S. at 423-24.
Interlocks
Paragraph 33 prohibited the defendants' officers and directors from owning stock in any other "corporation engaged either in the manufacture and sale of glassware or in the manufacture or distribution of machinery used in the manufacture of glassware." The Court said this was too broad, and it should be modified "to prohibit only the acquisition of a measure of control through ownership of stocks or bonds" of a competitor. Similarly, paragraph 35 enjoined each individual defendant from "holding at the same time an office or directorship in more than one corporation which manufactures and sells glassware or manufactures or distributes glassmaking machinery." The Court said this was too broad and should be similarly limited.323 U.S. at 425-26.
Patent acquisitions
Paragraph 51 prohibited the acquisition of any glassware-related patent rights from others, except for non-exclusive licenses. The majority said this provision "is inappropriate to restrain future violations of the antitrust statutes. The paragraph should be deleted."323 U.S. at 431.
Failure to "work" patents
Paragraph 52 dealt with "the problem of suppressed or unworked patents" and "it enjoins every defendant from applying for a patent 'with the intention of not making commercial use of the invention within four years' from issue of the patent, and makes the failure commercially to use the invention prima facie proof of the absence (sic) of such intention." The Court said: "This provision is also legislative, rather than remedial. Unless we are to overturn settled principles, the paragraph in question must be eliminated."323 U.S. at 431-32. The majority then went on to denounce the concept embodied in the relief that the government sought and the trial court granted:
A patent owner is not in the position of a quasi-trustee for the public, or under any obligation to see that the public acquires the free right to use the invention. He has no obligation either to use it or to grant its use to others. If he discloses the invention in his application so that it will come into the public domain at the end of the 17-year period of exclusive right, he has fulfilled the only obligation imposed by the statute. This has been settled doctrine since at least 1896. Congress has repeatedly been asked, and has refused, to change the statutory policy by imposing a forfeiture or by a provision for compulsory licensing if the patent is not used within a specified time.323 U.S. at 432-33.
Black dissent
thumb|150px|Justice Hugo Black dissented from the majority's modification of the relief that the trial court ordered
Justice Black concurred in the majority's sustaining the decree in part but dissented from many of the modifications. In his view:
The District Court's decree, taken as a whole, is an effective remedy, admirably suited to neutralize the consequences of such violations, to guard against repetition of similar illegal activities, and to dissipate the unlawful aggregate of economic power which arose out of, and fed upon, monopolization and restraints. Many of this Court's modifications seriously impair the decree and frustrate its purposes.323 U.S. at 435-36 (Black, J., dissenting).
He explained the background of the conduct that had to be remedied, and the defendants' unlawful intentions:
[T]hese defendants started out in 1916 to acquire a monopoly on a large segment of the glass industry. Their efforts were rewarded by complete success. They have become absolute masters of that domain of our public economy. They achieved this result largely through the manipulation of patents and licensing agreements. They obtained patents for the express purpose of furthering their monopoly. They utilized various types of restrictions in connection with leasing those patents so as to retain their dominance in that industry. The history of this country has perhaps never witnessed a more completely successful economic tyranny over any field of industry than that accomplished by these appellants. They planned their monopolistic program on the basis of getting and keeping and using patents which they dedicated to the destruction of free competition in the glass container industry. Their declared object was "[t]o block the development of machines which might be constructed by others . . . " and "[t]o secure patents on possible improvements of competing machines so as to "fence in" those and prevent their reaching an improved state." These patents were the major weapons in the campaign to subjugate the industry; they were also the fruits of appellant's victory. The restoration of competition in the glass container industry demands that appellants be deprived of these weapons. The most effective way to accomplish this end is to require, as the District Court did, that these patents be licensed royalty free.323 U.S. at 436-37.
Given this background, he said, the relief that the trial court ordered was needed to overcome the effects of the illegal conduct, particularly because of the defendants' deliberate flouting of the antitrust laws:
The decree of the court below was well fashioned to prevent a continuation of appellant's monopolistic practices. The decree as modified leaves them free, in a large measure, to continue to follow the competition-destroying methods by which they achieved control of the industry. In fact, they have received much milder treatment from this Court than they anticipated. This is shown by a memorandum of one of Hartford's officers made in 1925. That memorandum which discussed plans for suppression of a number of competitors, with particular reference to possible prosecutions under the Sherman Act, read in part as follows:
"Of course, the court might order that we transfer the entire Federal licensing business to some other party and turn over to that party the Federal patents. This, of course, would simply restore to a certain extent the existing situation, and establish a competitor. . . . I . . . do not see much danger of having any of these deals upset. . . . If they are upset, I still believe that, by that time, we will be in a better position even with such dissolution than we would be otherwise, and I see no danger whatsoever of any criminal liability, because the cases are necessarily so doubtful in the matter of law that they could never get any jury to convict, and I doubt if any prosecuting officer would ever attempt any criminal action. Criminal action in cases of this sort, so far, has practically been nonexistent."
I would sustain the decree of the District Court, for the reasons it gave, in all of the paragraphs mentioned.323 U.S. at 437-38.
Rutledge dissent
thumb|150px|Justice Wiley Rutledge dissented
Justice Rutledge agreed with Justice Black (who joined his dissent) that it was a mistake to modify the relief that the trial court decreed to remedy the defendants' "devious and ruthless methods, as well as the ultimate total success of this long adventure in monopoly and unlawful restraint of trade." He criticized the majority's wrong assumptions as to "the respective functions of trial and appellate courts in framing the decree, as well as to the criteria by which are to be gauged the quantity and quality of relief needed to be effective."323 U.S. at 438-39 (Rutledge, J., dissenting). He said that "the number, character and detail of the revisions" by the majority suggest "that it is the business of this Court to rewrite the decree, substituting its own judgment for that of the District Court when there is difference concerning the wisdom or need of a particular provision," but that is based on the, majority's "misconception that men who have misused their property, and acquired much of it, by violating the Sherman Act are free for the future to continue using it as are other owners who have committed no such offense, and that consequently the appropriate relief affecting such use is the least restriction which possibly will prevent repetition of past violations."323 U.S. at 440-41.
Justice Rutledge said that the majority's modifications of the trial court's decree "emasculate[d]" it. He maintained:
When the patent holder so far overreaches his privilege as to intrude upon the rights of others and the public protected by the antitrust legislation, and does this in such a way that he cannot further exercise the privilege without also trespassing upon the rights thus protected, either his right or the other person's, and the public right, must give way. It is wholly incongruous in such circumstances to say that the privilege of the trespasser shall be preserved, and the rights of all others which he has transgressed shall continue to give way to the consequences of his wrongdoing. This is substantially what the defendants have sought in this proceeding, and this Court's revision of the decree has granted in large measure.323 U.S. at 453.
Clarification
The Court subsequently granted the government's petition for clarification but denied its petition for reconsideration. The majority insisted that "it has never been suggested that this court must accept the decree fashioned by the trial court, if we affirm that court's findings as to violation of the statute, and cannot modify the terms of relief as drafted by the court below."
Justice Rutledge, joined by Justice Black, again dissented. The dissent objected to the majority's having "undertake[n] the long distance writing of the detailed provisions for relief, amounting to a framing of the decree, in [these] Sherman Act proceedings."324 U.S. at 576 (Rutledge, J., dissenting).
Commentary
● A contemporaneous article in the University of Chicago Law Review criticized the Supreme Court's revision of the district court decree as to the patents as "judicial legislation."Sylvester Petro, Patents: Judicial Developments and Legislative Proposals. I. The Hartford-Empire Case and Compulsory Licensing, 12  80, 99–100 (1944). The commentator characterized Justice Roberts's majority opinion as "something of a crusade—the evil of judicial legislation is to be exorcized."Petro, supra at 99. The author found this not only misguided but contrary to the legislative intent:
Actually, however, a good case can be made out for the position that the district court's "drastic" decree is simply a courageous application of legislative intent as expressed in the antitrust laws. Or, on the other hand, if it be insisted that the district court had "legislated from the bench," the Supreme Court's revision does no less.
The author pointed to the still little used Section 6 of the Sherman Act, which provides for the forfeiture of "[a]ny property owned under any contract or by any combination, or pursuant to any conspiracy (and being the subject thereof) mentioned in section 1 of this act, and being in the course of transportation from one State to another . . . ." and he suggested that Congress had "intended to put some teeth in the antitrust laws" along the lines of the district court's so-called drastic order that Justice Roberts found unlawfully confiscatory. "One can only conclude," as Justice Rutledge argued in dissent, "that the Supreme Court has substituted its discretion for that of the district court."Petro, supra at 100–01.
● Another contemporaneous commentator said that the Hartford-Empire case was "likely to take a permanent place in American legal history because of its Brobdingnagian contours." The lawsuit "was big during its period of conception, outsize during its youth and adolescence, and somewhat of a monstrosity in its Supreme Court maturity." The Temporary National Economic Committee first exposed "[t]he dirty linen of the glass container industry" in 1938 hearings. The Department of Justice then issued a statement that it "intended to bring a series of antitrust suits involving misuse of patents" in order to establish by test case " to what extent the patent laws gave immunity from the antitrust law."Philip Marcus, Patents, Antitrust Law and Antitrust Judgments, 34  L. J. 1, 1–2 (1945).
As a result of disclosures made during the trial, Hazel-Atlas, one of the defendants, sued Hartford-Empire, the main defendant, to overturn a patent infringement judgment that Hartford had fraudulently obtained against it on one of the gob feeders patents. Hartford had presented to the court a supposedly objective article describing the merits and unobviousness of the patented invention, but had itself ghost-written and paid the ostensible author (a union official).See Hazel-Atlas Glass Company v. Hartford-Empire Co., 322 U. S. 238 (1944); 34  L. J. at 3. According to the author, starting with Hartford-Empire in 1939, the Department of Justice filed 56 antitrust suits involving alleged illegal use of patents, and filed amicus curiae briefs in at least five cases involving patents in the Supreme Court.34  L. J. at 11.
The author assessed the effect of the case on the industry:
No miracle of restoration of competition in the glass container industry has yet been achieved as a result of the Hartford-Empire [case]. Some tangible signs of progress in that direction are observable.
Substantially all license restrictions have been eliminated. Glass manufacturers are free to make the type and number of glass containers they may desire. In the last few years the housewife has been able to find on the market a much wider choice of fruit jars than was possible prior to the action.
. . . As far as the writer knows no newcomer has come into the industry, and the defendants are still its dominant members.Id. at 62–63.
● In a contemporaneous article, Seventh Circuit Judge Evan A. Evans observed: "The stench arising from the Glass cases recently before the Supreme Court and the Third Circuit would drive a starving bear from the garbage barrel."Evan A. Evans, Some Stray Thoughts of a Federal Judge on our Patent System and Its Operation, 1945  477, 494–95 (1945).
● In still another contemporaneous commentary, Walter J. Derenberg summarized the Supreme Court majority's holding as that "even in case of gross abuses of patent rights no relief of a 'confiscatory' character should be granted in a civil proceeding under the Sherman Act."Walter J. Derenberg, The Antitrust Laws. 1945  L. 598, 607 (1945). Despite the substantial modifications of the decree, Derenberg said, "the majority opinion still remains precedent breaking in that for the first time the court sanctioned the relief of compulsory licensing on a basis of reasonable royalties of all existing and future patents pertaining to the machines and methods" that the conspirators used to effectuate their antitrust violation.Derenberg, supra at 608–09.
● A 1954 Note in the Yale Law JournalPatent Dedication As Antitrust Remedy: New Light on Hartford-Empire, 63  L.J. 717 (1954). explained that following Hartford-Empire, district courts refused under any circumstances to decree compulsory licensing without royalties.As examples of such antitrust decrees the Note cited United States v. Imperial Chemical Industries, Ltd., 100 F. Supp. 504 (1951) (division of world market in explosives and chemicals by exclusive patent licenses and technological exchange), final decree entered, 105 F. Supp. 215, 225 (S.D.N.Y. 1952) (compulsory licensing at reasonable royalties decreed); United States v. Vehicular Parking Ltd., 54 F. Supp. 828 (1944) (monopolization of parking meter business by assignment of competing patents to patent holding company followed by restrictive licenses), final decree entered, 61 F. Supp. 656 (D. Del. 1945) (compulsory licensing at reasonable royalties decreed). However, the Note commented, in the subsequent decision in United States v. National Lead Co.,. in which the whole Court affirmed a district court decree ordering compulsory reasonable royalty licensing as an exercise of "sound judicial discretion,332 U.S. at 338. the Court implied that royalty-free licensing might be permissible where "necessary and appropriate" for antitrust enforcement.332 U.S. at 349. Three justices dissented on the grounds that Hartford-Empire should be overruled as to its prohibition of royalty-free licensing.
The Note then turned to the (at the time) recent decision in United States v. General Elec. Co.,115 F. Supp. 835 (1953) (decree), irnplernenting 82 F. Supp. 753 (D.N.J. 1949) (decision on merits). in which the government had challenged GE under the antitrust laws for regimenting the incandescent lamp bulb industry. GE had used restrictive patent licensing practices that gave GE and its licensees an "almost impregnable front" against competition.63  L.J. at 720–21. The district court entered a decree enjoining the defendants from the restrictive practices and requiring dedication of all existing patents on lamps, and GE then dedicated 177 existing patents and 38 pending patent applications.63  L.J. at 721 n.38.
The Note concluded that subsequent case law interpreting Hartford-Empire "establishes a double requirement for dedication: if the essence of antitrust violation is monopolization of patents, and if the complete elimination of that monopoly is the key to restoration of competitive conditions, then dedication is a permissible remedy."63  L.J. at 725. It pointed out that other Supreme Court antitrust decisions sustain divestiture and dissolution in appropriate cases despite hardship and economic loss.63  L.J. at 725-26. See United States v. Crescent Amusement Co., 323 U.S. 173, 189 (1944) (divestiture affirmed even when harsh and inequitable because of income tax results); see also United States v. Corn Products Refining Co., 234 Fed. 964, 1018 (S.D.N.Y. 1916), appeal disnissed, 249 U.S. 621 (1918) (dissolution ordered in spite of loss to stockholders). Moreover, the Court has ordered divestiture of unlawfully acquired property in antitrust cases.See ; ; . The Note suggested that the doctrine of the "fruits of the conspiracy" is applicable to an unlawful aggregation of patents, and argued: "There is no reason why a patent monopolist should have the vested right to receive the benefits of his unlawful acts through royalties."63  L.J. at 726 and n.69. Finally, the Note pointed to patent misuse cases in which enforceability of patents is typically prohibited until the misuse is fully "purged."See, e.g., .
● New York lawyer Seth Dabney in a 1963 article in the Columbia Law Review described a preliminary skirmish in the Hartford-Empire case over whether the defendants could require the Government to accept a consent decree—"the first occasion on which defendants sought to secure a consent decree without the consent of the United States.".Seth M. Dabney, Consent Decrees Without Consent, 63  1053, 1058 (1963). The defendants' purpose was to avoid the effect of an adjudication of antitrust violation, which would become prima facie evidence in any subsequent antitrust treble damages action against the defendants.See Clayton Act § 5(a), , which excludes "consent judgments or decrees entered before any testimony has been taken" from that effect. The defendants argued that they had cancelled the objectionable patent licenses and they moved for the entry of consent decrees that, they alleged, would include all the relief that the Government requested in the complaint with respect to the remaining issues. But the Government opposed the defendants' motions, and the court denied them.See 
In denying the motions, the court said: "Since the Government has not and will not consent to these decrees, they cannot properly be termed consent decrees, and the court cannot force a consent decree upon one of the parties."1 F.R.D. at 427. Moreover, the pleadings left factual issues contested; it remained unclear what facts would be established at trial, and what relief other than what the Government required in its prayer for relief the court would consider appropriate. Treating the motions as summary judgment motions, the court said, they failed because the "court cannot now say he is of the opinion that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact involved" in the case. "Until the record contains facts upon which conclusions may be based, the court feels that he would do wrong and commit error to anticipate facts and approve one or all of the proposed decrees at this time."1 F.R.D. at 429.
In addition, it was arguable that the defendants misstated the posture of the case when they said they were offering all the relief requested. That ignored one of the final, "boiler plate" portions of the complaint. The court said:
On page 98 of the complaint, paragraph 18 of the prayer for relief, is found the usual shotgun provision, or residuary clause, if you may call it that, that each complaint in equity invariably contains. After asking for certain specific forms of relief, the prayer of the complaint concludes with paragraph 18 which reads as follows: "That plaintiff have such other further general and different relief as the nature of the case may require, and the court may deem proper in the premises." The court does not now know and cannot pre-judge what the testimony in this case will disclose; therefore, he cannot anticipate what form of relief he would deem to be wise, expedient, and necessary to be entered into a decree, if it be found that some or all or substantially all of the allegations of the complaint are sustained. Hence the court cannot now say that the proposed decrees would satisfy everything requested in the prayer.1 F.R.D. at 428–29.
Dabney points out, however, that other courts have ignored such boiler plate.63  at 1056. But the subsequent opinion of the Supreme Court in United States v. Ward Baking Co.,, reversing 1962 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 5860 (M.D. Fla. Dec. 10, 1962). reversing a trial court's grant of a "consent judgment" to which the Government refused to consent, appears to approve the reasoning of the district court in Hartford-Empire.The Court did not cite Hartford-Empire, but it referred to the similar boiler plate in the Ward case. See 376 U.S. at 333 n.3. Dabney suggests that counsel for antitrust defendants should consider attempting this tactic, but he recognizes that the Government may appeal.63  at 1061–62.
● In A Brief History of FRAND, Jorge Contreras discussed the "legacy" of the Hartford-Empire case and comprehensively reviews and summarizes the case law interpreting Hartford-Empire.Jorge L. Contreras, A Brief History of Frand: Analyzing Current Debates in Standard Setting and Antitrust through a Historical Lens, 80  L.J. 39, 55 ff. (2015). He maintains that the decision "had a lasting impact on the remedial decrees issued by courts in antitrust and other cases through the 1970s."80  L.J. at 55.
Contreras begins with the National Lead case,United States v. National Lead Co., 63 F. Supp. 513 (S.D.N.Y. 1945), aff’d, . a patent pooling cartel arrangement in the titanium compounds market. The district court found an antitrust violation and ordered reasonable royalty licensing, but refused the Government's request for royalty-free licensing. The Supreme Court affirmed, citing Hartford-Empire. The Court considered an automatic award of royalty-free licensing "inequitable without special proof to support such a conclusion," but said that in an appropriate case "royalties might be set at zero or at a nominal rate."332 U.S. at 349.
Contreras explained United States v. United States Gypsum Co.67 F. Supp. 397 (D.D.C. 1946), rev’d, 333 U.S. 364 (1948), remanded to 1949 WL 4071 (D.D.C. Nov. 7, 1949), rev’d, . as "an important milestone in the evolution of patent licensing
commitments," because it established a principle that once the court made its reasonable-royalty determination, it would apply to all other licenses of the patents afterwards, so that applicants who would not accept that royalty rate forfeited their right to a compulsory reasonable royalty license under the decree.80  L.J. at 60.
Contreras then turned to United States v. Besser Mfg, Co.,96 F. Supp. 304 (E.D. Mich. 1951), aff’d, . which he considered notable because the district court (affirmed by the Supreme Court) ordered that the compulsory reasonable and nondiscriminatory royalty rates, as well as the form and content of the license agreements, be determined through arbitration. Additionally, the Supreme Court unanimously recognized that “compulsory licensing” is a recognized remedy for antitrust violations and is particularly appropriate when
“a penchant for abuses of patent rights is demonstrated."80  L.J. at 62, quoting 343 U.S. at 449.
According to Contreras, the incandescent lamp bulb case against General ElectricUnited States v. General Elec. Co., 82 F. Supp. 753 (D.N.J. 1949), decree entered by 115 F. Supp. 835 (D.N.J. 1953). was notable not only because it required dedication of GE's vast aggregation of lamp patents—"arsenal of a huge body of patents"—but also because the court held that “it is advisable to require the defendants to license whatever machinery patents they have without possessing the correlative right to demand licenses in return."80  L.J. at 64.
Contreras found the telecommunications litigation and breakup of the Bell telephone monopoly "emblematic of the government’s post-War impatience with large industrial monopolies and their use of patents." First, a 1956 AT&T consent decree required AT&T and Western Electric to grant licenses under the Bell telephone equipment patents to all applicants. These licenses were required to bear reasonable royalties as
to General Electric, RCA, and Westinghouse (collaborators with the defendants that had all entered into prior licensing agreements with the Bell companies), and royalty-free licenses as to all others.See United States v. Western Elec. Co., 1956 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 4076, at *9–12 (D.N.J. 1956). Then another antitrust suit against AT&T, alleged that it illegally limited the connectivity of its network to MCI and other carriers, and blocked competing manufacturers from providing equipment to Bell operating companies. This lawsuit resulted in the 1982 consent decree that dismantled the Bell system.United States v. AT&T Co., 552 F. Supp. 131 (D.D.C. 1982), aff’d mem. sub nom., . The consent judgment eliminated the earlier compulsory licensing order on the ground that the need for compulsory licensing of patents would be lessened following separation of AT&T’s carrier and equipment businesses from one another.See 552 F. Supp. at 176–77.
Contreras explains that American Securit Co. v. Shatterproof Glass Corp.American Securit Co. v. Shatterproof Glass Corp., 154 F. Supp. 890 (D. Del. 1957), aff’d, 268 F.2d 769 (3d Cir. 1959). is a notable case because it is the first decision to address the consequences of a patent holder’s violation of the terms of a court-imposed compulsory patent licensing decree. In 1948, a district court entered a consent decree establishing that Securit and other glass-manufacturer defendants violated the Sherman Act by conspiring to exploit patents covering technology for tempering flat glass panes in a restrictive manner. The defendants were ordered to grant to any applicant a non-exclusive license under their patents and to refrain from including any restrictions or conditions in that license. The consent decree included a prohibition against requiring a licensee to take a license under any patent not covered by the decree.A modified version of the order is found as United States v. Libbey-Owens-Ford Glass Co., 1973 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 14992 (N.D. Ohio Feb. 8, 1973). Paragraph X prohibits the defendants from requiring a licensee to "accept a license or immunity under any other patent owned or controlled by any defendant." Id. at *12. Such a tie-in requirement is termed "package licensing." See ; see also  ("Conditioning the ability of a licensee to license one or more items of intellectual property on the licensee’s purchase of another item of intellectual property . . . has been held in some cases to constitute illegal tying.”). Shatterproof Glass requested a license from Securit in 1951 for a license under some patents covered in the consent decree. Securit refused to grant Shatterproof a license unless it agreed to license a larger portfolio of patents that included patents not covered in the decree, at a single, fixed royalty rate—a so-called package license. After inconclusive negotiations, Shatterproof began to manufacture glass in a manner allegedly covered by Securit’s patents. Securit then sued Shatterproof for patent infringement. Shatterproof raised as defenses patent misuse and Securit's violation of the consent order, which expressly prohibited Securit's package-licensing demand. The district court in Delaware ruled for Shatterproof on both grounds and barred Securit from enforcing its patents against Shatterproof, and the Third Circuit affirmed. Securit argued to the district court that the package license was its standard form of license and deviating from that standard offering would discriminate against Securit’s existing licensees. The district court rejected the argument, saying that obey the consent decree.154 F. Supp. at 897. Contreras states that this is "the first example of patents being rendered unenforceable as a result of the violation of a court-imposed patent licensing commitment."80  L.J. at 67.
Contreras then turned to United States v. Glaxo Group Ltd.,. in which the Government sued a drug company for restrictive licensing directed at preventing generic competitors from marketing the drug. The district court found a violation but refused to order compulsory reasonable royalty licensing or to allow the Government to challenge patent validity. The Supreme Court reversed, stating that "reasonable-royalty licensing [is a] well-established form[ ] of relief when necessary to an effective remedy, particularly where patents have provided the leverage for or have contributed to the antitrust violation adjudicated.”410 U.S. at 59. The Court cited, among other cases, Hartford-Empire, Gypsum, and Besser. After remand, Glaxo was unwilling to litigate the validity of its patent and agreed to grant any applicant an irrevocable, royalty-free license under the
patent, regardless of the Supreme Court's warnings in Hartford-Empire against such confiscation of property in antitrust decrees.80  L.J. at 69.
"The consent decree entered in" the Xerox case,See In re Xerox Corp., 86 F.T.C. 364 (1975). Contreras states, "is notable, not least because the enforcement action in question was brought by the FTC rather than the DOJ."80  L.J. at 71. The FTC asserted that Xerox violated FTC Act § 5 by engaging in various unfair methods of competition. The consent order had the unusual provision of allowing any applicant to select up to three Xerox patents for licensing on a royalty-free basis, and allowing Xerox to charge a 0.5% royalty for additional patents, subject to a cap of 1.5%.
References
External links
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States patent case law
Category:1945 in United States case law
"""

From "Hartman v. Moore" ==> """
Hartman v. Moore, 547 U.S. 250 (2006), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States involving the pleading standard for retaliatory prosecution claims against government officials. After a successful lobbying attempt by the CEO of a manufacturing company against competing devices that the US Postal Service supported, the CEO found himself the target of an investigation by US postal inspectors and a criminal prosecution that was dismissed for lack of evidence. The CEO then filed suit against the inspectors and other government officials for seeking to prosecute him in retaliation for exercising his First Amendment rights to criticize postal policy. The Court ruled 5-2 that to prove that the prosecution was caused by a retaliatory motive, the plaintiff bringing such a claim must allege and prove that the criminal charges were brought without probable cause.
 Background 
Campaign against U.S.P.S. policies
In the 1980s, William G. Moore, Jr. was the chief executive officer of Recognition Equipment Inc. (REI), which manufactured a multiline optical character reader for interpreting multiple lines of text.  REI initially received some $50 million from the United States Postal Service to develop this technology for reading and sorting mail, but the U.S. Postmaster General and other postal officials were urging mail senders to use nine-digit ZIP codes ("Zip + 4"), which would provide enough routing information on one line of text to allow single-line scanning machines to sort mail by reading just that line.
Many Members of Congress and federal research officers had reservations about the Postal Service's Zip + 4 policy and its intended reliance on single-line readers, in part because of the foreign sources of the equipment.  Moore built on this opposition by lobbying Congress, testifying before congressional committees, and supporting a "Buy American" rider to the Postal Service's 1985 appropriations bill.  Moore alleged that he and REI had received requests from the Postmaster General to be quiet, yet his company proceeded to support its agenda and hired a public relations firm recommended by a Postal Service official.
Investigation and prosecution
The campaign succeeded, and in July 1985 the Postal Service embraced multiline technology.  However, the Postal Service's ensuing order of multiline equipment (valued between $250–400 million) went to a competing firm.  Moore and REI were also soon the target of two investigations by postal inspectors.  The first looked into the purported payment of kickbacks by the PR firm to the official who recommended its services, and the second sought to document REI's possibly improper role in the search for a new Postmaster General.
Notwithstanding very limited evidence linking Moore and REI to any wrongdoing, an Assistant United States Attorney decided to bring criminal charges against them, and in 1988 the grand jury indicted Moore, REI, and REI's vice president.  At the close of the Government's case, after six weeks of trial, however, the District Court concluded that there was a "complete lack of direct evidence" connecting the defendants to any of the criminal wrongdoing alleged, and it granted the REI defendants' motion for judgment of acquittal.
Moore's lawsuit
Moore then brought an action in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Texas for civil liability under Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents, 403 U.S. 388 (1971),Bivens established that the victims of a constitutional violation by a federal agent have a right to recover damages against the official in federal court despite the absence of any statute conferring such a right.  Though more limited in some respects not relevant to this case, a Bivens action is the federal analog to suits brought against state officials under 42 U.S.C. § 1983. against the prosecutor and five postal inspectors. His complaint raised five causes of action, including the claim that the prosecutor and the inspectors had engineered his criminal prosecution in retaliation for criticism of the Postal Service, thus violating the First Amendment.  Moore argued that the postal inspectors launched a criminal investigation against him well before any suspicion of the two schemes actually arose, that the inspectors targeted him for his lobbying activities, and that they pressured the United States Attorney's Office to have him indicted.  He also sought recovery from the federal government of the United States under the Federal Tort Claims Act (FTCA). The District Court dismissed the claims against the Assistant United States Attorney in accordance with the absolute immunity for prosecutorial judgment, and rejected an abuse of process claim against the inspectors.Moore v. Valder, No. 91-2491 (N.D. Tex. Sept. 21, 1992).
The remaining claims were transferred to the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, where Moore's suit was dismissed in its entirety,Moore v. Hartman, No. 92-2288, 1993 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 13943, (D.D.C. Sept. 24, 1993). only to have the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit reinstate the retaliatory prosecution claim.  The District Court then permitted limited discovery on that matter regarding the inspectors, but again dismissed the remaining charges against the United States and the prosecutor.Moore v. Valder, No. 92-2288, Memorandum Opinion, D.D.C. Feb. 5, 1998.  Although Moore succeeded in having the District of Columbia Circuit reinstate his FTCA claim against the United States, the dismissal of his claims against the prosecutor was affirmed.Moore v. United States, 
With the remainder of the case back in District Court, the inspectors moved for summary judgment, urging that because the underlying criminal charges were supported by probable cause they were entitled to qualified immunity from a retaliatory-prosecution suit.  The District Court denied the motion, and the Court of Appeals affirmed.
The Courts of Appeals had divided on the issue of requiring evidence of a lack of probable cause in 42 U.S.C. § 1983 and Bivens retaliatory-prosecution suits.  Some circuits burdened plaintiffs with the obligation to show its absence,See, e.g., Wood v. Kesler, 323 F.3d 872, 883 (11th Cir. 2003); Keenan v. Tejeda, 290 F.3d 252, 260 (5th Cir. 2002);  Others, including the District of Columbia Circuit, imposed no such requirement.See, e.g., Poole v. County of Otero, 271 F.3d 955, 961 (10th Cir. 2001);   The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve the circuit split.Moore v. Hartman, 545 U.S. ___, 125 S. Ct. 2977 (2005).
 Opinion of the Court 
Writing for a five-justice majority, Justice David Souter delivered the Court's ruling that the plaintiff in a Bivens action for retaliatory prosecution must allege and prove the lack of probable cause for pressing the underlying criminal charges.The Court's ruling will likely be applied to retaliatory prosecution claims brought under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, as the Bivens action was merely a judicial remedy constructed to mirror the section 1983 action.  Furthermore, the Court appeared to treat the two actions as if they were interchangeable in its opinion.  Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg filed a dissent, which was joined by Justice Stephen Breyer.
Two justices did not participate in the case.  Justice Samuel Alito was confirmed to the Court on January 31, 2006, 21 days after it heard oral argument.  Chief Justice John Roberts was recused from the case because, as a judge on the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals, he had participated in that court's January 31, 2005 decision to deny the inspectors' motion for rehearing en banc.
Souter's majority opinion
Though the Court adopted the position of the inspector defendants that the absence of probable cause should be an essential element of this claim, it disagreed with their reasoning, and instead based the need for that element upon the requirement to prove causation.
The inspector defendants had first argued that the "objective" burden of proving lack of probable cause was needed to filter out frivolous claims.  However, the Court noted that in the past 25 years, fewer than two dozen actions for retaliatory prosecution had been before the Courts of Appeals, and there was no sign that they were brought disproportionately in the circuits that did not require the absence of probable cause to be established.
The defendants also urged that the traditional common law tort of malicious prosecution should be instructive, as that cause of action required a plaintiff, following acquittal, to show that the criminal action was begun without probable cause for charging the crime in the first place.  However, the Court considered common-law tort elements to be more "a source of inspired examples than of prefabricated components of Bivens torts."
The Court believed that imposing that burden on plaintiffs was instead best justified by the need to establish causation, "from animus to injury, with details specific to retaliatory-prosecution cases."  Although causal connection is required in any retaliation action, the Court considered that retaliatory prosecution claims presented an additional difficulty.
The ordinary claim is one in which the government agent allegedly harboring the animus is also the individual allegedly taking the adverse action, as in the paradigmatic case of a public employee being fired for criticizing the government.See, e.g.,  (allegation that a school board dismissed a teacher for writing a public letter critical of the board's financial administration).  Those cases require "but-for" causation, meaning that the adverse action would not have been taken but for the retaliatory motive of the official.  Evidence of the animus and the challenged action has been taken as sufficient for a circumstantial demonstration that the one caused the other.
The Court believed retaliatory prosecution claims differed from such ordinary retaliation claims in two key respects.  First, when the claimed retaliation is the bringing of criminal charges, there will always be evidence showing whether there was or was not probable cause for the underlying charge.  Demonstrating that there was no probable cause will tend to show that retaliation was the but-for cause for instigating the prosecution, while, conversely, establishing the existence of probable cause will suggest that prosecution would have occurred regardless.  The Court did not conclude that this alone meant that the plaintiff should be required to plead and prove no probable cause, but it did mean that any case for retaliatory prosecution would likely litigate the issue.
Second, the causal relationship will be much more complex than in ordinary retaliation cases, because prosecutorial immunity bars the plaintiff from suing the official who directly caused the injury of a retaliatory prosecution.  The defendant will instead be an official such as the postal inspectors, who may have influenced the prosecutorial decision but did not make it.  The Court viewed this less as a cause of action for retaliatory prosecution, but rather for "successful retaliatory inducement to prosecute."  The required causal connection is therefore between the retaliatory motive of one person and the action of another.
The problem is then that evidence of an inspector's motive does not necessarily show that the inspector induced a prosecution that would not have been otherwise pressed.  There is furthermore a long-standing presumption that a prosecutor has legitimate grounds for the actions he takes, supported by the Court's position that "judicial intrusion into executive discretion of such high order should be minimal."This principle follows from the separation of powers, which limits the extent to which one branch of government can interfere with the duties of another.  Because some kind of allegation is then needed to bridge the gap between the motive of the nonprosecuting official and the prosecutor's action, to address the presumption of legitimate prosecutorial decisionmaking, "retaliatory motive on the part of an official urging prosecution combined with an absence of probable cause supporting the prosecutor's decision to go forward are reasonable grounds to suspend the presumption of regularity behind the charging decision."
The Court observed that it could have left the causal gap to be filled by "such pleading and proof as the circumstances allow."  The disclosure of a prosecutor's own retaliatory motive would be significant, as would evidence that he merely rubber-stamped the work of his investigators.  However, the Court believed that those examples "are likely to be rare and consequently poor guides in structuring a cause of action."  Furthermore, because the issue is so likely to be raised in such litigation at some point, "a requirement to plead and prove its absence will usually be cost[-]free by any incremental reckoning."
Ginsburg's dissent
Justice Ginsburg filed a dissenting opinion, which was joined by Justice Stephen Breyer.  She believed that the lower court's ruling had struck a proper balance that was consistent with Court precedent.
Ginsburg began by noting that the Court of Appeals had determined that "the evidence of retaliatory motive [came] close to the proverbial smoking gun."Moore, 388 F.3d at 884.  The record also indicated that the postal inspectors engaged in "unusual prodding," strenuously urging a reluctant U.S. Attorney's Office to press charges against Moore.  Following circuit precedent, the Court of Appeals held that "once a plaintiff shows [conduct sheltered by the First Amendment] to have been a motivating factor in the decision to press charges," the burden shifts to the defending officials to show that the case would have been pursued anyway.
Because the case was at this stage directed only against the instigating postal inspectors, Ginsburg did not believe that the plaintiff—"the alleged victim"—should bear the burden of pleading and proving the lack of probable cause for the prosecution.  She would have instead applied the same burden that the Court of Appeals did, requiring the postal inspectors to show that the U.S. Attorney's Office would have pursued the case even absent "retaliatory motive and importuning."
Ginsburg believed that the majority's burden of proof allocation would only check "entirely baseless" prosecutions.  "So long as the retaliators present evidence barely sufficient to establish probable cause and persuade a prosecutor to act on their thin information, they could accomplish their mission cost[-]free. Their victim, on the other hand, would incur not only the costs entailed in mounting a defense, he likely would sustain a reputational loss as well, and neither loss would be compensable under federal law."  Ginsburg would have preferred the D.C. Circuit's "more speech-protective formulation," in which recovery remains possible "in those rare cases where strong motive evidence combines with weak probable cause to support a finding that the [investigation and ensuing] prosecution would not have occurred but for the [defending] officials' retaliatory animus."
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States constitutional torts case law
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:United States Postal Service litigation
Category:Retaliatory arrest and prosecution
"""

From "Hartsville Oil Mill v. United States" ==> """
Hartsville Oil Mill v. United States, 271 U.S. 43 (1926), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the jurisdiction of the Court of Claims was not enlarged by Congressional reference legislation when the court already had jurisdiction to hear the case under another section of the Judicial Code.Hartsville Oil Mill v. United States, . Additionally the court held that modification to the contract in question was not by duress as there had not been an inadequate power in the courts to remedy the effects of the threatened actions.Hartsville Oil Mill, 271 U.S. at 49.
Background
On September 26, 1918, the government made a contract with Hartsville Oil Mill, a cottonseed producer, which was replicated with several other cottonseed producers for the delivery of cotton linters.Hartsville Oil Mill, 271 U.S. at 45. Cotton linters, a by-product of the cotton crushing process, were used by the government in World War I for the production of explosives. Of the production of 2,250,000 pounds, 270,000 bales were on hand and inspected when armistice was declared in late 1918. At this time the government informed the producers that it intended to cancel the contract and would only accept 150,000 bales if the producers agreed to a contract modification.Chang, Betty, Coercion Theory and the State Action Doctrine as Applied in NCAA v. Tarkanian and NCAA v. Miller, 22 J.C. & U.L. 133, 159 (1995). Faced with this repudiation of the contract, the producers agreed to the modification and sought recovery by petition to the U.S. Senate under Judicial Code § 145, the predecessor to 28 U.S.C. § 1492.
Case details
Following the passage of a Senate Resolution numbered 448 on March 23, 1922, referring Senate bill numbered 4479 March 3, 1922 to the Court of Federal Claims, the producers filed a case with the Court of Claims requesting they investigate the matter and report to the Senate.Hartsville Oil Mill v. United States, 60 Ct.Cl. 712, 1925 WL 2676, 1 (1925). However, the Court of Claims determined that it held jurisdiction over the contract dispute under Judicial Code § 7 and heard the case under its Article III jurisdiction.Hartsville Oil Mill, 271 U.S. at 44. While the producers alleged that they had been forced to agree to the modification of the contract under duress of the government's threat of repudiation of the original contract, the Court of Claims held that there was no duress. They reasoned that the producers negotiated with the government for several weeks and that the government gave up concessions which constituted consideration for contractual purposes.Hartsville Oil Mill v. United States, 60 Ct.Cl. 712, 1925 WL 2676, 9 (1925). As such, there was no duress as the plaintiffs had substantial time, prior to agreeing to the modification, to seek redress in a court of law for their claims under the original contract and that therefore the remedies at law were not inadequate as to invoke the doctrine of duress.Refusal to pay debt as economic duress or business compulsion avoiding compromise or release, 9 A.L.R.4th 942 § 4
Appeal
On appeal to the Supreme Court, the producers contested the Court of Claims findings of jurisdiction and on the element of duress in the contract, alleging a lack of jurisdiction, the existence of duress, and a lack of consideration for the contract. Writing for the court, Justice Harlan F. Stone affirmed the decision of the lower court and found against the producers on their claims.Hartsville Oil Mill, 271 U.S. at 50. He argued that the Senate resolution referring the case to the Court of Claims had no effect on and did not enlarge its jurisdiction.Hartsville Oil Mill, 271 U.S. at 45. The case is known for establishing the idea that the Court of Claims' jurisdiction under its judicial authority would supersede its congressional jurisdiction where the two conflicted. 
See also
 Southern Pacific Terminal Co. v. ICC: appeals on cotton shipments
 Ware & Leland v. Mobile County: federal jurisdiction on cotton futures
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:1926 in United States case law
Category:Cotton industry in the United States
Category:United States home front during World War I
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:Cottonseed oil
"""

From "Harvey v. United States" ==> """
Harvey v. United States, 113 U.S. 243 (1885),  was a case for labor and materials furnished by the claimants in constructing coffer dams in Davenport, Iowa and in performing the work necessarily connected therewith and preliminary to the mason work for the piers and abutments referred to in the contract. That court proceeded on the view that the claimants had no right to rely on the testimony of experts introduced by them as to the value of the work, but should have kept and produced accounts of its cost and expense, but it gave to the claimants the benefit of the testimony of experts introduced by the United States as to such value in awarding the above amount. Held that the claimants could not be deprived of reasonable compensation for their work because they did not produce evidence of the character referred to, when it did not appear that such evidence existed, if the evidence they produced was the best evidence accessible to them and it enabled the court to arrive at a proper conclusion..  
Decision
The judgment of the Court of Claims is affirmed for the full amount of the award made to the claimants, and an additional amount of 842.82 is allowed for the labor done and materials furnished by the claimants in constructing coffer dams and in performing the work necessarily connected therewith and preliminary to the mason work for the piers and abutments referred to in their contract, the same being an additional allowance on account of item (1) in their petition filed August 30, 1876, and the said judgment is reversed so far as respects item (2) in that petition, and the sum of 574.80 is allowed for that item, and this cause was remanded to the Court of Claims, with a direction to enter judgment accordingly.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Davenport, Iowa
"""

From "Havens Realty Corp. v. Coleman" ==> """
Havens Realty Corp. v. Coleman, (1983), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that an organization may sue in its own right if it has been directly injured, for example through a "drain on the organization's resources", and that so-called "testers", individuals who sought to determine if a company was in violation of the law, may have standing in their own right.Summary from the National Association of Realtors
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases involving standing
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1983 in United States case law
"""

From "Hawaii Housing Authority v. Midkiff" ==> """
Hawaii Housing Authority v. Midkiff, 467 U.S. 229 (1984), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that a state could use eminent domain to take land that was overwhelmingly concentrated in the hands of private landowners and redistribute it to the wider population of private residents.Hawaii Housing Auth. v. Midkiff, .
 Background 
Only 22 landowners owned 72.5% of the fee simple titles in the island of Oahu, and the Hawaii State Legislature concluded that there was an oligopoly in land ownership that was "skewing the State's residential fee simple market, inflating land prices, and injuring the public tranquility and welfare."Haw. Hous. Auth. v. Midkiff, 467 U.S. 229, 232
However, the shortage of buildable land on Oahu was largely because roughly half of the island is government-owned and thus unavailable for privately owned housing.
The Hawaii legislature enacted a condemnation scheme, which was intended to transfer titles to the lots from its owner, the Bishop Estate, to the home lessees. The case focused on the taking of land held by the Bishop Estate, a charitable trust that held the residual lands of the Hawaiian monarchy, and used the proceeds to support the Kamehameha schools, which provide an education to Hawaiian children. The Bishop Estate had subdivided some of its land on Oahu and leased individual lots to land lessees, who built homes on them and at first paid nominal rents to the estate.
However, as Oahu land values rose, so did rents, and the tenants demanded the state acquire the Estate's title and reconvey the individual lots to the lessee-homeowners, who would have to pay fair market value to reimburse the state for the acquisition.
 Decision 
The Court's decision looked to Berman v. Parker (1954) in which eminent domain power had been used to redevelop slum areas and for the possible sale or lease of the condemned lands for private interest.
The Court decided that the United States Congress had the power to determine what was for the public good over the judiciary. The decision equated police power with the eminent domain of the sovereign's public use requirement.
In an 8-0 decision, the Court voted that the Hawaiian act was constitutional. Hawaii's act to regulate the oligopoly was seen as a classic exercise of the State's police powers, and a comprehensive and rational approach to identifying and correcting market failure and satisfied the public use doctrine. Land did not have to be put into actual public use in order to use eminent domain. It is the taking's purpose, and not its mechanics that were important. Here, eminent domain was used to provide an overall market benefit to the wider populace.
The decision suggested that a judicial deference to the legislature was involved. If the legislature determines there are substantial reasons for the exercise of the taking power, courts must defer to the legislature's determination that the taking will serve a public use.
The Court held that the takings to correct concentrated property ownership was a legitimate public purpose.
 Limitations of the decision 
The decision, though, placed limits on the power of the government, stating:
 Aftermath 
However, the aftermath of the Midkiff decision failed to achieve the stated purpose of the redistribution legislation. It could not create new housing because it transferred title from the land lessor only to the lessee-homeowners who already occupied existing homes on the subject property. As soon as the former lessees acquired fee simple titles to their homes, their homes became attractive to Japanese investors who paid high prices for those homes, largely in the upscale Kahala and Hawaii Kai neighborhoods. That led to a ripple effect throughout the island.
Home prices on Oahu, far from falling, as had been intended by the legislature, surged upward and more than doubled within six years.
The primary holding of Midkiff was reaffirmed by Kelo v. City of New London (2005).
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 467
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States land use case law
Category:Legal history of Hawaii
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:Public housing in the United States
Category:History of Oahu
Category:1984 in Hawaii
"""

From "Hawaii v. Office of Hawaiian Affairs" ==> """
Hawaii v. Office of Hawaiian Affairs, 556 U.S. 163 (2009), was a United States Supreme Court case about the former crown lands of the Hawaiian monarchy, and whether the state's right to sell them was restricted by the 1993 Apology Resolution.  The Court, in an opinion by Justice Samuel Alito, ruled unanimously that the state had the power to sell the lands free of encumbrances.
Overview
In 1893, a "Committee of Safety," in co-operation with United States minister to Hawaii John L. Stevens, overthrew the Kingdom of Hawaii and established a provisional government.  The resulting Republic of Hawaii governed the islands until 1898, when the United States granted their proposal for annexation.  Under the Newlands Resolution, the Republic of Hawaii "'cede[d] absolutely and without reserve to the United States of America all rights of sovereignty of whatsoever kind' and further 'cede[d] and transfer[red] to the United States the absolute fee and ownership of all public, Government, or Crown lands ... and all other public property of every kind and description belonging to the Government of the Hawaiian Islands.' The Newlands Resolution further provided that all 'property and rights' in the ceded lands 'are vested in the United States of America.'".  
The Hawaiian Organic Act established a territorial government for Hawaii in 1900.  In the Organic Act, Congress provided that "The portion of the public domain heretofore known as Crown land is hereby declared to have been, on [1898], and prior thereto, the property of the Hawaiian government, and to be free and clear from any trust of or concerning the same, and from all claim of any nature whatsoever, upon the rents, issues, and profits thereof. It shall be subject to alienation and other uses as may be provided by law."  In 1959, Hawaii was admitted as a state by the Hawaii Admission Act.  In that Act, Congress transferred title to most of the former Crown lands to the state, including the parcel at issue in this case.
In 1993, the United States Congress adopted the Apology Resolution, in which the United States apologized for its role in the overthrow of the Kingdom of Hawaii in 1893. Shortly thereafter, the Office of Hawaiian Affairs (OHA) sought to enjoin a residential development on a parcel of land owned by the state that was held in trust for Native Hawaiians and the general public.  OHA also requested that the Housing Finance and Development Corporation  (HFDC - the state agency in charge of the parcel's development) certify that any transfer of the parcel's ownership would not diminish Native Hawaiians' claims to the land and include a disclaimer to that effect.  The HFDC refused, believing that such a disclaimer would render it impossible for future owners to obtain title insurance.  HFDC sent OHA a check for the land.  OHA refused to accept the payment.
Procedural history
OHA filed suit in state court.  The trial court held in favor of HFDC.  On appeal, the Supreme Court of Hawaii reversed and held that the Apology Resolution changed the legal relationships of the parties and issued an injunction against development of the land until the state of Hawaii reconciled with Native Hawaiians.  The state appealed to the United States Supreme Court in 2008.
The issue was whether the Apology Resolution barred Hawaii from selling land held in public trust to third parties until the claims of Native Hawaiians had been resolved.
The OHA argued that the Apology Resolution changed the relationship between Native Hawaiians and the government and that it restored rights that had been lost in the 1893 revolution. The state disagreed by arguing that the language was intended only as an apology and that no changes in law had been made.
Decision
Justice Samuel Alito wrote for a unanimous US Supreme Court, which reversed the Hawaii Supreme Court's ruling and held that the Apology Resolution had neither created new rights nor changed the relationship between the state and Native Hawaiians. The Apology Resolution used only conciliatory words, which are not used by Congress to create substantive rights.
The Apology Resolution noted that it did not serve as a settlement of any claims against the United States. However, a disclaimer of settling claims against one sovereign, the United States, cannot be read as an affirmative recognition of claims against another sovereign, Hawaii.
Aftermath
After the decision, HFDC continued to develop the parcel, which will be called the Leiali'i Affordable Housing Project.  It is expected to be complete by 2016.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 556
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 References 
External links
 Hawaii v. Office of Hawaiian Affairs at supremecourt.gov (docket information)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:2009 in Hawaii
"""

From "Hawaii v. Standard Oil Co. of California" ==> """
Hawaii v. Standard Oil Co. of Cal., 405 U.S. 251 (1972), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court which held that Section 4 of the Clayton Antitrust Act does not authorize a U.S. state to sue for damages for an injury to its general economy allegedly attributable to a violation of the United States antitrust law.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 405
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:Legal history of Hawaii
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:Chevron Corporation
Category:Standard Oil
"""

From "Hawke v. Smith" ==> """
Hawke v. Smith, 253 U.S. 221 (1920), was a United States Supreme Court case coming out of the state of Ohio. It challenged the constitutionality of a provision in the state constitution allowing the state legislature's ratification of federal constitutional amendments to be challenged by a petition signed by six percent of Ohio voters. This would then bring the issue to referendum.
In the case of Ohio and the 18th Amendment, the legislature ratified the amendment and, before the ninety-day waiting period had passed, the Secretary of State, Robert Lansing, declared the 18th Amendment to be in effect. Meanwhile, a petition was signed by at least six percent of the voters and, in the ensuing referendum, a majority of Ohio voters voted against prohibition, seemingly invalidating the passage of the 18th Amendment. The controversy regarding this situation led to litigation.
The issue before the court was whether or not a state had a right to reserve to its people the right to review its legislature's ratification of federal amendments. The prohibitionists argued that the Constitution provided for the ratifying of federal amendments by state legislatures—it said nothing about the people's right to review such amendments. Opponents of this view argued that the Constitution did not say anything about what constituted a state legislature and it was up to each of the states to decide what constituted its legislature. Thus in the case of Ohio, the idea of "state legislature" came with the limit of not being able to ratify a federal amendment without review by the people of the state, and, thus, the amendment had not been ratified.
 Opinion of the Court 
On June 1, 1920, the Court ruled that Ohio voters could not overturn the state legislature's approval of the Eighteenth Amendment.Hawke v. Smith. Ohio Historical Society. Retrieved on 2008-06-12.
 Significance 
Hawke v. Smith was important for two reasons. First, several other states had been considering referendums on Prohibition. This case made it clear that the 18th Amendment was valid. Second, the fact that the amendment passed in Ohio despite a majority of voters voting against it fostered the idea that Prohibition was the work of powerful groups and not the people themselves.
 References 
Bibliography
 Kyvig, David E. Repealing National Prohibition. 2nd ed. Kent, Ohio: The Kent State UP, 2000. Pages 14–16.
External links
Category:1920 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Ohio
Category:Prohibition in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:1920 in Ohio
Category:United States Eighteenth Amendment case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Five case law
Category:Referendums in the United States
"""

From "Hawker v. New York" ==> """
Hawker v. New York, 170 U.S. 189 (1898), is a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States upheld a New York state law preventing convicted felons from practicing medicine, even when the felony conviction occurred before the law was enacted.
Case
Dr. Hawker was convicted in 1878 of performing an illegal abortion.  He served his time, and then resumed the practice of medicine.  In 1893 and 1895, the legislature of the State of New York passed public health laws making it illegal for convicted felons to practice medicine.  Dr. Hawker was convicted under this law in 1896, but contended that the law passed after his conviction was putting an additional penalty on him, contrary to the protection from ex post facto laws in Section 9 of Article One of the United States Constitution, also known as the Bill of Attainder.
Majority opinion
Justice Brewer's opinion cites Dent v. West Virginia and other cases which held that states may add new qualifications for practicing medicine that apply to those already in practice.  It also cites Jones v. Brim , which held that the states have a right to classify individuals for application of laws and also Alabama and California cases where the right to vote or to sell liquor (respectively) could be revoked on the basis of a prior conviction when that conviction is reasonable evidence that a person has broken a law, and thus is evidence of insufficient good character to exercise the right.
An exigent threat to [[patient safety]] was provided as the reason to revoke Dr. Hawker's medical license. He was not an existential threat when legally practicing. When the law changed, the safety of the public suddenly became of paramount concern and he was disbarred. "It is, no one can doubt, of high importance to the community that health, limb and life should not be left to the treatment of ignorant pretenders and charlatans. It is within the power of the legislature to enact such laws as will protect the people from ignorant pretenders, and secure them the services of reputable, skilled and learned men... To require this is an exercise of the police power for the protection of the public against incompetents and impostors, and is in no sense the creation of a monopoly or special privileges. The door stands open to all who possess the requisite age and good character, and can stand the examination which is exacted of all applicants alike."
Dissenting opinion
Justice Harlan's dissenting opinion contends that this is a case of an ex post facto law, given that the law does not consider the doctor's current fitness for the job, but rather relies on a conviction nearly 20 years old, which he does not consider evidence of current character.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 170
 Gabriel J. Chin, Are Collateral Sanctions Premised on Conduct or Conviction: The Case of Abortion Doctors, 30 Fordham Urban Law Journal 1685 (2003) (discussing case).
References
External links
Category:1898 in New York (state)
Category:1898 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of New York (state)
Category:Medical regulation in the United States
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:United States ex post facto case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Hayburn's Case" ==> """
Hayburn's Case, 2 U.S. (2 Dall.) 409 (1792), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States was invited to rule on whether certain non-judicial duties could be assigned by Congress to the federal circuit courts in their official capacity.2 U.S. 409 Excerpted version of the opinion from "The Founders' Constitution" at University of Chicago This was the first time that the Supreme Court addressed the issue of justiciability. Congress eventually reassigned the duties in question, and the Supreme Court never gave judgment in this case.
Facts and procedural history
By the Invalid Pensions Act of 1792,Act of March 23, 1792 Congress created a scheme for disabled veterans of the American Revolution to apply for pensions to the United States Circuit Courts.Hall, Kermit L. ed.  The Oxford Companion to the Supreme Court of the United States, Second Edition. Oxford University Press, 2005.  p. 427. The decisions of the courts in such cases were subject to stay by the Secretary of War, pending further action by Congress. Three Circuit Courts balked, on the grounds that the Constitution insulated them from such non-judicial duties and preserved their decisions from correction by the political branches. They communicated their objections in remonstrances to the President, who shared them with Congress. In the following Term of the Supreme Court, United States Attorney General Edmund Randolph petitioned for a writ of mandamus commanding the Circuit Court for the District of Pennsylvania to proceed in accordance with the Act. His original petition was made ex officio, but when the Supreme Court expressed doubts about proceeding in such fashion, he changed his position, averring that he was bringing the petition on behalf of William Hayburn, a pension applicant. At that point, the Supreme Court took the matter under advisement and bound the case over until its next term.Goebel Jr., Julius, 1 History of the Supreme Court of the United States: Antecedents and Beginnings to 1801.  MacMillan Publishing Co., 1971. pp. 560–566. While Hayburn's petition was thus pending, Congress intervened with the Act of February 28, 1793, relieving the Circuit Courts of the duty of processing such pension applications.
Decision
The only decision by the Supreme Court in this case was to continue it. None was ever handed down on the constitutional questions it presented. In his report of the hearing and continuance, Dallas appended a long footnote in which he quoted from the remonstrances. At the time of this case, each Justice of the Supreme Court served also on a Circuit Court. Thus, while the Supreme Court of the United States never ruled on the constitutionality of the Invalid Pensions Act of 1792, five of its six members, Jay, Cushing, Wilson, Blair and Iredell, declared it unconstitutional as members of the United States Circuit Courts for the Districts of New York, Pennsylvania and North Carolina.
The decision, however, may have been due to the lack of the authority of the appellant, the Attorney General of the United States, Edmund Randolph, to bring the appeal to the Supreme Court.  Attorney General Randolph initiated the case at the Supreme Court neither on behalf of the United States or Mr. Hayburn.  The Court declined to rule on a lower court decision, possibly because only the Attorney General wanted it to do so.See Marcus & Teir, "Hayburn's Case: A Misinterpretation of Precedent," 1988 Wis. L. Rev. 4; Bloch, "The Early Role of the Attorney General in Our Constitutional Scheme: In the Beginning There was Pragmatism," 1989 Duke L. J. 561, 590-618 - See more at: http://constitution.findlaw.com/article3/annotation03.html#sthash.7IjdO3cd.dpuf
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 2
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:1792 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Jay Court
Category:United States justiciability case law
Category:Veterans' affairs law in the United States
"""

From "Haynes v. United States" ==> """
Haynes v. United States, 390 U.S. 85 (1968), was a United States Supreme Court decision interpreting the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution's self-incrimination clause.. Haynes extended the Fifth Amendment protections elucidated in Marchetti v. United States..William F. Funk, Richard H. Seamon, Examples & explanations series: Administrative Law, Edition 3, Aspen Publishers, 2009, page 361-62.
Background of the case
The National Firearms Act of 1934 required the registration of certain types of firearms. Miles Edward Haynes was a convicted felon who was charged with failing to register a firearm under the Act. Haynes argued that, because he was a convicted felon and thus prohibited from owning a firearm, requiring him to register any firearms in his possession was requiring him to make an open admission to the government that he was in violation of the law, which was essentially a violation of his right not to incriminate himself.
Majority opinion
In a 7-1 decision, the Court ruled in 1968 in favor of Haynes. Earl Warren dissented in a one sentence opinion and Thurgood Marshall did not participate in the ruling.
As with many other 5th amendment cases, felons and others prohibited from possessing firearms could not be compelled to incriminate themselves through registration. The National Firearms Act was amended after Haynes to make it apply only to those who could lawfully possess a firearm. This eliminated prosecution of prohibited persons, such as criminals, and  cured the self-incrimination problem. In this new form, the new registration provision was upheld. The court held:
"  To eliminate the defects revealed by Haynes, Congress amended the Act so that only a possessor who lawfully makes, manufactures, or imports firearms can and must register them",  United States v. Freed, 401 U.S. 601 (1971).David Fellman, Defendants Rights Today, Univ. of Wisconsin Press, 1979, page 310. The original Haynes decision continues to block state prosecutions of criminals who fail to register guns as required by various state law gun registration schemes.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 390
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:United States federal firearms case law
Category:1968 in United States case law
"""

From "Haywood v. Drown" ==> """
Haywood v. Drown, 556 U.S. 729 (2009), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a New York law preventing state trial courts from hearing claims for money damages against prison employees whether based on federal or state law violated the Supremacy Clause of the United States Constitution.
Background
The defendant in this trial, Keith Haywood, was an inmate at the Attica Correctional Facility, in Attica, New York In 2003 and 2004, Haywood was charged with multiple counts of misbehavior, including assaulting an officer, soliciting mail, and failing a drug test. After a guilty verdict, Haywood filed suit in a New York state court against two employees of the Attica Correctional facility to review the claims under 42 U.S.C. § 1983. The defendants moved to dismiss Haywood's claims based on a New York statute that banned inmates from filing suit against the "official capacities" of correctional officers of the state.
Decision of the Supreme Court
Writing for the majority in favor of Haywood, Justice Stevens wrote the opinion of the Supreme Court. The court noted that the New York statute was passed to protect correctional facilities employees against "frivolous" damages suits filed by inmates. The Court found, however, that states "may not relieve whole categories of federal claims from their courts merely to avoid congestion."
Dissenting opinions
In dissent, Justice Clarence Thomas note that "neither the Constitution nor Supreme Court precedent require that states open their courts to Section 1983 claims."
Arguments
The case was argued by Jason E. Murtagh, an attorney with Dechert, for the Petitioner, and by Barbara D. Underwood for Respondent.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 556
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Attica Correctional Facility
"""

From "Haywood v. National Basketball Association" ==> """
Haywood v. National Basketball Association, 401 U.S. 1204 (1971), was a U.S. Supreme Court decision that ruled against the NBA's requirement that a player could not be drafted by an NBA team until four years after graduating from high school. Justice Douglas, in an in-chambers opinion, allowed Spencer Haywood to play in the NBA temporarily until the litigation could proceed further. The case was settled out of court, Haywood continued playing, and the NBA modified its four-year rule to allow players to enter the league early in cases of "hardship".
Background
Spencer Haywood turned pro after his sophomore season at the University of Detroit, joining the American Basketball Association’s (ABA) Denver Rockets in 1969. While both the NBA and the ABA required players to be at least four years removed from their high school graduation, the ABA offered a hardship exemption. With his mother raising 10 children while picking cotton at $2 per day (equivalent to about $ per day in ), Haywood met the criteria. 
Haywood led the ABA in scoring (30.0 per game) and rebounding (19.5 per game) in 1969-70, before jumping to the NBA the following season. Seattle SuperSonics owner Sam Schulman signed Haywood to a six-year, $1.5 million contract, ignoring the four-year rule. As a result, the NBA threatened to disallow the contract and implement various sanctions against the SuperSonics.
Procedural history
Haywood challenged this decision by commencing an antitrust action against the NBA. As part of his claim against the NBA, Haywood argued that the conduct of the NBA was a "group boycott" and a violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act. The central issue that had to be determined was whether the NBA draft policy was a restraint on trade and therefore was illegal in accordance with the Sherman Act.
The case was filed in the United States District Court for the Central District of California, which issued an injunction in Haywood's favor, ruling:
The NBA appealed to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, which stayed the injunction. Joined by the SuperSonics, Haywood appealed to the Supreme Court, which upheld the District Court, reinstated that court's injunction against the NBA, and remanded the case to the District Court for further proceedings.
Impact
Shortly after the Supreme Court's decision, the league and Haywood reached an out-of-court settlement which allowed him to stay with the Sonics permanently.
The decision allowed a significant number of high school graduates and college attendees to make themselves eligible for the NBA draft without waiting until four years after high school.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 401
Toolson v. New York Yankees, 
Silver v. New York Stock Exchange, 
Robertson v. National Basketball Association 556 F.2d 682 (2nd Cir. 1977)
Clarett v. National Football League, 369 F.3d 124 (2d Cir. 2004)
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:Sports case law
Category:American Basketball Association
Category:National Basketball Association draft
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:National Basketball Association controversies
"""

From "Hazel-Atlas Glass Co. v. Hartford-Empire Co." ==> """
Hazel-Atlas Glass Co. v. Hartford-Empire Co., 322 U.S. 238 (1944), is a much cited 1944 decision of the United States Supreme Court dealing with fraud on the Patent Office..  A widely quoted statement in the Court's opinion is: "The public welfare demands that the agencies of public justice be not so impotent that they must always be mute and helpless victims of deception and fraud."322 U.S. at 246. Although the fraud occurred in the late 1920s, the facts became public only much later in the Government's antitrust trial in United States v. Hartford-Empire Co.. 
Background
thumb|right|300px|The Hartford gob feeder fraudulently patented in this case (U.S. Pat. No. 1,655,391
In 1926 Hartford had a pending Peiler patent application on a "gob feeder" glass-making machine. The Patent Office confronted Hartford with "apparently insurmountable opposition." To help persuade the Office to grant the application, Hartford's patent attorney R.F. Hatch "ghost-wrote" a trade journal article for a union official, Clarke, praising the invention as a revolutionary advance, and paying him to sign it. Hartford's patent attorneys Brown and Dorsey brought the published article to the attention of the Patent Office. The Office then issued the patent (U.S. Patent No. 1,655,391), in 1928. Hartford then sued Hazel for infringing the patent. The district court dismissed the bill, however, on the ground that no infringement had been proved. The court considered the patent to be at best only a slight improvement in a well-developed art (automatic feeders for mechanical glass bottle blowing), accordingly held that the claims were not entitled to a broad construction and that, with the Peiler patent so construed, Hazel had not infringed.
Hartford appealed to the Third Circuit; its patent attorneys, including the one who "had played a part in getting the spurious article prepared for publication," for the first time focused the court's attention on the article. The court's opinion quoted copiously from the article and reversed the district court, holding the patent valid and infringed. 322 U.S. at 240–41. In contrast to the district court, the Third Circuit considered the patent to be a pioneer (as Clarke maintained), so that the claims were entitled to a broad construction. Therefore, with the patent claims so construed, the Third Circuit held that Hazel infringed a valid patent.59 F.2d at 413.
During trial in the district court in 1929, Hazel had received hearsay information that both Clarke and one of Hartford's lawyers had, several years previously, admitted that a Hartford lawyer was the true author of the spurious publication. Hazel did not at that time attempt to verify the truth of the hearsay story of the article's authorship, but relied upon other defenses, which proved successful in the district court. After the opinion of the Third Circuit in 1932, quoting the spurious article and reversing the decree of the district court, Hazel hired private investigators for the purpose of verifying the hearsay by admissible evidence. One of the PIs interviewed Clarke twice. In each interview, Clarke insisted that he wrote the article, and would so swear if summoned to court. In the second interview, the investigator asked Clarke to sign a statement telling in detail how the article was prepared, and further asked to see Clarke's files. Clarke replied that he would not "stultify" himself by signing any "statement or affidavit;" and that he would show the records to no one unless compelled by a subpoena. At the same time, he reinforced his claim of authorship by asserting that he had spent seven weeks in preparing the article. Unknown to Hazel, a Hartford representative had gone to visit Clarke. Hazel's PI reported failure, but Hartford's man reported "very successful results," that Hartford was in a "most satisfactory position" in the matter, and that Clarke had signed an affidavit for him stating that Clarke had "signed the article and released it for publication." Hazel then capitulated in the patent infringement litigation and settled with Hartford for $1 million, and the parties entered into a cross-licensing agreement.This agreement was part of the glass bottle cartel arrangement involved in the Government antitrust suit described in the Wikipedia article Hartford-Empire Co. v. United States. Hartford's representative then went back to Clarke, who asked for $10,000; they negotiated (Hartford initially said $$10,000 was too much) but Hartford eventually paid him the full $10,000. These facts came out during the Government's Hartford-Empire trial in 1941. 322 U.S. at 241–43.
Renewed Third Circuit review
Hazel then filed in the Third Circuit a petition for leave to file a somewhat belated bill of review in the district court to set aside the 1932 judgment which that court entered against Hazel pursuant to the Third Circuit's mandate overturning the district court's judgment of non-infringement. Hazel contended that the Third Circuit's appellate judgment had been obtained by fraud. The Third Circuit decided that because the alleged fraud had been perpetrated on it, rather than on the district court, it should decide the case instead of having the district court consider a bill of review.
The Third Circuit considered the evidence of how Hartford's patent attorneys wrote the article for Clarke, had it published, and then presented it to the Patent Office. It concluded, however, that "sordid as is the story concerning the genesis of the Clarke article and the deceptive design and use of its spurious authorship, still it does not qualify as after-discovered evidence" in Hartford's infringement suit against Hazel. The court pointed to Hazel's knowledge of the hearsay during the trial in 1929. "Although then so informed, counsel for Hazel-Atlas deliberately chose not to go into the matter of the article's real authorship, fearing that if they should refer to the article (which was not in evidence), they might thereby call attention to the statements therein contained as to the increased production from gob feeders as compared with stream feeders, which could not be successfully refuted."
The Third Circuit also emphasized that although the authorship of the article had been falsified, it was not shown that its factual assertions were false. Therefore, the fraud was not "material." Accordingly, "In the situation shown, it is not possible for us to say that the Clarke article was so basic to this court's decision in the Hazel-Atlas case that, upon the showing of fraud in the article's authorship, we would be justified in setting aside the order[]."137 F.2d at 768–69.
The Third Circuit also held that it lacked power to set aside its 1932 of infringement and must dismiss the case:
[This court lost] the only jurisdiction it ever had over the decrees in those cases, appropriate mandates duly issued and the terms at which the final orders on the appeals were entered expired long prior to the filing of the instant petitions without action having been taken to extend this court's grasp.  In that situation there is nothing from which the jurisdiction of this court can be deemed to have been continued.137 F.2d at 769.
Ruling of Supreme Court
thumb|150px|Justice Hugo Black delivered the opinion of the Court
Hazel sought further review in the Supreme Court, which reversed in a 5-4 opinion that Justice Hugo Black delivered for the Court.  Four justices dissented on procedural grounds, believing that the case should have been decided in the district court rather than the court of appeals.
Majority opinion
The Court rejected each of the three reasons that the Third Circuit gave for denying the petition. First, the general rule that federal courts will not alter or set aside their judgments after the expiration of the term at which the judgments were finally entered is not inviolable. "From the beginning," Black wrote, citing the court's 1878 decision in United States v. Throckmorton, "there has existed alongside the term rule a rule of equity to the effect that, under certain circumstances, one of which is after-discovered fraud, relief will be granted against judgments regardless of the term of their entry" and "where the situation has required, the court has, in some manner, devitalized the judgment even though the term at which it was entered had long since passed away", relying on an 1891 decision, Marshall v. Holmes, which allowed an unconscionability exception from Throckmortons rule generally barring equitable relief in cases of intrinsic fraud such as how Hartford characterized its actions. The Court condemned Hartford's conduct as "a deliberately planned and carefully executed scheme to defraud not only the Patent Office, but the Circuit Court of Appeals."Hazel-Atlas, at 244-45.
Next, because of public policy, the Court rejected the Third Circuit's condonation of Hartford's fraud on the grounds of Hazel's failure to exercise sufficient diligence:
 This matter does not concern only private parties. There are issues of great moment to the public in a patent suit. Furthermore, tampering with the administration of justice in the manner indisputably shown here involves far more than an injury to a single litigant. It is a wrong against the institutions set up to protect and safeguard the public, institutions in which fraud cannot complacently be tolerated consistently with the good order of society. Surely it cannot be that preservation of the integrity of the judicial process must always wait upon the diligence of litigants. The public welfare demands that the agencies of public justice be not so impotent that they must always be mute and helpless victims of deception and fraud.322 U.S. at 246 (citations omitted).
Third, the Court challenged the Third Circuit's argument that the fraudulent conduct was not "basic’ to the 1932 decision and the factual allegations in the article were actually true. Hartford persuaded the court of appeals to reverse the district court's judgment on the basis of the article, and is therefore estopped from claiming it was not effective. Moreover: "The article, even if true, should have stood or fallen under the only title it could honestly have been given—that of a brief in behalf of Hartford, prepared by Hartford's agents, attorneys, and collaborators."
322 U.S. 246-47.
Hartford had conceded that the district court has the power, upon proper proof of fraud, to set aside its 1932 decree in a bill of review proceeding, but nevertheless denied that the court of appeals possesses a similar power, for the reason that the term during which its 1932 judgment was entered had expired.322 U.S. at 247-48. The Court disagreed and held that the court of appeals had "both the duty and the power to vacate its own judgment and to give the district court appropriate directions" to set aside its judgment entered pursuant to the Third Circuit's previous mandate and to reinstate its original judgment denying relief to Hartford.322 U.S. at 250-51.
Dissenting opinion
thumb|150px|Owen J. Roberts delivered the dissent
In dissent, Justice Owen Roberts conceded: "No fraud is more odious than an attempt to subvert the administration of justice. The court is unanimous in condemning the transaction disclosed by this record. Our problem is how best the wrong should be righted and the wrongdoers pursued."322 U.S. at 251. He then summarized the majority holding, with which he disagreed only on procedural grounds, as follows:
(1) That the court below has power at this date to deal with the matter either as a new suit or as a continuation of the old one; (2) that it can recall the case from the District Court; (3) that it can grant relief; (4) that it can hear evidence and act as a court of first instance or a trial court; (5) that such a trial as it affords need not be according to the ordinary course of trial of facts in open court, by examination and cross-examination of witnesses, but that the proofs may consist merely of ex parte affidavits, and (6) that such a trial has already been afforded, and it remains only, in effect, to cancel Hartford's patent.322 U.S. at 254.
Roberts said the court of appeals lacked power to operate in this manner once the time to correct an erroneous judgment has passed, and the only proper way to deal with this case would be by a new action in the district court. Courts of appeals lack original jurisdiction to hold trials, and the proceeding should be by way of taking testy from witnesses, not use of affidavits as here. Roberts pointed to additional facts that he believed should be considered. The settlement agreement resulted to Hazel's becoming a co-conspirator in the market-allocation scheme condemned in the recent Hartford-Empire case and profiting greatly from the antitrust violation. Roberts therefore concluded that the majority:
holds that, solely because of the fraud which was practiced on the Patent Office and in litigation on the patent, the owner of the patent is to be amerced and in effect fined for the benefit of the other party to the suit, although that other comes with unclean hands and stands adjudged a party to a conspiracy to benefit over a period of twelve years under the aegis of the very patent it now attacks for fraud. To disregard these considerations, to preclude inquiry concerning these matters, is recklessly to punish one wrongdoer for the benefit of another.322 U.S. at 270.
Justices Stanley Reed and Felix Frankfurter joined in this dissenting opinion, while Chief Justice Harlan Stone simply agreed with the result that the dissent suggested.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 322
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Stone Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States patent case law
Category:1944 in United States case law
Category:United States res judicata case law
"""

From "Hazelwood School District v. Kuhlmeier" ==> """
Hazelwood School District et al. v. Kuhlmeier et al., 484 U.S. 260 (1988), was a landmark decision by the Supreme Court of the United States that held that public school curricular student newspapers that have not been established as forums for student expression are subject to a lower level of First Amendment protection than independent student expression or newspapers established (by policy or practice) as forums for student expression.
The case concerned the censorship of two articles in The Spectrum, the student newspaper of Hazelwood East High School in St. Louis County, Missouri, 1983. When the school principal removed an article concerning divorce and another concerning teen pregnancy, the student journalists sued, claiming that their First Amendment rights had been violated. A lower court sided with the school, but its decision was overturned by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit, which sided with the students.
In a 5–3 decision, the Supreme Court overturned the circuit court's decision, determining that school administrators could exercise prior restraint of school-sponsored expression, such as curriculum-based student newspapers and assembly speeches, if the censorship is "reasonably related to legitimate pedagogical concerns." School-sponsored student newspapers will not be presumed to be operating as public forums for student expression absent evidence indicating otherwise.
The case, and the earlier Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District (1969), are considered landmark decisions for defining the right of expression for students in public schools. While subsequent court rulings have varied on when Hazelwood applies, the case remains a strong precedent in the regulation of student speech. However, the state statutes protecting student free expression, enacted by 14 states as of March 21, 2018, most in response to the limitations of Hazelwood, typically adopt the more protective Tinker precedent.
 Background 
 Facts of the case 
The case concerned The Spectrum, a student newspaper published as part of a Journalism II class at Hazelwood East High School in St. Louis County, Missouri. The Spectrum was published roughly every three weeks during the 1982–1983 school year. About 4,500 copies were distributed to students and community members. The cost of printing the paper, as well as supplies, textbooks, and a portion of the academic advisor's salary, were furnished by the district's Board of Education, supplemented by newspaper sales. For that school year, the board supplied $4,668 in printing costs, and Howard Emerson, the adviser to the journalism class, submitted page proofs of the May 13 issue of the newspaper to principal Robert Eugene Reynolds for approval, a practice that was customary at the time. Reynolds objected to two of the stories scheduled to run. One was about teen pregnancy, containing interviews with three students who had been pregnant. The story used false names to keep the girls' identities a secret, but Reynolds was concerned that the students would still be identifiable from the text. He was also concerned that the references to sexual activity and birth control were inappropriate for younger students at the school. The second story was about divorce and featured an interview with a student whose parents were divorced, in which she complained that her father "wasn't spending enough time with my mom, my sister, and I ... was always out of town on business or out late playing cards with the guys ... always argued about everything". Reynolds, unaware that the girl's name would also be changed, argued that her family should have been given an opportunity to respond within the story, or to object to its publication.
Reynolds did not believe there was time to make changes because, if there were any delays in publication, the newspaper would not be published before the end of the school year. After consulting with his supervisors, he opted to publish a four-page newspaper instead of a six-page one, omitting the pages containing the two stories in question. Cutting two pages removed a total of seven articles from the paper. Reynolds did not tell the students about the decision, and they did not find out about it until the paper was delivered to the school.
In response, editor Cathy Kuhlmeier and reporters Leslie Smart and Leanne Tippett filed suit in January 1984 with the aid of the American Civil Liberties Union. Kuhlmeier later said that the idea for the pieces had come from old issues of The Spectrum, and that she had been looking to update them.
 Legal precedent 
Until the 1960s, administrative review of student publications was considered routine at both the high school and collegiate level. However, with the rise of the counterculture of the 1960s, student publications began to explore social issues with greater fervor, focusing on the Vietnam War, the civil rights movement, sexual orientation, and other topics considered controversial at the time.
In 1969, the U.S. Supreme Court held in Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District () that students' freedom of expression is protected under the First Amendment. Following that precedent, at least 125 cases in lower courts across the country were decided in favor of student expression and against administrative censorship. Whenever an instance of censorship involved action by a government employee, such as a school principal or a college dean, the courts held that First Amendment safeguards applied. Under the Tinker precedent, courts recognized student newspapers as public forums in which expression could be restricted only if administrators could prove that substantial disruption of school activities was imminent. Two subsequent cases—Healy v. James,  (1972), and Papish v. University of Missouri Curators,  (1973)—expanded the First Amendment rights of students on college campuses, but did not strongly define the status of student newspapers as public forums.
By the 1980s, however, with the end of the student protest era, school administrators sought to reassert their authority. The first case in the new trend, Bethel School District v. Fraser,  (1986), involved a high school student who was disciplined for delivering a speech containing sexual innuendos, even though they were not obscene or disruptive in a legal sense. Overturning lower court rulings, the Supreme Court held that the Tinker precedent did not apply because the penalties imposed by the school were unrelated to the student's political viewpoint.
 Lower court decisions 
The Hazelwood case was filed in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri. The students sought a declaration that their First Amendment and Fourteenth Amendment rights had been violated by undue actions of a public official, as well as injunctive relief and monetary damages. After a bench trial, the district court denied the injunction and monetary damages. In May 1985, it ruled that no violation of First Amendment rights had occurred, and held that school officials may restrict student speech in activities that "are an integral part of the school's educational function" as long as the restriction has "a substantial and reasonable basis".
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit reversed the district court's decision in January 1986. It held that The Spectrum was not only part of the school program, but also a public forum. The newspaper was "intended to be and operated as a conduit for student viewpoint", the appeals court found, and as a public forum, it could not be censored unless "necessary to avoid material and substantial interference with school work or discipline ... or the rights of others ".
Supreme Court ruling
The Supreme Court granted certiorari in January 1987, and the case was argued on October 13, 1987. On January 13, 1988, the court handed down its decision, overturning the circuit court in a 5-3 ruling. Its majority opinion set a precedent that school-sponsored activities, including student newspapers and drama productions, are not normally protected from administrative censorship under the First Amendment.
 Majority opinion 
thumb|upright|Associate Justice Byron White wrote the court's majority opinion.
The majority of the justices held that the school principal was entitled to censor the articles. The majority opinion, written by Associate Justice Byron White, stated that officials had never intended the school paper to be a public forum, as underground publications were in past cases. White went on to say that educators do not infringe on First Amendment rights when exercising control over student speech in school-sponsored activities, "so long as their actions are reasonably related to legitimate pedagogical concerns". The court established that the student publication could be regulated by school officials, and that they "reserved the forum for its intended purpose, as a supervised learning experience for journalism students".
A school need not tolerate student speech that is inconsistent with its basic educational mission, even though the government could not . ... (Judicial action to protect students' rights is justified) only when the decision to censor a school-sponsored publication, theatrical production or other vehicle of student expression has no valid educational purpose.
The decision overrode the precedent set in the Tinker case, which had permitted censorship of student speech only if it violated the rights of other students or threatened to cause a campus disruption. The majority opinion in Hazelwood held that this case was different. The majority opinion said that school administrators are not required to tolerate speech that is contrary to the school's academic mission, and continued:
The question [of] whether the First Amendment requires a school to tolerate particular student speech—the question we addressed in Tinker—is different from the question whether the First Amendment requires a school affirmatively to promote particular student speech. The former question addresses educators' ability to silence students' personal expression that happens to occur on the school premises. The latter question concerns educators' authority over school sponsored publications, theatrical productions, and other expressive activities that students, parents, and members of the public might reasonably perceive to bear the imprimatur of the school.
In a footnote, the court clarified that the ruling did not necessarily apply at the collegiate level.
 Dissenting opinion 
thumb|upright|Associate Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. wrote the dissenting opinion.
Associate Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. wrote a dissenting opinion, in which he was joined by Associate Justices Thurgood Marshall and Harry Blackmun, who often took liberal positions on First Amendment issues. In his opinion, Brennan expressed concern about the message the majority ruling would send to students, writing:
The young men and women of Hazelwood East expected a civics lesson, but not the one the Court teaches them today ... Such unthinking contempt for individual rights is intolerable from any state official. It is particularly insidious from (a school principal) to whom the public entrusts the task of inculcating in its youth an appreciation for the cherished democratic liberties that our constitution guarantees.
Legacy
The case established the standard that school personnel must meet to limit students' freedom of expression in secondary schools. As representatives of the state, school administrators can censor, restrain, or refuse to publish school-sponsored student expression if it interferes with the requirements of school discipline, interferes with students' rights, interferes with academic propriety, generates health or welfare concerns, or is deemed obscene or vulgar. This extends to theatrical productions, public speeches in an assembly environment, and publications produced as part of curricular activity, such as a student newspaper. The Supreme Court majority termed these reasons "legitimate pedagogical concerns".
This standard does not, however, apply to personal or non-school-sponsored communication, such as off-campus publications, unless that communication interferes with school discipline or the rights of others. The Hazelwood case established student newspapers as "limited public forums". This means schools may exercise prior restraint regarding the "style and content" of a student newspaper so long as their action is "not unreasonable", whereas there previously had to be compelling evidence to warrant censorship. Separate cases also established what constituted school activities, such as in-class parties and art created by students at the behest of teachers.
In response to the ruling, some students created web-based publications not subsidized by the school. Some individual states have also responded with laws designating student newspapers as public forums and offering them greater First Amendment protection. Experts from the Student Press Law Center say the case has meant that fewer lawsuits regarding student censorship make it to court.
In conjunction with the 25th anniversary of the Court's decision in 2013, the Student Press Law Center launched a nationwide censorship awareness campaign, "Cure Hazelwood," that ignited "New Voices" reform movements across the country, seeking to enact state legislation affording students enhanced press freedoms.
Subsequent jurisprudence 
Federal appeals courts have been divided on whether the Hazelwood case applies to college newspapers, a question the Supreme Court left open. Courts have also been split on viewpoint-based expression in schools, such as religious expression.
A 1989 case, Alabama Student Party v. Student Government Assn. (867 F.2d 1344), held that campus newspapers that are part of a curriculum might not enjoy First Amendment protection. In 2001, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit ruled in Kincaid v. Gibson (236 F. 3d 342) that Hazelwood did not apply at the college level, and that a student publication could not be censored if the censorship was not viewpoint-neutral. Subsequently, Dean v. Utica dealt with what defines a "legitimate pedagogical concern", and the court found that a school had censored speech wantonly.
A 2005 U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit decision, Hosty v. Carter (), however, held that Hazelwood did apply to subsidized student media at the college level. That ruling, though controversial, found that there was "no sharp difference between high school and college newspapers", noting that some college newspapers are financially subsidized or produced by journalism classes. The 2007 decision Morse v. Frederick () found that the First Amendment did not protect student speech that could be "reasonably viewed as promoting drug use".
See also
 Desilets v. Clearview Regional Board of Education, 647 A.2d. 150 (N.J. 1994)
 Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District
 Hazelwood School District v. United States
 Censorship of student media in the United States
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 484
 Student Press Law Center
 References 
 Citations 
 Sources 
External links
Hazelwood v. Kuhlmeier: A complete guide to the decision
First Amendment Rights Diagram (shows whether Hazelwood or Tinker standard is applicable)
State student free expression laws and regulations
The Supreme Court on "Hazelwood": A Reversal on Regulation of Student Expression
Much information on the case including the arguments
Research resources
 Student Press Law Center white paper on the case
 First Amendment Library entry on Hazelwood v. Kuhlmeier
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Student rights case law in the United States
Category:United States children's rights case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:Education in St. Louis County, Missouri
Category:High school newspapers published in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1985 in education
Category:Legal history of Missouri
"""

From "Hazelwood School District v. United States" ==> """
Hazelwood School District v. United States, 433 U.S. 299 (1977), was a court case argued before the United States Supreme Court on April 27, 1977. It concerned employment discrimination and was decided on June 27, 1977..
Case
In 1969, the Hazelwood School District in Missouri hired its first black teacher, and continued hiring black teachers ever since. In 1972, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 was amended to apply to public employers, including school districts, making the hiring of black teachers almost a necessity in order to avoid liability. However, due to statistical disparities in the hiring practices of this particular school district, as well as 55 individual cases of alleged discrimination, the United States brought suit in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri to enjoin the school district from discriminating based on race. The District Court found in favor of the school district, saying that the ratio of black teachers to white was roughly equivalent to the ratio of black students to white.
The United States appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit, which reversed the District Court's decision. This judgment was based on their decision to disregard the comparison to the student population, and instead compare the Hazelwood hiring statistics to the statistics of the surrounding area, including the St. Louis, MO school districts, saying that those numbers would more accurately reflect the "relevant labor market[.]" Hazelwood appealed to the Supreme Court to review the Court of Appeals decision, arguing that the relevant labor market statistics should not include the St. Louis numbers, because that city had imposed very strict hiring guidelines to help overcome past racial discrimination.
Judgment
The Supreme Court decided that, in this case, the proximity of the questionable hiring statistics to the application of Title VII to public employers was very relevant. The primary reason for the ultimate decision of the Court was that "pre-Act" hiring practices, that were perfectly legal under Title VII until the 1972 amendment, might have caused the statistical disparities in question. Based on that fact and the warning in the recent Teamsters decision that, when considering statistics as evidence of discrimination, all of the facts must be carefully considered, the Court vacated the decision of the Court of Appeals and remanded to the District Court for further proceedings, instructing them to consider whether the pre-Act practices might have played a predominant role in the statistics.
Significance
This case solidified the decision in Teamsters v. United States, where the Court decided that statistics could play a leading role in showing a prima facie case of discrimination under Title VII, but that they must be used with great care. The Teamsters decision was very important in the evolution of disparate impact jurisprudence, and made it much easier for the victims of discrimination to bring cases against their employers. Hazelwood somewhat weakened that decision, however, by noting that statistics which were caused by actions taken legally, before the application of anti-discrimination laws, could not be used in such a way, and that an employer must be given a chance to prove that that might be the case, before a prima facie case can be said to have been established.
Notes
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 433
 Hazelwood v. Kuhlmeier
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States employment discrimination case law
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:Education in St. Louis County, Missouri
Category:Legal history of Missouri
Category:Minority rights
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Hazen Paper Co. v. Biggins" ==> """
Hazen Paper Co. v. Biggins, 507 U.S. 604 (1993), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the court held that a disparate treatment claim cannot succeed unless the employee's protected trait had a determinative influence on the employer's decisionmaking.
 Background 
Hazen Paper fired Biggins, 62, a few weeks before his service would have reached the required number of years for his pension to vest. Biggins sued Hazen Paper alleging a violation of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 References 
 External links 
Category:1993 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Hazlehurst v. United States" ==> """
Hazlehurst v. United States, 4 U.S. (4 Dall.) 6 (1799), was a 1799 decision of the United States Supreme Court asserting that the appellants' (several similar cases were combined) failures to appear in court regarding their writs of error resulted in the Court issuing a orders of non prosequitur. The case was a federal case from South Carolina disputing their written seal on a bond which was purportedly improper because a wax seal was required.The documentary history of the Supreme Court of the United States, 1789-1800, Volume 8 (Columbia University Press, 2007), pg. 271-274   https://books.google.com/books?id=NDCWQKHAo_sC
 Opinion of the Court 
In error from the circuit court for the district of South Carolina. A rule had been obtained by Lee, the attorney-general, at the opening of the court, that the plaintiffs appear and prosecute their writ of error within the term, or suffer a non-pros.: but it was found, that errors had been assigned in the court below, and a joinder in error entered here. The rule was, therefore, changed to the following: " that unless the plaintiffs in error appear and argue the errors tomorrow, a non-pros, be entered." The plaintiffs not appearing, the writ of error was non-prossed, according to the rule.Reports of decisions in the Supreme Court of the United States: with notes and a digest, Volume 1 (Little, Brown, 1887), pg. 310 
 References 
External links
Category:1799 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Ellsworth Court
"""

From "Head Money Cases" ==> """
The Head Money Cases, 112 U.S. 580 (1884), also referred to as Edye v. Robertson, were a group of cases decided together by the United States Supreme Court.
Background
Pursuant to the Immigration Act of 1882, officers from the customhouse in the Port of New York began collecting a tax from ships of fifty cents for each immigrant aboard. Multiple ship owners sued because they were transporting Dutch immigrants, and the Netherlands had a treaty with the United States that seemed to prohibit the tax.
Decision
The case established the precedent that treaties, which are described in the Supremacy Clause of the US Constitution as "the supreme law of the land" equal to any domestic federal law, do not hold a privileged position above other acts of Congress. Hence, other laws affecting the "enforcement, modification, or repeal" of treaties are legitimate.
See also
Passenger Cases: A similar case covering a head tax on British immigrants.
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 112
External links
Category:1884 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States Treaty Clause case law
Category:Netherlands–United States relations
Category:Ellis Island
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:Poll taxes
"""

From "Head v. Amoskeag Manufacturing Co." ==> """
Head v. Amoskeag Mfg. Co., 113 U.S. 9 (1885), was a U.S. Supreme Court case considering whether a dam constructed on privately owned land served a public purpose and whether having the owner of the dam compensate any adjacent landowner was a legal form of eminent domain.
Background
The state of New Hampshire passed a General Mills Act in 1868 which established a permitting process for companies to build dams on non-navigable waterways so long as they compensated any adjacent landowners for flooded property. Head v. Amoskeag Mfg Co, 113 U.S. 9 (1885) Justia.com The Amoskeag Manufacturing Company dammed the Merrimack River at Amoskeag Falls for the purpose of powering their cotton mills. This had the inadvertent result of flooding Head's land along the river for which he was offered compensation.
Head sued claiming the benefit to the company was not a public purpose and that the Equal Protection Clause was being violated because the rights of a major employer was outweighing those of a smaller landowner. When the New Hampshire Supreme Court ruled that the dam was legal, 
Head appealed to the federal courts for a writ of error to reverse the judgment.
Decision
Justice Horace Gray, delivered the opinion of the court that regulating riparian water rights was clearly within the purview of the state, that similar regulations were used in other states, that similar laws in New Hampshire went back to 1718, and that the remedy for any financial loss showed that due process of law was being preserved. The court did not find the equal protection claims compelling. Therefore, the court ruled in favor of the Amoskeag Manufacturing Company.
There were no concurring or dissenting opinions but Justice Samuel Blatchford did not participate in the case.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States water case law
Category:Amoskeag Manufacturing Company
Category:Merrimack River
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:1885 in United States case law
"""

From "Health and Hospital Corporation of Marion County v. Talevski" ==> """
Health and Hospital Corporation of Marion County v. Talevski (Docket 21–806) is a pending United States Supreme Court case related to private enforcement of Spending Clause statutes. It relates to whether third parties can initiate lawsuits against public institutions for violations of Congressional spending bills under claims of Section 1983, which was established to protect individual rights from constitutional violations from public institutions.
 Background 
Gorgi Talevski had dementia and his family placed him in a nursing home operated by the Health and Hospital Corporation of Marion County (HHC). As Talevski's condition declined, HHC transferred him between various facilities, and modified his course of medication. Talevski's family objected to these changes, and eventually sued under Section 1983 of the Ku Klux Klan Act (codified at ) to enforce the Federal Nursing Home Amendments Act of 1987 (FNHRA) against HHC. Talevski asserted he could enforce the FNHRA, which specifies conditions for facilities to receive federal Medicaid funding, against HHC, because it confers federal rights that Section 1983 provides a venue to vindicate; the Supreme Court has generally upheld that private citizens can sue under Section 1983, including for Medicare programs, if the government had deprived them of "any rights, privileges, or immunities secured by the Constitution and laws" as recently as Edelman v. Jordan (1974). The United States District Court for the Northern District of Indiana disagreed and dismissed his complaint, but the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit reversed.
HHC filed a petition for a writ of certiorari, asserting a conflict with cases like Gonzaga University v. Doe and Blessing v. Freestone.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case on May 2, 2022. Amici briefs on in support of HHC were submitted by the National Conference of State Legislatures and the American Healthcare Association. Amici in support of Talevski were submitted by Public Citizen, the Constitutional Accountability Center, and the AARP. The case was argued on November 8, 2022.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2023 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Second Enforcement Act of 1871 case law
"""

From "Healy v. James" ==> """
Healy v. James, 408 U.S. 169 (1972), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that Central Connecticut State College's refusal to recognize a campus chapter of Students for a Democratic Society was unconstitutional.  The denial of official recognition was found to violate the First Amendment.
The crux of the ruling was that the onus was on the college to provide valid reasons for denial, rather than insisting that the organization provide evidence that their recognition would not be harmful.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1972 in United States case law
"""

From "Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States" ==> """
Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States, 379 U.S. 241 (1964), was a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States holding that the Commerce Clause gave the U.S. Congress power to force private businesses to abide by Title II of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, religion, or national origin in public accommodations..
 Background 
This important case represented an immediate challenge to the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the landmark piece of civil rights legislation which represented the first comprehensive act by Congress on civil rights and race relations since the Civil Rights Act of 1875. In the 100 years preceding 1964, African Americans in the United States had been subjected to racial segregation, a system of racial separation which, while in name providing for "separate but equal" treatment of both white and African Americans, in fact provided inferior accommodation, services, and treatment for African Americans.
During the mid-20th century, partly as a result of cases such as Powell v. Alabama, 287 U.S. 45 (1932); Smith v. Allwright, 321 U.S. 649 (1944); Shelley v. Kraemer, 334 U.S. 1 (1948); Sweatt v. Painter, 339 U.S. 629 (1950); McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents, 339 U.S. 637 (1950); NAACP v. Alabama, 357 U.S. 449 (1958); Boynton v. Virginia, 364 U.S. 454 (1960); and, most notably, Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 347 U.S. 483 (1954), public opinion began to turn against segregation. Despite the outcomes of these cases, segregation remained in full effect into the 1960s in parts of the southern United States, where the Heart of Atlanta Motel was located.
 Court case 
 Petitioner's argument 
The Heart of Atlanta Motel was a large, 216-room motel that opened on September 5, 1956 in Atlanta, Georgia. In direct violation of the terms of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which banned racial discrimination in public places, largely based on Congress's control of interstate commerce, the motel refused to rent rooms to African-American patrons. The owner, Moreton Rolleston, filed suit in federal court, arguing that the requirements of the Act exceeded the authority the Commerce Clause granted to Congress over interstate commerce. Rolleston specifically argued against Title II of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, religion, or national origin in places of public accommodation. Hotels and motels are included as types of public accommodation in the Act, and so are restaurants that serve food substantially to those who participate in interstate travel. In further arguing against the validity of the Act's basis on the Commerce Clause, he stated that people themselves are not commerce; rather, people engage in commerce. Therefore, a hotel or motel does not necessarily engage in interstate commerce because the profit comes from persons rather than goods. Rolleston also asserted that racial discrimination by an individual is not prohibited by the Fourteenth Amendment or the Constitution, claiming that discrimination is a private wrong that individuals are allowed to commit.
In addition, Rolleston maintained that it violated his Fifth Amendment rights to choose customers and operate his business as he wished and resulted in unjust deprivation of his property without due process of law and just compensation. Finally, he contended that Congress had placed him in a position of involuntary servitude by forcing him to rent available rooms to African Americans, thereby violating his Thirteenth Amendment rights. Rolleston noted that in 1944 the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals for the United States held that even if acts committed in involuntary servitude are compensated, it still violates the Thirteenth Amendment.
Rolleston maintained throughout his argument that the Constitution should be interpreted as it was at the time of its creation and as the Framers originally intended it. He concluded his opening argument by stating that the Supreme Court did not need to exist if the Commerce Clause allowed for Congress to enact any regulations it pleases.
 Respondent's argument 
In response, Archibald Cox, the Solicitor General for the United States, countered that the restrictions requiring adequate accommodation for African Americans were unquestionably related to interstate travel and that Congress, under the Constitution's Commerce Clause, certainly had the power to address such a matter in law. Cox stated that racial discrimination in inns and restaurants “constitute[s] a source of burden or obstruction to interstate commerce.” He brought up multiple examples in which protests over racial discrimination, some in regards to public accommodations and some with broader scopes, intensely affected the economy of certain areas. One of the prime examples was Birmingham, Alabama in the spring of 1963, during which department and downtown store sales dropped dramatically in the area and the amount of business failure rivaled the rates of the Great Depression. Cox also mentioned that areas that do not practice equal opportunity are often overlooked by companies that seek commercial and industrial expansion due to the possibility of demonstrations. He used Little Rock, Arkansas to exemplify this point, as business expansion fell by over 50 million dollars in the two years it experienced high racial tensions.
Cox also highlighted how discrimination by hotels and motels hinders interstate travel by limiting the availability of accommodations for travelers. He described the impediment discrimination imposes with a hypothetical road trip:On a motor trip between Washington D.C. and Miami, Florida, the average distance that was found between accommodations of reasonable quality open to Negroes was 141 miles. And when we think of the frequency by such we go by other hotels and motels open to everyone, the significance of a three or four-hour drive between the hope of accommodation is very significant indeed. 
— Archibald CoxHe further argued that the Fifth Amendment does not forbid reasonable regulation of interstate commerce and that such incidental damage did not constitute the "taking" of property without just compensation or due process of law. He emphasized that the courts have consistently sustained cases that strengthen anti-discrimination measures. Lastly, he asserted that the Thirteenth Amendment applies primarily to slavery and the removal of widespread disabilities associated with it and so it undoubtedly would not place issues of racial discrimination in public accommodations beyond the reach of federal and state law:But surely it would turn the world quite upside down for anyone to seriously suggest that the Thirteenth Amendment was intended to prohibit either Congress or the state governments from guaranteeing Negroes equality of treatment in places of public accommodation.
— Archibald Cox
 Ruling 
The United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia ruled in favor of the United States and issued a permanent injunction requiring the Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. to refrain from using racial discrimination when providing services or goods to guests or the general public on its premises. The case was combined with the case of the future Governor of Georgia Lester Maddox, regarding his Pickrick restaurant and his refusal to serve African Americans.Heart of Atlanta/Pickrick trial. Civil Rights Digital Library. Retrieved 2014-05-23
The opinion of the court, announced on December 14, 1964, was delivered by Justice Tom C. Clark, with concurring opinions by Justice Arthur Goldberg, Justice Hugo Black, and Justice William O. Douglas.
The U.S. Supreme Court held that Congress acted well within its authority under the Commerce Clause in passing the Civil Rights Act of 1964, thereby upholding the act's Title II in question. While it might have been possible for Congress to pursue other methods for abolishing racial discrimination, the way in which Congress did so, according to the Court, was perfectly valid. It found no merit in the arguments pursuant to the Thirteenth Amendment, finding it difficult to conceive that such an amendment might be applicable in restraining civil rights legislation. Having observed that 75% of the Heart of Atlanta Motel's clientele came from out-of-state and that it was strategically located near Interstates 75 and 85 as well as two major Georgia highways, the Court found that the business clearly affected interstate commerce. Accordingly, it upheld the permanent injunction issued by the district court and required the Heart of Atlanta Motel to receive business from the clientele of all ethnicities.
 Case legacy 
Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States has been cited in at least 690 other case decisions since its ruling, including multiple other Supreme Court cases. A notable example includes the 1997 case Camps Newfound/Owatonna, Inc. v. Town of Harrison, in which a summer camp in Maine that mainly serviced out-of-state residents fought against a state tax exemption statute that favored organizations that serviced state residents. The courts compared out-of-state campers staying at a summer camp to out-of-state residents occupying a hotel, deeming the camp a participant in interstate commerce. Another example is the 1966 case United States v. Guest, in which the courts ruled, due to the conspiratorial murder of Lt. Col. Lemuel Penn while he was traveling home, that forcefully depriving someone's right to travel is unconstitutional.
 See also 
 Constantine v Imperial Hotels Ltd
 Katzenbach v. McClung
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 379
 The Negro Motorist Green Book
 References 
 External links 
 Heart of Atlanta – misc photos
 Heart of Atlanta/Pickrick trial, Civil Rights Digital Library
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:African-American history of Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:Hotels in Atlanta
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States racial desegregation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Heath v. Alabama" ==> """
Heath v. Alabama, 474 U.S. 82 (1985), is a case in which the United States Supreme Court ruled that, because of the doctrine of "dual sovereignty" (the concept that the United States and each state possess sovereignty – a consequence of federalism), the double jeopardy clause of the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution does not prohibit one state from prosecuting and punishing somebody for an act of which they had already been convicted of and sentenced for in another state.
This decision is one of several that holds that the Fifth Amendment does not forbid the U.S. federal government and a state government, or the governments of more than one state, from prosecuting the same individual separately for the same illegal act.
 Background 
The Fifth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States says:
No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a Grand Jury, except in cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the Militia, when in actual service in time of War or public danger; nor shall any person be subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just compensation.U.S. Const. amend. V .
The clause "nor shall any person be subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb" means that the government cannot re-prosecute somebody for a crime of which he or she has been found "not guilty"; likewise, the government cannot appeal against a verdict of acquittal.Fong Foo v. United States, 369 U.S. 141 (1962); see also United States v. Martin Linen Supply Co., 430 U.S. 464 (1977). However, the first ten amendments to the Constitution, known as the Bill of Rights, were originally interpreted as binding only on the Federal government; for example, the First Amendment, which guarantees freedom of religion, expressly begins with the words, "Congress shall make no law . . . ." It was not until the passage of the Fourteenth Amendment, the first section of which says, in part, "No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws" that any serious consideration was given to the proposition that the Bill of Rights is binding on the states.Cf. Twining v. New Jersey, 211 U.S. 78 (1908).
Since then, the decisions of the United States Supreme Court have gradually evolved so as to include most state actions within the scope of the Bill of Rights.See, e.g. Washington v. Texas, 388 U.S. 14, 18 (1967); Malloy v. Hogan, 378 U.S. 1 (1964); Stromberg v. California, 283 U.S. 359, 368 (1931). In Benton v. Maryland, 395 U.S. 784 (1969), the Supreme Court held that the Fifth Amendment prohibition against double jeopardy applies to the states. Nevertheless, each U.S. state has long been considered to have its own sovereignty, which it shares with the U.S. federal government;See U.S. Const. amend. X  thus, the question of whether more than one state can punish the same individual for the same set of actions was left open.
 Facts and procedural history 
In 1981, the defendant, Larry Gene Heath (5 October 1951 – 20 March 1992), traveled from Russell County, Alabama to Troup County, Georgia, where he met with two other individuals whom he had hired to kill his pregnant wife Rebecca.Heath v. Alabama, 474 U.S. at 83-84. They returned with him to his house and, after he left the scene, they killed his wife in exchange for $2,000. He was arrested later that year and, on 10 February 1982, pled guilty in a Georgia court to the crime of murder, and was sentenced to life imprisonment.
Subsequently, a grand jury in Alabama, his state of residence, indicted him for the crime of murder during a kidnapping, and he entered a plea of "autrefois convict and former jeopardy under the Alabama and United States Constitutions," by which he stated that he was not eligible to be punished in Alabama because a Georgia court had already convicted and sentenced him for the same crime, and that the crime had, in fact, not taken place in Alabama.Heath, 474 U.S. at 85. The prosecutor argued, however, that because the defendant's wife had been kidnapped in Alabama, the murder "may be punished" there. On 12 January 1983, a jury in the Alabama court convicted Heath of "murder during a kidnapping in the first degree," a capital offense, He was sentenced to death, and the Alabama Court of Criminal Appeals affirmed this decision on direct appeal.Heath v. State, 455 So. 2d 898 (Ala. Crim. App. 1983). The Alabama Supreme Court, after granting certiorari, affirmed the decision of the lower court as well.Ex parte Heath, 455 So.2d 905 (Ala. 1984).
The United States Supreme Court then granted certiorari to determine whether the conviction of Heath violated the precedent that had been set by an earlier case, Brown v. Ohio, 432 U.S. 161 (1977), in which the Court had held that one cannot be punished consecutively for two different offenses if the proof of both offenses is identical.
 Decision 
Writing for a 7-2 majority, Justice O'Connor ruled that "the dual sovereignty doctrine . . . compels the conclusion that successive prosecutions by two States for the same conduct are not barred by the Double Jeopardy Clause."Heath, 474 U.S. at 88. "The dual sovereignty doctrine," she wrote, "is founded on the common-law conception of crime as an offense against the sovereignty of the government. When a defendant in a single act violates the 'peace and dignity' of two sovereigns by breaking the laws of each, he has committed two distinct 'offences.' United States v. Lanza, 260 U.S. 377, 382, 43 S.Ct. 141, 67 L.Ed. 314 (1922)."
When a person commits a crime against the laws of two different states, then the question of whether the states constitute two different sovereigns or just one is determined by whether the state governments "draw their authority to punish the offender from distinct sources of power." Answering the question, Justice O'Connor wrote that the "powers" of state governments "to undertake criminal prosecutions derive from separate and independent sources of power and authority originally belonging to them before admission to the Union and preserved to them by the Tenth Amendment."Heath, 474 U.S. at 89cf. U.S. v. Wheeler, 435 U.S. 313 (1978) (applying the doctrine of dual sovereignty to the internal affairs of Native American tribes). But see Nielsen v. Oregon, 212 U.S. 315 (1909) (distinguished from Heath by the majority, 474 U.S. at 91, but cited by Justice Marshall in support of his dissent, 474 U.S. at 100).
The majority opinion concluded that by violating the laws of two different states, the defendant committed separate offenses against each state; for this reason, the Constitutional prohibition on prosecuting or convicting a person "for the same offense" did not apply, and the Court affirmed the defendant's conviction.474 U.S. at 94.
 Dissent 
 Justice Marshall's dissent 
Justice Marshall, in a minority opinion, sought to distinguish between the long-held principle that the Fifth Amendment does not prohibit the U.S. federal government and the state governments from separately prosecuting the same individual for the same illegal act, and the majority holding that two separate state governments can do likewise.
In his dissent, he explains that the "dual sovereignty" exception to the double jeopardy clause was designed specifically "to accommodate complementary state and federal concerns within our system of concurrent territorial jurisdictions."Heath, 474 U.S. at 95 (Marshall & Brennan, JJ., dissenting).
Furthermore, even if the reasoning of the majority was correct, the dual sovereignty doctrine must "not [be used to] legitimate the collusion between Georgia and Alabama in this case to ensure that petitioner is executed for his crime." Specifically, in this case the defendant pleaded guilty in Georgia for the express purpose of avoiding the death penalty; then, he was put on trial in Alabama by a jury in a town where the crime was notorious, and where 75 of 82 prospective jurors were aware that Heath had already pleaded guilty in Georgia. The judge, rather than exclude the jurors who knew that the defendant had already pleaded guilty, simply asked them if they would be able to "put aside their knowledge of the prior guilty plea in order to give petitioner a fair trial in Alabama."Heath, 474 U.S. at 96. It strains credibility that the jurors could remain impartial in spite of their knowledge of the guilty plea.Heath, 474 U.S. at 97. Furthermore, given that the jurors had this knowledge, defense counsel "could do little but attempt to elicit information from prosecution witnesses tending to show that the crime was committed exclusively in Georgia"; any argument tending to show actual innocence would likely be disbelieved by the jury, in spite of the fact that the guilty plea in Georgia was part of a plea bargain, and some defendants, to avoid execution, may plead guilty without actually being guilty.Cf. North Carolina v. Alford, 400 U.S. 25 (1970).
Justice Marshall also comments that it would, without question, have been unconstitutional if the State of Georgia had decided to re-prosecute Heath on a capital charge because of its dissatisfaction with the life sentence that he had already received. "The only difference between this case and such a hypothetical volte-face by Georgia is that here Alabama, not Georgia, was offended by the notion that petitioner might not forfeit his life in punishment for his crime. The only reason the Court gives for permitting Alabama to go forward is that Georgia and Alabama are separate sovereigns."Heath, 474 U.S. at 97-98 (Marshall & Brennan, JJ., dissenting). He then goes on to criticize the majority for its "restrictive" interpretation of the word "offence."Heath, 474 U.S. at 98.
The only reasons why there needs to be a dual-sovereignty exception to the Fifth Amendment prohibition of double jeopardy, argues Marshall, are that
were a prosecution by a State, however zealously pursued, allowed to preclude further prosecution by the Federal Government for the same crime, an entire range of national interests could be frustrated
and that
Conversely, because "the States under our federal system have the principal responsibility for defining and prosecuting crimes," Abbate v. United States, supra, at 195, it would be inappropriate - in the absence of a specific congressional intent to pre-empt state action pursuant to the Supremacy Clause - to allow a federal prosecution to preclude state authorities from vindicating "the historic right and obligation of the States to maintain peace and order within their confines," Bartkus v. Illinois, supra, at 137.Heath, 474 U.S. at 99 (Marshall & Brennan, JJ., dissenting).
No such "interests" need to be protected when two different states are seeking to prosecute the same offense, and so the underlying reasons behind the "dual-sovereignty" exception to the prohibition against double jeopardy do not apply. Indeed, in 1909 the Supreme Court had held that in case of an incident that occurs on territory subject to "'the one first acquiring jurisdiction of the person may prosecute the offense, and its judgment is a finality in both States, so that one convicted or acquitted in the courts of the one State cannot be prosecuted for the same offense in the courts of the other' Nielsen v. Oregon, 212 U.S. 315, 320 (1909),"Heath, 474 U.S. at 100. (The majority decision of the Court stated that the holding of Nielsen v. Oregon was applicable only to a unique set of circumstances.Heath, 474 U.S. at 91. In Nielsen v. Oregon,212 U.S. 315 (1909) two States jointly had jurisdiction over the river that separates them from each other, and one state had prosecuted somebody for an act that was specifically permitted under the laws of the other, and the Court reversed the conviction.)
Finally, Justice Marshall points out that "Even where the power of two sovereigns to pursue separate prosecutions for the same crime has been undisputed, this Court has barred both governments from combining to do what each could not constitutionally do on its own."474 U.S. at 102. In this case, the prosecutions in Alabama and Georgia were so inextricably linked that it was as if they were acting together as a single governmental entity. Furthermore, the interests of justice, according to Marshall, were frustrated by having the defendant plead guilty to a crime in Georgia to avoid the death penalty, only to have the guilty plea prevent him from mounting a meaningful defense to capital charges in Alabama. For these reasons, in the interests "of fundamental fairness," Justice Marshall voted against the majority decision.
 Justice Brennan's dissent 
Justice Brennan joined Justice Marshall in his dissent, but wrote a separate statement (joined by Justice Marshall), in which he indicated that the "interests" mentioned by Justice Marshall, which would justify allowing Federal and State prosecutions for the same illegal act, are not of a nature that would justify any other exception to the rule that one may not be prosecuted more than once for the same offense.
 Subsequent history 
The defendant in this case subsequently filed a petition for post-conviction relief in the Alabama state court system, and for a Federal writ of habeas corpus, both of which were denied;Heath v. State, 536 So. 2d 142 (Ala. Crim. App. 1988); Heath v. Jones, 941 F.2d 1126 (11th Cir. 1991) he was executed on 20 March 1992.
 References 
External links
Full text of the amendments to the Constitution of the United States of America, including the Bill of Rights and the Fourteenth Amendment.
FindLaw annotation on the Fifth Amendment
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:1985 in Alabama
Category:Legal history of Alabama
Category:Contract killers
Category:Troup County, Georgia
Category:Russell County, Alabama
"""

From "Heckler v. Campbell" ==> """
Heckler v. Campbell, 461 U.S. 458 (1983), is a United States Supreme Court case concerning whether the United States Secretary of Health and Human Services could rely on published medical-vocational guidelines to determine a claimant’s right to Social Security benefits.
 Background 
In 1978, the Secretary of Health and Human Services promulgated regulations in order to implement the statutory definition of disability. People who were disabled were separated into two groups: those who could not perform any gainful work and those with less severe impairments. For this second group, the Secretary promulgated guidelines to examine whether the claimant could perform either their former work or some less demanding employment by creating a matrix that evaluated four factors that had been identified by Congress: physical ability, age, education, and work experience. Information was also compiled about what jobs were available.
Carmen Campbell claimed she had a back condition that kept her from working at her former job as a hotel maid. Ms. Campbell had been born in Panama, and though she had limited ability to speak and write English, she could read and understand English to a fair degree. The administrative law judge in her case found that by using the guidelines, there were a significant number of jobs that existed that Ms. Campbell could perform and concluded that she was not disabled.
Ms. Campbell's case was appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit which reversed the decision, saying that the guidelines did not provide evidence that specific alternative jobs existed, and that the determination that Ms. Campbell was not disabled was not supported by substantial evidence as required by the Social Security Act.
 Opinion of the Court 
In an opinion delivered by Justice Powell, the Supreme Court reversed the Second Circuit, saying that “[w]here the statute expressly entrusts the Secretary with the responsibility for implementing a provision by regulation, review is limited to determining whether the regulations promulgated exceeded the Secretary’s statutory authority and whether they are arbitrary and capricious.” The Court decided that even where an agency's enabling statute expressly required that it hold a hearing, the agency could rely on its rulemaking authority to determine issues that didn't require case-by-case considerations.
The Court held that the Secretary’s reliance on the guidelines was not inconsistent with the Social Security Act, nor were the guidelines arbitrary and capricious.
Justice Brennan concurred while pointing out that the record contained scant evidence about Ms. Campbell's ability to do "light work."
Justice Marshall dissented essentially on the same grounds.
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:United States disability case law
Category:Social Security lawsuits
"""

From "Heckler v. Chaney" ==> """
Heckler v. Chaney, 470 U.S. 821 (1985), was a United States Supreme Court decision that held agency decisions to not undertake enforcement proceedings is "committed to agency discretion by law" () and therefore not subject to judicial review under the Administrative Procedure Act.
 Background 
Respondents had been convicted in Oklahoma and Texas criminal courts and sentenced to death. The procedure to be used was lethal injection. They applied first to the FDA, stating that while the drugs to be involved in the lethal injection had been approved, the manner in which they were going to be used had not, in violation of the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act's prohibition against "misbranding". They also argued that the Act's procedures for "new drugs" should be applicable, given that these drugs were being utilized for a new and un-tested purpose. More simply, they were arguing that the FDA had not certified that the drugs were "safe and effective" for human executions, and thus should be barred for being distributed via interstate commerce.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Rehnquist delivered the opinion of the Court saying, "[The Court] granted certiorari to review the implausible result that the FDA is required to exercise its enforcement power to ensure that states only use drugs that are 'safe and effective' for human execution..."
The Court assessed that the Court of Appeals decision coming before raised three questions:
 whether the FDA had jurisdiction to undertake the enforcement actions requested
 whether, if it did have jurisdiction, its refusal to take those actions was subject to judicial review, and
 whether, if reviewable, its refusal was arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of discretion.
The Court's opinion skirted the jurisdictional issue, ruling that an agency's decision not to pursue an enforcement action is presumptively unreviewable, as such actions are "committed to agency discretion by law" under § 701(a)(2) of the Administrative Procedure Act.  
The Court however, did not reach this conclusion based on a reading of text, but rather on the notion that such decisions were presumptively unreviewable under the common law, that it was Congress' intention under the APA to codify the common law, and that therefore such a presumption should be sustained under the APA.
The Court further supported its holding by pointing to three reasons why reviewing an agency's decision not to act is unsuitable to judicial review. First, agency decisions whether to initiate enforcement actions are usually based on a complicated balancing of multiple factors, such as efficient allocation of limited resources, likelihood of success, and the relationship of the potential action to the overall enforcement strategy of the agency. The courts are ill-suited to perform such an analysis. Secondly, the court noted when an agency chooses not to act, they are not exercising any coercive power over others that might be worthy of heightened judicial protection. Third, the Court found an agency’s discretion not to seek enforcement as being analogous to exercises of prosecutorial discretion that courts have traditionally been unwilling to review.
The Court though emphasized that the presumption of unreviewability is rebuttable where (1) an agency declines to act based "solely" on its belief that it lacks jurisdiction, or (2) where an agency "consciously and expressly" adopts a policy that is so extreme that it represents an abdication of its statutory responsibilities.
The Court declined to address whether the presumption of unreviewability applies to an agency decision not to issue a rule or initiate a rulemaking.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
