"""

From "International News Service v. Associated Press" ==> """
International News Service v. Associated Press, 248 U.S. 215 (1918), also known as INS v. AP or simply the INS case, is a 1918 decision of the United States Supreme Court that enunciated the misappropriation doctrine of federal intellectual property common law—that a "quasi-property right" may be created against others by one's investment of effort and money in an intangible thing, such as information or a design. The doctrine is highly controversial and criticized by many legal scholars, but it has its supporters.See the Columbia Symposium,  Product Simulation: A Right or a Wrong, 64  1178 (1964), for a group of articles on INS and related case law. See also Dennis Karjala, Misappropriation As A Third Intellectual Property Paradigm, 94 . 2594 (1994) (arguing for application of INS misappropriation doctrine to data retrieval systems); Leo J. Raskind, The Misappropriation Doctrine As A Competitive Norm of Intellectual Property Law, 75  875 (1991) (criticizing misappropriation doctrine); Richard H. Stern & Joel E. Hoffman, Public Injury and the Public Interest: Secondary Meaning in the Law of Unfair Competition, 110  935, 966-971 (1962) (arguing that misappropriation doctrine is anticompetitive and too vague to serve any predictive function).
The INS decision recognized the doctrine of U.S. copyright law that there is no copyright in facts, which the Supreme Court later greatly elaborated in the Feist case in 1991, but nonetheless INS extended the prior law of unfair competition to cover an additional type of interference with business expectations: "misappropriation" of the product of "sweat of the brow." The case was decided during a period when a body of federal common law existed for business practices and torts, which the Supreme Court had power to declare or create, but two decades later the Supreme Court abolished that body of substantive law and held that state law must govern the field henceforth. Accordingly, the INS case no longer has precedential force, although state courts are free to follow its reasoning if they so choose.
 Background 
Two competing United States news services (INS and AP) were in the business of reporting in the US on World War I.  Their businesses hinged on getting fast and accurate reports published. Following reporting that the Allied Powers (Britain and France) perceived to be unduly favorable to the Central Powers (Germany and Austria) by William Randolph Hearst's INS, the Allies barred INS from using Allied telegraph lines to report news;Justice Brandeis observed in his dissenting opinion, "For aught that appears, this prohibition may have been wholly undeserved." International News Service v. Associated Press, 248 U.S. 215, 263 (1918). that effectively shut down INS's war reporting.News Pirating Case in Supreme Court, N.Y. Times, May 3, 1918.
To continue publishing news about the war, INS gained access to AP news through examination of AP news bulletin boards and early editions of newspapers affiliated with AP. INS members would rewrite the news and publish it as their own, without attribution to AP. Although INS newspapers had to wait for AP to post news before going to press, INS newspapers in the west had no such disadvantage relative to their AP counterparts. The AP brought an action seeking to enjoin INS from copying AP-gathered news.
 Ruling 
Power to rule on issues
In 1918, the federal courts and in particular the Supreme Court had the power to declare and create binding law in commercial matters, such as bills and notes and torts such as negligence and business interference. This was under the doctrine of Swift v. Tyson, 41 U.S. 1 (1842), which had held that the federal courts, when deciding matters not specifically addressed by the state legislature, had the authority to develop a federal common law. In 1938, in Erie Railroad Co. v. Tompkins, 304 U.S. 64 (1938), the Supreme Court overruled Swift v. Tyson. As Justice Brandeis wrote:
Congress has no power to declare substantive rules of common law applicable in a state whether they be local in their nature or "general," be they commercial law or a part of the law of torts. And no clause in the Constitution purports to confer such a power upon the federal courts.304 U.S. at 78.
But because the INS case was decided in 1918, the Supreme Court could declare or create applicable tort law to govern the controversy between INS and AP.
Previous state of unfair competition law
Before the INS case, unfair competition was generally considered to be limited to cases of "palming off"—where the defendant deceived customers by causing them erroneously to believe that the defendant's product emanated from the plaintiff, and as a result diverted trade from the plaintiff to the defendant.See Paul Goldstein, Federal System Ordering of the Copyright Interest, 69  49, 58 (1969).
Majority opinion
The Court held in favor of the AP, with Justice Pitney writing for the majority. Justices Holmes and Brandeis wrote dissents.
thumb|150px|Justice Pitney
The majority opinion by Justice Pitney recognized that the information found in the AP news was not copyrightable as "the information respecting current events contained in the literary production is not the creation of a writer but is a report of matters that ordinarily are publici juris; it is the history of the day."248 U.S. at 234. Instead, Pitney approached the issue from the perspective of unfair competition.  He found that there was a quasi-property right in the news as it is "stock in trade to be gathered at the cost of enterprise, organization, skill, labor and money, and to be distributed and sold to those who will pay money for it."248 U.S. at 236. Given the "economic value" of the news, a company can "therefore" have a limited property interest in it against a competitor (but not the general public) who would attempt to take advantage of the information.248 U.S. at .
The Court characterized INS's behavior as misappropriation. Due to the tenuous value of "hot" news, Pitney narrowed the period for which the proprietary right would apply: this doctrine "postpones participation by complainant's competitor in the processes of distribution and reproduction of news that it has not gathered, and only to the extent necessary to prevent that competitor from reaping the fruits of complainant's efforts and expenditure."248 U.S. at 241.
The Court justified its creation of a "quasi-property right" in these terms:
[INS] is taking material that has been acquired by AP as the result of organization and the expenditure of labor, skill, and money, and which is salable by AP for money, and that INS in appropriating it and selling it as its own is endeavoring to reap where it has not sown, and by disposing of it to newspapers that are competitors of AP's members is appropriating to itself the harvest of those who have sown.
Stripped of all disguises, the process amounts to an unauthorized interference with the normal operation of AP's legitimate business precisely at the point where the profit is to be reaped, in order to divert a material portion of the profit from those who have earned it to those who have not; with special advantage to INS in the competition because it is not burdened with any part of the expense of gathering the news. The transaction speaks for itself and a court of equity ought not to hesitate long in characterizing it as unfair competition in business.
The underlying principle is much the same as that which lies at the base of the equitable theory of consideration in the law of trusts—that he who has fairly paid the price should have the beneficial use of the property. It is no answer to say that AP spends its money for that which is too fugitive or evanescent to be the subject of property. That might, and for the purposes of the discussion we are assuming that it would furnish an answer in a common-law controversy. But in a court of equity, where the question is one of unfair competition, if that which AP has acquired fairly at substantial cost may be sold fairly at substantial profit, a competitor who is misappropriating it for the purpose of disposing of it to his own profit and to the disadvantage of AP cannot be heard to say that it is too fugitive or evanescent to be regarded as property. It has all the attributes of property necessary for determining that a misappropriation of it by a competitor is unfair competition because contrary to good conscience.248 U.S. at 239-40. (Emphasis added. Emphasized passages are those widely quoted in later cases.)
Holmes dissent
thumb|150px|Justice Holmes circa 1930
Justice Holmes began by challenging the Court's concept of property or "quasi-property" as the majority opinion terms it:
Property, a creation of law, does not arise from value, although exchangeable—a matter of fact. Many exchangeable values may be destroyed intentionally without compensation. Property depends upon exclusion by law from interference, and a person is not excluded from using any combination of words merely because some one has used it before, even if it took labor and genius to make it. If a given person is to be prohibited from making the use of words that his neighbors are free to make some other ground must be found.248 U.S. at 246.
Holmes then turned to the law of unfair competition, which the majority claimed was the basis of the ruling. He said the law of unfair competition requires a misrepresentation. If the misrepresentation here is that some people may think AP copied the news from INS, the proper remedy would be only to prohibit INS (for a limited time) from copying from AP unless it provides a notice that it copied from AP.248 U.S. at 248.
Brandeis dissent
thumb|150px|Justice Brandeis
Justice Brandeis objected, first, to the creation of a new property right (even if called "quasi-property"): "The knowledge for which protection is sought in the case at bar is not of a kind upon which the law has heretofore conferred the attributes of property; nor is the manner of its acquisition or use nor the purpose to which it is applied, such as has heretofore been recognized as entitling a plaintiff to relief."248 U.S. at 251.
Next, he denied that "reaping where another sowed" is an actionable tort:
To appropriate and use for profit, knowledge and ideas produced by other men, without making compensation or even acknowledgment, may be inconsistent with a finer sense of propriety; but, with the exceptions indicated above [i.e., misrepresentation, physical or moral coercion, or by inducing breaches of contract], the law has heretofore sanctioned the practice. Thus it was held that one may ordinarily make and sell anything in any form, may copy with exactness that which another has produced, or may otherwise use his ideas without his consent and without the payment of compensation, and yet not inflict a legal injury; and that ordinarily one is at perfect liberty to find out, if he can by lawful means, trade secrets of another, however valuable, and then use the knowledge so acquired gainfully, although it cost the original owner much in effort and in money to collect or produce.248 U.S. at 257.
He objected to the majority's saying that "INS cannot be heard to say" such and such "in a court of equity, where the question is one of unfair competition." He said there was no basis to invoke equity:
 The case presents no elements of equitable title or of breach of trust. The only possible reason for resort to a court of equity in a case like this is that the remedy which the law gives is inadequate. If the plaintiff has no legal cause of action, the suit necessarily fails. There is nothing in the situation of the parties which can estop [INS] from saying so.248 U.S. at 262.
Brandeis closed his dissent with an argument that the Court was ill-suited to act as a legislature and the matter should be left to the wisdom of Congress:
Implications and aftermath
Although a landmark case when it was decided, subsequent developments have diminished its significance. A leading copyright law scholar has commented:
It has been suggested that the credence due the International News Service case today is minimal: that subsequent decisions have restricted its doctrine to the news context and that, in any event, it is but a derelict of the federal common law, untenable after Erie R.R. v. Tompkins.Paul Goldstein, Federal System Ordering of the Copyright Interest, 69  49, 49 (1969).
Seventh Circuit Judge Posner similarly remarked that INS is "a decision no longer authoritative because it was based on the federal courts' subsequently abandoned authority to formulate common law principles in suits arising under state law though litigated in federal court."
"Hot news" cases
In Twentieth Century Sporting Club, Inc. v. Transradio Press Service, the court found misappropriation when a press service stationed "spotters" on rooftops who watched a boxing match in a nearby stadium; the defendant combined that information with information broadcast by plaintiff's exclusive licensee (NBC) to produce a simulated ringside, blow-by-blow broadcast of a boxing match.See, to the same effect, Mutual Broadcasting System, Inc. v. Muzak, 177 Misc. 489, 30 N.Y.S.2d 419 (Sup. Ct. 1941) (rebroadcast of World Series).
The narrowest implication of INS was that there was now a "hot news" doctrine that protected first comers in their creation of an ephemeral, time-sensitive information asset at appreciable expense against "free riders." Thus, in National Basketball Association v. Motorola, Inc. (NBA), the Second Circuit held that under New York State law, a "hot-news" INS-like claim exists in "cases where: (i) a plaintiff generates or gathers information at a cost; (ii) the information is time-sensitive; (iii) a defendant's use of the information constitutes free riding on the plaintiff's efforts; (iv) the defendant is in direct competition with a product or service offered by the plaintiffs; and (v) the ability of other parties to free-ride on the efforts of the plaintiff or others would so reduce the incentive to produce the product or service that its existence or quality would be substantially threatened."National Basketball Ass'n, 105 F.3d at 845.
But after the passage of the 1976 Copyright Act, the hot news doctrine began to suffer reverses. The Second Circuit held that the "hot news" tort was largely preempted by the 1976 Act in the NBA case.Accord 
Other copying cases
Prior to 1972, federal copyright law did not extend to sound recordings.See . During this period, several states acted against "record piracy" (the copying of phonograph records or tape recordings) under the INS doctrine.See Capitol Records, Inc. v. Greatest Records, Inc., 43 Misc. 2d 878, 252 N.Y. Supp. 2d 553 (1964); Capitol Records, Inc. v. Erickson, 2 Cal. App. 3d 526, 532, 82 Cal. Rptr. 798 (1969); Capitol Records v. Spies, 130 Ill. App. 2d 429, 432, 264 N.E.2d 874 (1970); National Broadcasting Co., Inc. v. Nance, 506 S.W.2d 483, 484-85 (Mo. Ct. App. 1974); Liberty/U A, Inc. v. Eastern Tape Corp., 11 N.C. App. 20, 22, 180 S.E.2d 414 (1971), cert. denied, 278 N.C. 702, 181 S.E.2d 600 (1971); Columbia Broadcasting System, Inc. v. Custom Recording Co., Inc., 258 S.C. 465, 478, 189 S.E.2d 305 (1972). In Goldstein v. California, the Supreme Court held that the California penal statute against the unlicensed copying of records was not preempted by federal copyright law since Congress had not regulated the subject matter.See Note, Copyrights: States Allowed to Protect Works Not Copyrightable Under Federal Law, 58  316, 324 (1973).
In John Roberts Mfg. Co. v. University of Notre Dame du Lac, an
unlicensed manufacturer distributed class rings in competition with the "official" product sponsored by the university.John Roberts Mfg. Co. v. University of Notre Dame du Lac, 152 F. Supp. 269 (N.D. Ind. 1957), aff'd, 258 F.2d 256 (7th Cir. 1958). That in making his rings the copyist used the Notre Dame name, seal, and monogram without the university's consent, a misappropriation of property rights that the Seventh Circuit equated (without citing INS) to the theft of cash from the university's safe deposit box.John Roberts Mfg. Co., 258 F.2d at 259, 262.
In Flint v. Oleet Jewelry Mfg. Co., the defendant copied the plaintiff's unpatented, uncopyrighted "Mustard Seed Remembrancer" locket, containing a mustard seed to remind users of the power of "so much faith as a grain of mustard" to move mountains (Matt. 17:20). The court found misappropriation under the INS doctrine, holding that secondary meaning was no longer an essential element of unfair competition law in New York.
In Metropolitan Opera Ass'n v. Wagner-Nichols Recorder Corp.,Metropolitan Opera Ass'n v. Wagner-Nichols Recorder Corp., 199 Misc. 786, 101 N.Y.S.2d 483 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. 1950), aff'd, 279 A.D. 632, 107 N.Y.S.2d 795 (1st Dep't 1951). the trial court described New York misappropriation law as standing for the "broader principle that property rights of commercial value are to be and will be protected from any form of commercial immorality"; that misappropriation law developed "to deal with business malpractices offensive to the ethics of [] society"; and that the doctrine is "broad and flexible."Metropolitan Opera, 101 N.Y.S.2d at 492, 488-89). In that case, the defendant engaged in a "business malpractice offensive to the ethics of society":101 N.Y.S.2d at 492. it copied and recorded the Met's opera broadcasts, which interfered with the Met's exclusive recording contract with Columbia Records. (At the time, the Copyright Act did not yet extend to sound recordings.) This was not a "hot news" case but rather an improper copying case. It shows the expansion of the INS doctrine beyond "hot news" to a more general misappropriation doctrine.
But the Second Circuit subsequently held that New York law, so interpreted, was preempted by the 1976 Copyright Act. After quoting the foregoing language from Metropolitan Opera, the Second Circuit said:
However, we believe that Metropolitan Operas broad misappropriation doctrine based on amorphous concepts such as "commercial immorality" or society's "ethics" is preempted. Such concepts are virtually synonymous for wrongful copying and are in no meaningful fashion distinguishable from infringement of a copyright. The broad misappropriation doctrine relied upon by the district court is, therefore, the equivalent of exclusive rights in copyright law.National Basketball Ass'n, 105 F.3d at 851.
At the same time, other Second Circuit case law, beginning shortly after the INS decision, has greatly limited the application of INS to general product copying. In these cases, typically, the doctrine requiring "secondary meaning" is invoked to bar plaintiff's recovery.
An illustrative case is the 1929 decision in Cheney Bros. v. Doris Silk Corp., decided a decade after INS. Many of the plaintiff's fabric designs (80%) were unsuccessful; plaintiff copied successful designs. The designs were not practicably copyrighted or patented, so that "the plaintiff, which is put to much ingenuity and expense in fabricating them, finds itself without protection of any sort for its pains." Since the designs were short lived, plaintiff sought "hot-news" type of protection from equity, for less than a year. The Second Circuit, per Judge Learned Hand, denied relief: "In the absence of some recognized right at common law, or under the statutes—and the plaintiff claims neither—a man's property is limited to the chattels which embody his invention. Others may imitate these at their pleasure."Cheney Bros., 35 F.2d at 280. As for the INS case, on which the plaintiff sought to rely, the court refused to apply it beyond its particular fact pattern:
Although that [case] concerned another subject-matter—printed news dispatches—we agree that, if it meant to lay down a general doctrine, it would cover this case; at least, the language of the majority opinion goes so far. We do not believe that it did. While it is of course true that law ordinarily speaks in general terms, there are cases where the occasion is at once the justification for, and the limit of, what is decided. This appears to us such an instance; we think that no more was covered than situations substantially similar to those then at bar. The difficulties of understanding it otherwise are insuperable. We are to suppose that the court meant to create a sort of common-law patent or copyright for reasons of justice. Either would flagrantly conflict with the scheme which Congress has for more than a century devised to cover the subject-matter.
Another illustrative case is the 1960 decision in American-Marietta Co. v. Krigsman, involving a sponge-mop replacement (for installation after the original sponge becomes worn out). The plaintiff did not attempt to protect functional features of the product, but only sought to prevent the copying of the nonfunctional arrangement of slots in the metal "presser plate" (hinged to the bottom of the mop) which is pressed against the sponge to squeeze water out. The rule against nonfunctional copying, the Second Circuit held (in an opinion by Judge Learned Hand), is restricted to cases where the nonfunctional element has acquired a secondary meaning:
It is indeed quite likely that buyers have assumed an identity of origin to the two mops from their general similarity; it is even possible-though we should suppose it very unlikely-that the identical form of the "slots" may have contributed to that assumption, but one who seeks to enjoin the reproduction of what is in the public domain must affirmatively show that the copied features were the reason for the confusion; it is not enough that perhaps it may have contributed [to it].Krigsman, 275 F.2d at 290.
The implication of this line of cases is that the INS doctrine is being given very limited scope, particularly in contexts in which copyright law may dominate the field. Decisions from other circuits are consistent with those from the Second Circuit.See, e.g., Pagliero v. Wallace China Co., 198 F.2d 339, 343 (9th Cir. 1952); Supreme Records, Inc. v. Decca Records, Inc., 90 F. Supp. 904, 908 (S.D. Cal. 1950) ("I do not believe that the Supreme Court intended the decision in [INS] to apply to appropriations of a different character.") (citing Cheney case); 
Triangle Pubs., Inc. v. New England Newspaper Pub. Co., 46 F. Supp. 198, 203 (D. Mass. 1942) ("The courts of Massachusetts, perhaps mindful of the views held by the Massachusetts brethren on the Supreme Court of the United States, perhaps from their general hostility to new trends in the law of torts, and perhaps observing that the federal courts now seem to feel Mr. Justice Pitney's dicta went too far in [INS]." But see Mercury Record Productions, Inc. v. Economic Consultants, Inc., 64 Wis.2d 163, 182, 218 N.W.2d 705 (1974) (rejecting "the line of precedents originating with Judge Learned Hand").
Kellogg  case
In Kellogg Co. v. National Biscuit Co.,. in 1938, the Supreme Court considered a case arguably akin to INS but (with Justice Brandeis writing for the Court and now in the majority) denied relief. The Court said:
Kellogg Company is undoubtedly sharing in the goodwill of the article known as Shredded Wheat; and thus is sharing in a market which was created by the skill and judgment of plaintiff's predecessor and has been widely extended by vast expenditures in advertising persistently made.  But that is not unfair.  Sharing in the goodwill of an article unprotected by patent or trade-mark is the exercise of a right possessed by all—and in the free exercise of which the consuming public is deeply interested.305 U.S. at 122.
One commentator maintained that one could properly—
... view Kellogg as vindication of the views that he [Brandeis] expressed in INS. That Nabisco had invested in the shredded wheat product did not give it control over the use of the pillow shape (or the term SHREDDED WHEAT); it had no property right against misappropriation of the shape after the expiry of the patents. Instead, Brandeis inquired [only] whether Kellogg had engaged in any acts of misrepresentation.Graeme B. Dinwoodie, The Story of Kellogg Co. v. National Biscuit Co.: Breakfast with Brandeis 29 (2005).
Sears and Compco cases
The 1964 decisions of the Supreme Court in Sears v. Stiffel and Compco v. Day-Brite undermined the application of the INS doctrine to prohibit or penalize the copying of product designs, to the point where the First Circuit said in 1967 that INS "has clearly been overruled." Those cases held that federal patent law preempts state laws that duplicate the patent laws or disturb the balance that patent law sets between competition and monopoly protection for inventions; as one commentator explained:
The implement selected by the Court to vindicate the competition–monopoly balance may be characterized as a per se rule. Any state law which operates to jar the balance, however incidentally, is, per se, an illegitimate impediment and to be condemned. In the view of Mr. Justice Black, writing for the majority, just "as a State cannot encroach upon the federal patent laws directly, it cannot, under some other law . . . give protection of a kind that clashes with the objectives of the federal patent laws." . . . Though International News Service has never been expressly overruled, the Court was, in Sears and Compco, apparently rejecting its approach.Paul Goldstein, 69  49, 64 (1969).
Accordingly, such INS-based decisions as the Notre Dame ring case, the Flint mustard seed case, Haeger Potteries, Inc. v. Gilner Potteries, in which the court held that copying an ash-tray design "in precise detail as to design, shape and color, and in every other respect than quality, is nothing less than piracy," and Dior v. Milton, in which the court held that there was no good reason "why the rights of the plaintiff [in a dress design] should receive less protection than those of the sponsor of sporting events and the disseminator of news,"Dior v. Milton, 419 Misc. 2d 425, 155 N.Y.S. 2d 443 (Sup. Ct.), aff'd per curiam, 2 App. Div. 2d 878, 156 N.Y.S. 2d 996 (1956). can no longer survive: they have been given "the death knell."See Wylie A. Aitken, Case Note: Product Simulation: The Death Knell for the Misappropriation Theory—the Stiffel and Compco Cases, 48  596 (1965). It is said that—
Stiffel and Compco now have made it clear that the misappropriation theory as applied to cases involving article duplication is to be rejected.  . . . By applying the doctrine of preemption of the field by congressional enactment of federal patent and copyright laws, the Supreme Court has . . . rung the death knell for the misappropriation theory as applied to product simulation.Aitken, at 605.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 248
 Associated Press v. United States (1945), an antitrust Supreme Court case
 Feist v. Rural (1991), holding that "copyright awards originality, not effort"
 Barclays Capital Inc. v. Theflyonthewall.com, Inc. (2d Cir. 2011)
References
Further reading
Howard B. Abrams, Copyright, Misappropriation, and Preemption: Constitutional and Statutory Limits of State Law Protection. 1983  509.
Douglas G. Baird, The Story of INS v. AP: Property, Natural Monopoly, and the Uneasy Legacy of Concocted Controversy in  9 (Jane C. Ginsberg and Rochelle Cooper eds., 2005).
Douglas G. Baird, Common Law Intellectual Property and the Legacy of International News Service v. Associated Press, 50  411 (1983).
Richard A. Epstein, International News Service v. Associated Press: Custom and Law as Sources of Property Rights in News, 78  85 (1992).
Victoria Smith Ekstrand,  (2005).
Dennis S. Karjala, Copyright and Misappropriation, 17  885 (1992).
Matthias Leistner, The legacy of International News Service v. Associated Press in   33 (Christopher Heath and Anselm Kamperman Sanders eds., 2010).
Gary Myers, The Restatement's Rejection of the Misappropriation Tort: A Victory for the Public Domain, 47 S.C.L. . 673 (1996).
Leo J. Raskind, The Misappropriation Doctrine as a Competitive Norm of Intellectual Property Law, 75  875 (1991).
External links
The Doctrine of Misappropriation
Category:1918 in United States case law
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:Associated Press
"""

From "International Salt Co. v. United States" ==> """
International Salt Co. v. United States, 332 U.S. 392 (1947), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that the Sherman Act prohibits as per se violations all tying arrangements in which a product for which a seller has a legal monopoly, such as a patent, requires purchasers to buy as well a product for which the seller has no legal monopoly.
Background
The defendant, International Salt Company, had patented machines for processing salt and mixing or injecting it into various foodstuffs. The company required those who leased machines to buy the salt or salt tablets as well, which was processed through the machines from the defendant. The US government brought a case charging the company of an antitrust violation by the tying of its products. The defendant replied to the charges with the contention that the tying arrangement was necessary to control the quality of salt being used in its machines and claimed that salt not meeting certain standards would damage the machines.
Issue
The Supreme Court was asked to determine whether such an arrangement was a per se violation of the antitrust laws.
Decision
The Court found a per se violation. It also rejected the defense that the associated product must meet certain standards since competitors must be given the opportunity to meet them. The defense that customers could buy elsewhere if other vendors sold at lower prices was also rejected since the defendant could foreclose the market simply by meeting it.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 332
 United States v. Loew's Inc. (1962)
External links
Category:1947 in United States case law
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:History of salt
"""

From "International Shoe Co. v. Washington" ==> """
International Shoe Co. v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310 (1945), was a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States in which the Court held that a party, particularly a corporation, may be subject to the jurisdiction of a state court if it has "minimum contacts" with that state.International Shoe v. Washington, . The ruling has important consequences for corporations involved in interstate commerce, their payments to state unemployment compensation funds, limits on the power of states imposed by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, the sufficiency of service of process, and, especially, personal jurisdiction.
Facts
The plaintiff, the State of Washington, established a tax on employers conducting business therein with the stated legislative purpose of providing a fund to be used for financial assistance to newly unemployed workers in the state. The tax was in effect a mandatory contribution to the state's Unemployment Compensation Fund. The defendant, International Shoe Company, was an American company that was incorporated in Delaware with its principal place of business ("PPB") in Missouri. The corporation had maintained for some time a staff of 11-13 salesmen in the State of Washington, working on commission. The salesmen were residents of that state and they met with prospective customers in motels and hotels, and occasionally rented space to put up displays. The company thus had no permanent "situs" of business in the State. Each year, the salesmen brought in about $31,000 in compensation. International Shoe's solicitation system allegedly was set up explicitly to avoid establishing the situs of the business in other states insofar as the salesmen did not have offices, did not negotiate prices, and sent all orders back to Missouri; shipments from the plant to customers were sent f.o.b.
Procedural history
International Shoe Co. did not pay the tax at issue in this case, so the state effected service of process on one of their salesmen with a notice of assessment.  Washington also sent a letter by registered mail to their place of business in Missouri. International Shoe made a special appearance before the office of unemployment to dispute the state's jurisdiction over it as a corporate "person." However, the trial court ruled that it had personal jurisdiction over the defendant corporation. This ruling was upheld in the appeal tribunal, the Superior Court, and the Supreme Court of Washington. International Shoe Co. then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
Ruling
thumb|upright|Chief Justice Harlan F. Stone
The issue involved a determination of the level of connection that must exist between a non-resident corporation and a state in order for that corporation to be sued within that state.   The Supreme Court,  in an opinion by Chief Justice  Harlan Fiske Stone  (and in which  Justice Robert Jackson  did not participate),  held that in view of 26 U.S.C. § 1606(a) (providing that no person shall be relieved from compliance with a  state  law requiring payments to an unemployment fund on the ground that he is engaged in interstate commerce) the fact that the corporation is engaged in interstate commerce does not relieve it from liability for payments to the state unemployment compensation fund.   The activities in behalf of the corporation render it amenable to suit in courts of the State to recover payments due to the state unemployment compensation fund.   The activities in question established sufficient contacts or ties between the State and the corporation to make it reasonable and just, and in conformity to the due process requirements of the Fourteenth Amendment, for the State to enforce against the corporation an obligation arising out of such activities.   In such a suit to recover payments due to the unemployment compensation fund, service of process upon one of the corporation's salesmen within the State, and notice sent by registered mail to the corporation at its home office, satisfies the requirements of due process. The tax imposed by the state unemployment compensation statute—construed by the state court, in its application to the corporation, as a tax on the privilege of employing salesmen within the State—does not violate the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. In reaching its decision the Court stated that throughout  American  history,  the jurisdiction of courts to render judgment in personam has been grounded on their de facto power over the defendant's person.  Hence, his presence within the territorial jurisdiction of a court was prerequisite to its rendition of a judgment personally binding him. But now that the capias ad respondendum has given way to personal service of summons or other form of notice, due process requires only that,  in order to subject a defendant to a judgment in personam, if he be not present within the territory of the forum, he have certain minimum contacts with it such that the maintenance of the suit does not offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice. Justice Hugo Black wrote a separate opinion, agreeing with the outcome in this case, but contending that the Court has excessively restricted the power of states to find jurisdiction over companies doing business therein.
Analysis
A growing body of Supreme Court precedent and incremental statutory and common law doctrines related to personal jurisdiction had been evolving over a period of several decades from the late 19th century through the early 20th century, and the Supreme Court therefore could have upheld jurisdiction over defendant corporation. Initially the courts followed a strict interpretation of territorial jurisdiction, where states only had power over property or defendants who were actually present in the state (excepting corporations or residents). Defendants wishing to avoid claims could abscond to other jurisdictions without fear of suit.
As the doctrine of personal jurisdiction evolved with additional cases directed to related subject matter, the Supreme Court expanded jurisdiction to anyone who tacitly "consented" to jurisdiction (in that case, a defendant consented to jurisdiction by merely driving on a Massachusetts state highway). These doctrines were built upon the expanding legal fiction of "presence" within the forum state or the defendant's commission of an act or failure to act within the forum state. (A "forum state" means the state in whose courts a case is being litigated.)
In International Shoe, the Court's majority chose to create a new doctrine, while still adhering to a "presence" rationale. The basic formulation is: a state may exercise personal jurisdiction over an out-of-state defendant, so long as that defendant has "sufficient minimum contacts" with the forum state, from which the complaint arises, such that the exercise of jurisdiction "will not offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice . . ." See 326 U.S. 310 (1940).
The court broke down the types of contact that a defendant can have with a state into "casual" contact and "systematic and continuous" contact. In cases with only casual contact, the claim must be related to the contact in order for the state to have jurisdiction. Casual contact is not a basis for bringing unrelated claims. Systematic and continuous contact allows for both claims related to the contact and unrelated claims.
It was and remains a broad doctrine. It eventually allowed states to create "long arm" statutes and responded to the actualities of the national market of the United States. Defendants had often avoided legal responsibilities by "scampering" from the state of occurrence and not being available for service of process. This case changed that to some extent, though the "traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice" are drawn from the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and Aristotle's notions of justice. The doctrine of International Shoe is broad, but the Court has recognized that it has limits, nevertheless.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 326
List of United States Supreme Court cases
Pennoyer v. Neff
Calder v. Jones
References
External links
 International Shoe Co. v. Washington Case Brief at Lawnix.com
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States personal jurisdiction case law
Category:1945 in United States case law
Category:Shoe business
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:Unemployment benefits
"""

From "Interstate Circuit, Inc. v. United States" ==> """
Interstate Circuit, Inc. v. United States, 306 U.S. 208 (1939), is a 1939 decision of the United States Supreme Court finding an antitrust price-fixing conspiracy based on what subsequently came to be known a hub-and-spoke conspiracy theory.See . thumb|100px|right This is a conspiracy in which one actor (the "hub"), such as a supplier, enters into agreements with a number of actors (the "spokes"), such as retailers, who are aware that the supplier is entering into similar agreements with other retailers and that the success of the plan agreed to depends on the retailers all performing in accordance with the agreements. In this case, the hub was Interstate (a motion picture theater chain) and the spokes were various motion picture film distributors that supplied Interstate (and other theaters) with films.
Background
The Government sued two groups of defendants for engaging in a price-fixing conspiracy. One group of eight defendants were distributors (such as Paramount Pictures) of motion picture films, that distributed about 75 percent of all first-class feature films exhibited in the United States. A second group of defendants were dominant theater owners in Texas and New Mexico, and included Interstate Circuit, which had a monopoly of first-run theaters in various Texas cities..
The manager of the defendant theater owners sent a letter to each of the distributor defendants, in which he demanded as a condition of continued dealing in the distributor's films that the distributor (1) require that second-run theaters never exhibit such films at any time or in any theater at a smaller admission price than 25¢  for adults in the evening, and (2) on such films that are exhibited at night, minimum admission of 40¢  and that they shall never be exhibited in conjunction with another feature picture (so-called double features).306 U.S. at 216-18.
Conferences discussing the matter were held between representatives of Interstate and individual distributors. The distributors each agreed and complied with the demands. It does not appear that there was evidence of communication between distributors, but it was clear that each knew that the other distributors were being asked to join in the plan.306 U.S. at 218-20.
Ruling of Supreme Court
thumb|150px|right|Justice Harlan Stone delivered the opinion of the Court
Justice Harlan F. Stone delivered the 5-3 opinion of the Court. Justice Owen Roberts filed a dissenting opinion in which Justices James C. McReynolds and Pierce Butler joined. Justice Felix Frankfurter did not participate.
The Supreme Court agreed with the district court that it was permissible to draw "the inference of agreement from the nature of the proposals made . . .[and] from the substantial unanimity of action taken upon them by the distributors." The letter making the demands named on its face as addressees the eight distributors, and so, from the beginning, "each of the distributors knew that the proposals were under consideration by the others." The Court added that each distributor knew that "without substantially unanimous action with respect to the restrictions for any given territory, there was risk of a substantial loss of the business and goodwill of the subsequent-run and independent exhibitors, but that, with it, there was the prospect of increased profits." The Court said that provided "strong motive for concerted action."306 U.S. at 221–22.
The Court explained the legal requirements for finding a hub-and-spoke conspiracy, but did not use that term:
While the District Court's finding of an agreement of the distributors among themselves is supported by the evidence, we think that, in the circumstances of this case, such agreement for the imposition of the restrictions upon subsequent-run exhibitors was not a prerequisite to an unlawful conspiracy. It was enough that, knowing that concerted action was contemplated and invited, the distributors gave their adherence to the scheme and participated in it. Each distributor was advised that the others were asked to participate; each knew that cooperation was essential to successful operation of the plan. They knew that the plan, if carried out, would result in a restraint of commerce,  . . and, knowing it, all participated in the plan.306 U.S. at 226-27.
The dissent found the challenged conduct merely the right of a copyright owner to exploit and profit from the ownership of its statutory monopoly. and disagreed with the conspiracy theory:
The Government stresses the fact that each of the distributors must have acted with knowledge that some or all of the others would grant or had granted Interstate's demand. But such knowledge was merely notice to each of them that, if it was successfully to compete for the first-run business in important Texas cities, it must meet the terms of competing distributors or lose the business of Interstate. It could compete successfully only by granting exclusive licenses to Interstate and injuring subsequent-run houses by refusing them licenses -- a course clearly lawful -- or by doing the less drastic thing of agreeing to protect the goodwill of its pictures by putting necessary and not severely burdensome restrictions upon subsequent-run exhibitors, which I think equally lawful.
306 U.S. at 240.
Commentary
Richard Givens in a 1960 article in The Antitrust Bulletin called Interstate Circuit "the leading case establishing that consciously parallel business conduct might form the basis for a finding of antitrust violation."Richard A. Givens,  Parallel Business Conduct under the Sherman Act, 5  271, 277 (1960). This case and American Tobacco Co. v. United States,. he asserts, established that parallel business conduct, which would be unlikely to occur but for some express or tacit agreement, may satisfy the requirement of combination or conspiracy under the Sherman Act. He states the qualification, however, that subsequent cases make clear that parallel conduct with knowledge of the similar action of others is evidence of a combination or conspiracy, but that a "plus factor," which might be the unusual quality of the conduct itself, such as a radical departure from past practice or a price rise during a depression is necessary for the inference of conspiracy to be made, and other evidence can rebut that inference.Givens at 278. Givens emphasizes that it is reasonable to infer conspiracy when parallel business action is "drastic or predatory as in Interstate Circuit' " but not "where the conduct is in itself normal and logical."Givens at 282-83.
The statement of facts from this case have been challenged as inaccurate. In a 2019 article, antitrust scholar Barak Orbach discussed why the facts of the case are fundamentally different from their descriptions in judicial opinions and the literature to argue that the circumstantial evidence of the case should not have been read as sufficient to convict.
See also
Hub-and-spoke conspiracy
References
External links
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:1939 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
"""

From "Interstate Commerce Commission v. Cincinnati, New Orleans & Texas Pacific Railway Co." ==> """
Interstate Commerce Commission v. Cincinnati, New Orleans and Texas Pacific Railway Co., 167 U.S. 479 (1897), was an important early U.S. Supreme Court case in the development of American administrative law..
Background
Legal principle
The power of an administrative agency is executive and administrative, but not legislative.  The scope of authority held by an agency is determined by the agency's organic statute.  Where an administrative agency wishes to assume the traditionally legislative power to make policy, the power must be expressly granted by the agency's organic statute, and not implied from other terms of the statute.  This principle applies especially where the policy involves issues of great consequence.
Note: This principle was later qualified by cases such as NBC v. US which provided for more expansive powers for administrative agencies.
Facts and procedural posture
The ICC set rates for rail transport, and issued an order requiring all rail companies who charged more than the set rates to cease operations.  The ICC then went to the 6th Circuit Court of Appeals to seek a legal injunction requiring the Cincinnati, New Orleans and Texas Pacific Railway to comply with the order.  The 6th circuit sent a certified question to the US Supreme Court, asking:
Had the interstate commerce commission jurisdictional power to make the order hereinbefore set forth; all proceedings preceding said order being due and regular, so far as procedure is concerned?
Ultimately, the Supreme Court determined that the ICC had no such power.
Opinion of the Court
The ICC's authority stemmed from the Interstate Commerce Act, the organic statute which gave the ICC life, and determined the extent of its powers.  The Court considered two possible ways that Congress might vest the power to set rates in the ICC: expressly in the statute, or implied from the terms of the statute.
The Court found first that nowhere in the statute is the ICC expressly given power to set rates.
The issue of implied power also required consideration.  The ICC asserted that the power should be implied from the first section, which provided that "all charges ... should be reasonable and just; and every unjust and unreasonable charge for such serve is prohibited and declared to be unlawful."  The ICC deduced that if all charges must be reasonable, and Congress had not determined what was reasonable, then the ICC must determine which rates are reasonable, in order to perform its legal obligation to ensure that all rates would be reasonable and just.  Therefore, they argued, the only reasonable interpretation of the statute was that Congress intended them to exercise the power to set rates.
The Court rejected this argument, holding that the powers granted by the terms of the statute were solely executive and administrative, but not legislative.  As such, without an explicit grant of the power to set rates by Congress, the ICC was not permitted to set rates for rail transport.
 References 
External links
Category:1897 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States administrative case law
v. Cincinnati, New Orleans and Texas Pacific Railway Co.
Category:Railway litigation in 1897
Category:Predecessors of the Southern Railway (U.S.)
"""

From "Board of Governors, FRS v. Investment Co. Institute" ==> """
Board of Governors, FRS v. Investment Company Institute, 450 U.S. 46 (1981), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court, which held that the amendment to Regulation Y does not exceed the Board's statutory authority.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 450
Glass–Steagall Act
Bloomberg L.P. v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States banking case law
Category:1981 in United States case law
Category:Federal Reserve System
"""

From "Inwood Laboratories, Inc. v. Ives Laboratories, Inc." ==> """
Inwood Laboratories Inc. v. Ives Laboratories, Inc., 456 U.S. 844 (1982), is a United States Supreme Court case, in which the Court confirmed the application of and set out a test for contributory trademark liability under § 32 of the Lanham Act (15 U.S.C. § 1114).. 
 Background 
 Contributory trademark infringement 
Under the Lanham Act, an owner of a trademark is permitted to sue anyone who uses a mark that is identical or confusingly similar to the trademark owner's mark or who otherwise makes deceptive claims of origin.Cross, supra, at 103–04. The Lanham Act does not explicitly provide a cause of action for contributory infringement.Liability as Vicarious or Contributory Infringer under Lanham Act -- Modern Cases, 152 A.L.R. Fed. 573, § 2(a) Thus, contributory trademark infringement is a judicial doctrine based on the common law of torts. Specifically, contributory liability is based on the principle that parties should be held liable for their contribution to a harm, even when they did not directly cause the harm.The Supreme Court first recognized the doctrine of contributory infringement in 1924, in William R. Warner & Co. v. Eli Lilly & Co.. In this case, the salesmen for the defendant, a manufacturer, suggested to retail dealers that defendant's product could be imperceptibly substituted for the plaintiff's product. Despite the fact that the manufacturer itself did not use plaintiff's mark and the retail dealers were not deceived, the Court found liability, stating: "The wrong was in designedly enabling the dealers to palm off the preparation as that of the respondent."
 Facts 
The plaintiff, Ives Laboratories, Inc., owned a patent on the drug cyclendelate, which it distributed in colored blue and blue-red capsules and marketed under the name Cyclospasmol.Inwood Labs., 456 U.S. at 846–47. After the patent expired in 1972, the defendant, Inwood Laboratories, Inc., and other manufacturers began to make and distribute generic versions of the drug using identically colored capsules. Ives sued several manufacturers and wholesalers under § 32 of the Lanham Act, alleging that some pharmacists were distributing generic versions of cyclendelate and mislabeling them as Cyclospasmol. Ives argued that the generic manufacturers' use of identical capsules induced the pharmacists to substitute and mislabel generic versions of the drug as Cyclospasmol, and that pharmacists would continue to make such infringing substitutions as long as the nearly identical generic versions were available.
 Prior procedural history 
The Federal District Court denied Ives' request for a preliminary injunction on the sale of drugs that appear identical to Ives' Cyclospasmol, as Ives did not demonstrate that the manufacturers had conspired with the pharmacists to commit the infringement or suggested that the pharmacists make substitutions. The Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed the decision, but noted that the District Court's standard for contributory infringement was too narrow. Instead, the Court of Appeals stated that a manufacturer or distributor could be held liable for infringement if they suggested that the pharmacists engaged in such infringing conduct, or if they continued to sell the generic drug to retailers whom they knew or had reason to know were engaging in infringing practices.
 Opinion 
 Majority opinion 
The question before the Court was whether the manufacturer could be held liable for trademark infringement when it was the distributors of those drugs (the pharmacists) who actually committed the infringing acts. In an opinion written by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, the Court agreed with the lower courts that "liability for trademark infringement can extend beyond those who actually mislabel goods with the mark of another." The Supreme Court found that a manufacturer or distributor may be held liable for contributory trademark infringement where it "intentionally induces another to infringe a trademark, or if it continues to supply its product to one whom it knows or has reason to know is engaging in trademark infringement."Inwood Labs., 456 U.S. at 854.
The majority of the opinion deals with the Circuit Court overstepping its role of appellate review, as it was to review the District Court's findings under the "clearly erroneous" standard of Rule 52(a) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. The Court stated that an appellate court could not interpret the evidence on its own in place of the district court's findings, as the trier of fact has the exclusive responsibility of determining the weight and credibility of the evidence.
The Court reversed the Court of Appeals' finding of infringement of § 32 of the Lanham Act, and remanded the case to the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit for further proceedings, as the Circuit Court had not considered the rest of Ives' claims.
 Definition of functionality 
Although its opinion in Inwood did not deal much with the issue of functionality, the Court gave a definition of functionality in Footnote 10 that it has referred back to in more recent cases. One of Inwood's defenses to Ives' infringement action was that the color of the capsules was functional. In Footnote 10, the Supreme Court discussed that defense, stating: "In general terms, a product feature is functional if it is essential to the use or purpose of the article or if it affects the cost or quality of the article."Inwood Labs., 456 U.S. at 850 n.10. The Court cited Sears, Roebuck & Co. v. Stiffel Co., 376 U.S. 225, 232 (1964) and Kellogg Co. v. National Biscuit Co., 305 U.S. 111, 122 (1938) as support. For a number of years, lower courts wrestled with how to reconcile the Inwood definition with prior case law, with some ignoring it altogether and others blending the Inwood test with other case law. In Qualitex Co. v. Jacobson Products Co., the Court reiterated this Inwood test for functionality, along with additional language, demonstrating that Inwood formulation of the functionality test should not be dismissed merely as dicta.. The Court also reiterated the test in TrafFix Devices v. Mktg Displays, 532 U.S. 159 (1995).. 
Justice White included another definition of the functionality standard in his concurrence, stating: "A functional characteristic is 'an important ingredient in the commercial success of the product." Furthermore, Justice White concluded that the defendant should bear the burden of proof for functionality.
 Cases extending Inwood 
Inwood involved a manufacturer or distributor, but it left open whether its test of contributory liability applied beyond this context. Since Inwood, courts have extended the application of contributory infringement to other areas, including flea markets, franchises,See, e.g.,  and service providers
References
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1982 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States trademark case law
"""

From "Inyo County v. Paiute-Shoshone Indians of the Bishop Community" ==> """
Inyo County v. Paiute-Shoshone Indians of the Bishop Community, 538 U.S. 701 (2003), was a United States Supreme Court case.
 Background 
The Bishop Paiute Tribe of California owns and operates the Paiute Palace Casino. The Inyo County District attorney had three casino employees under suspicion of welfare fraud, and asked the casino for their employment records. The casino declined, stating that it was against their privacy policy. Upon finding probable cause, the district attorney obtained a search warrant, authorizing the search of employment records of those three casino employees. Subsequently, the district attorney asked for the records of six more employees. The tribe once again reiterated their privacy policy, but offered up for evidence the last page of each employee's welfare application. The district attorney refused the offer. To ward off additional searches, the tribe filed a suit against the district attorney and the county. They stated that their tribe's status as a sovereign made them immune to state processes under federal law and asserted that the state authorized the seizure of tribal records.
The California district court dismissed the tribe's complaint, holding that the tribal sovereign immunity does not preclude the search and seizure of personnel records. In 2002, the decision was reversed, with the Ninth Circuit holding that the executing of a search warrant against the Paiute-Shoshone tribe interfered with their right to make their own laws, and be governed by them.
 Decision 
In a unanimous decision, the court vacated the decision of the Ninth Circuit. The court found that  was only meant to protect private rights, not sovereign rights. And since the case rested entirely of the basis that the tribe's sovereign immunity was violated by the search warrant being issued, the tribe could not sue under section §1983.
 See also 
 Paiute-Shoshone Indians of the Bishop Community of the Bishop Colony
 Cherokee Nation v. Georgia
 Worcester v. Georgia
 References 
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2003 in United States case law
Category:United States Native American gaming case law
Category:United States tribal sovereign immunity case law
Category:Second Enforcement Act of 1871 case law
Category:History of Inyo County, California
Category:Paiute
Category:Mono
Category:Welfare fraud
"""

From "Iowa v. Tovar" ==> """
Iowa v. Tovar, 541 U.S. 77 (2004),Iowa v. Tovar, 541 U.S. 77 (2004) was a unanimous decision of the Supreme Court of the United States that clarified how well-informed a defendant had to be to waive their right to counsel under the Sixth Amendment. The defendant in this case had waived his right to counsel and pled guilty to drunk driving, and then had been convicted of drunk driving twice more, with sentences increasing as his convictions piled up. He argued that the judge in the first case had not explained that multiple drunk driving convictions would lead to more severe sentences, so his waiver of counsel had been invalid. The Supreme Court disagreed, saying that the judge's warnings had been adequate, and the defendants' waiver was "knowing, voluntary, and intelligent."
 Background 
 Legal background 
The assistance of counsel clause of the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution generally guarantees that defendants have a right to be represented by an attorney during criminal proceedings. This is not mandatory, however, and defendants also have the right to represent themselves (known as litigating pro se). When a defendant chooses to proceed pro se, they are waiving their right to an attorney, and will not be able to claim later (e.g. on appeal) that the trial was unconstitutional because their right to counsel was violated. Because having an attorney can make an enormous difference during a trial, the Supreme Court decided in Faretta v. California in 1975 that pro se defendants had to be warned of the "dangers and disadvantages of self-representation."Faretta v. California, 422 U.S. 806 (1975)
 Prior litigation 
 First OWI 
In 1996, Felipe Tovar (then a college student in Ames, Iowa) was charged with operating while intoxicated (OWI).State v. Tovar, 656 N.W.2d 112 (Iowa 2003) At his arraignment, he did not have a lawyer, and the judge confirmed with him that he wanted to represent himself during the hearing. Tovar entered a guilty plea, and the judge went through a plea colloquy with him, following Iowa's Rules of Criminal Procedure. The judge explained that (among other things), not only was Tovar giving up his right to a trial, but also a right to have an attorney at that trial, and "That attorney could help you select a jury, question and cross-examine the State's witnesses, present evidence, if any, in your behalf, and make arguments to the judge and jury on your behalf." He also reviewed the other trial-related rights that Tovar would be waiving, and asked Tovar to verify that he still wanted to plead guilty. Tovar did so. After reviewing the factual basis for the charges, the judge accepted Tovar's guilty plea. At the sentencing hearing, Tovar appeared pro se again, and the judge went through another colloquy to make sure that Tovar did not want a lawyer and understood the risks. Tovar was sentenced to two days in jail and a $500 fine, plus fees (as well as a fine of $250 plus fees for driving himself to the courthouse, even though his license had been suspended).
 Second and third OWI 
Tovar was charged for OWI again in 1998, and a third time in 2000. He was represented by attorney for both of these charges; in 1998 he pled guilty, and in 2000 he pled not guilty. Under Iowa law, the first OWI was a serious misdemeanor, the second was an aggravated misdemeanor, and the third was a felony.Iowa Code § 321J.2 (1999) In 2001, Tovar's attorney filed a motion that the charge should be reduced, arguing that his waiver of counsel in 1996 had been invalid. The trial court denied the motion, saying:
After Tovar was convicted and sentenced, he appealed the motion.
 Appeal 
The Iowa Court of Appeals affirmed. However, the Iowa Supreme Court reversed, saying Tovar's waiver in 1996 of his right to counsel was not "knowing and intelligent." Although the U.S. Supreme Court had not yet explicitly said what standard to apply for this situation, the Iowa Supreme Court noted that in Brady v. United States, a guilty plea was held constitutionally valid because it was "voluntary," "knowing," and "intelligent" (taking the circumstances into account), and in Patterson v. Illinois it had been held that the importance of the right to counsel varied depending on the stage and circumstances of litigation. Moreover, the court in Patterson had pointed out two key issues: "whether the accused was 'made sufficiently aware of his right to have counsel present' at the proceeding and 'the possible consequences of a decision to forgo the aid of counsel.' " With this in mind, the Iowa Supreme Court ruled that the trial judge's colloquy had been insufficient, and remanded the case for a new trial:
 Decision of the Supreme Court 
The U.S. Supreme Court unanimously reversed the Iowa Supreme Court and reinstated Tovar's conviction. Justice Ginsburg, writing for the court, said that the Sixth Amendment did not require colloquies as extensive as the Iowa court had held. A defendant had to be informed of "the nature of the charges against him, of his right to be counseled regarding his plea, and of the range of allowable punishments attendant upon the entry of a guilty plea," but that was all.
An arraignment where a defendant might enter a guilty plea was certainly a "critical stage" of litigation, and thus there was a right to an attorney then. The Court declined to decide on a "formula or script" for plea colloquies, however, because the amount of information necessary for "voluntary, knowing, and intelligent" waiver would vary for different defendants and circumstances; the Court noted that "the defendant's education or sophistication, the complex or easily grasped nature of the charge, and the stage of the proceeding" were all factors. The ruling of the Iowa Supreme Court was simply too "rigid", as it did not take such factors into account. It also might be counterproductive:
Ginsburg also noted that Tovar's motion was a collateral attack (meaning that Tovar was attacking a prior ruling because it was relevant to an ongoing case), and as such the burden of proof was on him. Tovar had not done much to argue that he had actually been unaware of his rights in 1996; he had only argued that he might have been unaware, since the judge's colloquy had not been more extensive. In the Court's view, this was insufficient.
 See also 
 Faretta v. California
 Patterson v. Illinois
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Legal history of Iowa
Category:United States Sixth Amendment assistance of counsel case law
Category:2004 in United States case law
"""

From "Irvin v. Dowd" ==> """
Irvin v. Dowd, 359 U.S. 394 (1959), was a United States Supreme Court case.. It involved an escaped convict's (Leslie Irvin) denial of appeal. The convict sought a federal writ of habeas corpus.
Irvin v. Dowd was one of the first of many cases to underscore the "swing vote" role played by Justice Potter Stewart, who recently had come to the Supreme Court and was caught between the two warring camps of justices—the liberal camp of Justices Earl Warren and William Brennan, and the conservative one headed by Justice Felix Frankfurter. 
Factual background
The Irvin case centered on a series of murders in Evansville, Indiana, from 1954 to early 1955. In April 1955, local police arrested Leslie Irvin, announcing he had confessed to the crimes.. Irvin's lawyers sought a change of venue for the case to avoid local biases, but they lost; a third of the jury was seated despite statements showing they had prejudged the defendant to be guilty. Irvin was sentenced to death in January 1956; he soon escaped from jail, leaving a note maintaining his innocence and alleging police misconduct and public prejudging of his case, as well as asking his lawyer to appeal.. Irvin was soon recaptured, and the Indiana Supreme Court would reject his motions for appeals..
Irvin's lawyer came to the Supreme Court asking for a writ of habeas corpus.
Legal issues
The case came to the Supreme Court to decide the question of whether Irvin's escaping from custody forfeited his right to appeal. Beyond that, the justices on the court prone to judicial restraint (Frankfurter, Harlan, Clark, and Whittaker) were usually not supportive of the idea of a federal court issuing a writ of habeas corpus in a state prosecution case. Brennan and Warren were concerned with the jurors who were allowed to sit on the case despite having prejudged the outcome.
Justice Stewart at first felt that court precedent, especially the case of Brown v. Allen, precluded the Supreme Court from getting involved in the state prosecution.. Brennan managed to distinguish the Brown case and convinced Stewart to vote with him, bringing about a 5-4 majority for the liberals. Brennan wrote an opinion forcing the state of Indiana to consider Irvin's appeal on the basis of the jury issue; he did not reach the matter of Irvin's escape.
Outcome
Justice Brennan wrote an opinion holding that Irvin's exhaustion of state remedies did not bar a federal court's granting habeas corpus. Stewart issued a one-line concurrence distinguishing the case from Brown v. Allen.
The four judges in the minority, Frankfurter's bloc, saw the case as an example of the Court overreaching.  Frankfurter resented the interposition of federal court review over state criminal actions.
Aftermath
Though Justice Brennan had begun his Supreme Court career voting with Justice Frankfurter about half the time, the Irvin case marked the end of a meaningful relationship between the two justices.. Frankfurter convinced a distinguished Harvard Law professor, Henry M. Hart, Jr., to focus on the case in the law school's Harvard Law Review as a means of character-assassinating Justice Brennan..
Despite ideological divides, when the case came back to the Supreme Court nearly two years later, the Court managed to write a unanimous opinion again remanding the case to state court, due to the original trial depriving Irvin of Fourteenth Amendment due process. Justice Clark's majority opinion underscored the need for impartiality in the jury: "In essence, the right to jury trial guarantees to the criminally accused a fair trial by a panel of impartial, 'indifferent' jurors."
Justice Frankfurter wrote a concurrence on the media and its coverage's way of preventing jurors from delivering impartial verdicts.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Sixth Amendment jury case law
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:1959 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Irwin v. Gavit" ==> """
Irwin v. Gavit, 268 U.S. 161 (1925), was a case before the U.S. Supreme Court regarding the taxability, under United States tax law, of a divided interest in a bequest..  It is notable (and thus appears frequently in law school casebooks) for the following holding:
A bequest of income from property held in trust is taxable, even where the bequest of the entire corpus of the trust would be excluded as a gift.
Facts and procedural history
Under Anthony N. Brady's will, a sixth of his estate would be held in trust for his granddaughter until she turned 21. During this period, her father would receive some of the income on this principal—in other words, he held an income interest in a testamentary trust for 15 years, with the remainder to his daughter.
The Collector viewed these payments as income, because they constituted the income on principal. Plaintiff argued they were exempt under §102(a) as property acquired by bequest.
He sued the Commissioner of Internal Revenue (Irwin) in the United States District Court for the Northern District of New York, which found for the plaintiff. The Second Circuit affirmed. The Commissioner appealed to the Supreme Court.
Issue
Is a gift of future income on an estate includable as income (because the bequest is made of the income of the estate and not the estate itself)?
Majority opinion
"[W]e can perceive no distinction relevant to the question before us between a gift of the fund for life and a gift of the income from it."  The Code provision excluding gifts and bequests "assumes the gift of a corpus and contrasts it with the income arising from it, but was not intended to exempt income properly so-called. ... "
The Internal Revenue Code at the time provided that while the gains, profits and income "derived from any source whatsoever" was taxable, the value of property acquired by gift or bequest was not to be included in taxable income, and that trustees could be required to account for and withhold certain amounts for the payment of tax.
Justice Holmes, writing for the majority,  reasoned that the statute as then written required that the income received by trustees and paid to the remainderman be considered taxable income.  Holmes held that although the receipt of the estate funds would be considered a non-taxable bequest, the receipt of income from those funds in installments is taxable.
Reasoning
Under the statute:
§2(A)(1), provides for a tax upon "the entire net income arising or accruing from all sources."  (Holmes: These payments seem to be the type of "income" intended by Congress. Eisner v. Macomber.)
§2(B): net income includes "gains or profits and income derived from any source whatever, including the income from but not the value of property acquired by gift, bequest, devise or descent."
§2(D): trustees shall make "return of the net income of the person for whom they act, subject to this tax;" and trustees and others, having the control or payment of fixed or determinable gains, etc., of another person who are required to render a return on behalf of another are "authorized to withhold enough to pay the normal tax."
The language quoted leaves no doubt in our minds that if a fund were given to trustees for A for life with remainder over, the income received by the trustees and paid over to A would be income of A under the statute. It seems to us hardly less clear that even if there were a specific provision that A should have no interest in the corpus, the payments would be income none the less, within the meaning of the statute and the Constitution, and by popular speech. In the first case it is true that the bequest might be said to be of the corpus for life, in the second it might be said to be of the income. But we think that the provision of the act that exempts bequests assumes the gift of a corpus and contrasts it with the income arising from it, but was not intended to exempt income property so-called simply because of a severance between it and the principal fund. No such conclusion can be drawn from Eisner v. Macomber, 252 U.S. 189, 206, 207 S., 40 S. Ct. 189, 9 A. L. R. 1570. The money was income in the hands of the trustees and we know of nothing in the law that prevented its being paid and received as income by the donee.
Dissent
Justice Sutherland dissented, rejecting Holmes' distinction between the income from the trust and the trust itself, and suggesting that the majority stretched the meaning of the statute too far.  He wrote that money is itself property, and therefore the money paid to Marcia Ann Gavit should also be considered part of the bequest:
The corpus of the estate was not the legacy which respondent received, but merely the source which gave rise to it. The money here sought to be taxed was not the fruits of a legacy; it was the legacy itself.Irwin, 268 U.S. at 169.
Academic Commentary
Gavit implies that the §102(a) exclusion goes to the remainderman alone, because he is treated as owning the corpus.  In holding that trust income cannot be excluded by an income beneficiary (e.g. life-tenant), "the Court in effect decided not merely how much should be taxed, but to whom."  But why not divide the realization of the income somehow between the several heirs?  For example:
Since the life-tenant's interest is a "wasting asset," tax her life-estate/life-tenancy as an annuity, with a present value (at any given time) equal to the present value of the future payments -- an amount she could "recover ratably" each year.
The value of the remainder likewise grows from year to year; that could count as annual income, taxed to the remainderman -- but also added to the basis of his remainder interest (as if he had purchased an endowment policy -- but, as we don't tax the income accumulating interest on an endowment policy until it matures, the remainderman should likewise be permitted to defer this "income" until it "matures")
See also
 Early v. Commissioner
 Eisner v. Macomber
 Towne v. Eisner
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 268
References
External links
Category:1925 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:Dividends
"""

From "Island Trees School District v. Pico" ==> """
thumb|right|Island Trees High School in 2019
Board of Education, Island Trees Union Free School District No. 26 v. Pico, 457 U.S. 853 (1982), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court split on the First Amendment issue of local school boards removing library books from junior high schools and high schools. Four Justices ruled that it was unconstitutional, four Justices concluded the contrary (with perhaps a few minor exceptions), and one Justice concluded that the court need not decide the question on the merits.. Pico was the first Supreme Court case to consider the right to receive information in a library setting under the First Amendment, but the court's fractured plurality decision left the scope of this right unclear.
Facts
Background
In September 1975, the Island Trees Board of Education received a list of books deemed inappropriate by Parents of New York United. The board temporarily removed the books from school libraries and formed a committee to review the list. The committee found that five of the nine books should be returned, but the board overruled the decision and returned only two of the books.
A group of five high school students (including one junior high school student) who, according to oral argument, were 17, 16, 15, 14, and 13 years old at the time of the removal of the books, led by Steven Pico, filed a lawsuit against the school board by claiming a violation of First Amendment rights. The United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York granted summary judgment in favor of the school board, citing the discretion given to a school board's authority in terms of its political philosophy. The judgment was challenged and remanded to the Second Circuit after questions rose of the school board's motives.
Case
According to the syllabus of the case:
Eleven books were the subject of the case. The books were:
 Slaughterhouse-Five, by Kurt Vonnegut, Jr.
 The Naked Ape, by Desmond Morris
 Down These Mean Streets, by Piri Thomas
 Best Short Stories of Negro Writers, edited by Langston Hughes
 Go Ask Alice, of anonymous authorship
 Laughing Boy, by Oliver LaFarge
 Black Boy, by Richard Wright
 A Hero Ain't Nothin' but a Sandwich, by Alice Childress
 Soul on Ice, by Eldridge Cleaver
 A Reader for Writers, edited by Jerome Archer
 The Fixer, by Bernard Malamud
The first nine titles above were removed from shelves of the High School library; A Reader for Writers was removed from the Junior High School library because it contained the 1729 satirical essay A Modest Proposal by Jonathan Swift which the Board found to be offensive; and The Fixer was removed from the curriculum of a 12th-grade literature course.Pico, 457 U.S. at 856-57 n. 3.
Plurality
No single opinion commanded a majority of the Court or announced any legal binding rule. Justice Brennan announced the judgment of the Court affirming the Court of Appeals and delivered an opinion joined by Justices Marshall and Stevens and joined in all but Part II-A(1) by Justice Blackmun. Justice Blackmun filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring the judgment.
Justice Brennan noted the Court had previously held that students do not "shed their constitutional rights to freedom of speech or expression at the schoolhouse gate" (Tinker v. Des Moines School District).. Brennan also reasoned that the First Amendment protects not only the right to express ideas but also the right to receive them. (citing Pico, 457 U.S. at 866-67). The First Amendment, in this case, included the right to read library books of the student's choosing.
Brennan concluded the plurality opinion by noting that the court's holding was narrowly limited to the extent of the school board's authority to remove books from the school library:
Justice Blackmun's concurrence
Justice Blackmun, concurring, concluded that a proper balance between the limited constitutional restriction imposed on school officials by the First Amendment and the broad state authority to regulate education would be struck by holding that school officials may not remove books from school libraries for the purpose of restricting access to the political perspectives or social ideas discussed in the books when that action is motivated simply by the officials' disapproval of the ideas involved.
Justice White's concurrence
Justice White provided the necessary fifth vote for the final outcome, which was to allow the case to proceed in the lower court. However, his reasoning was different from that of the plurality and of Justice Blackmun, and he expressly refused to opine on the First Amendment question.
Rather, he rejected the plurality's decision to speak about "the extent to which the First Amendment limits the discretion of the school board to remove books from the school library," and he concluded that there was "no necessity for doing so at this point. When findings of fact and conclusions of law are made by the District Court, that may end the case. If, for example, the District Court concludes after a trial that the books were removed for their vulgarity, there may be no appeal. In any event, if there is an appeal, if there is dissatisfaction with the subsequent Court of Appeals' judgment, and if certiorari is sought and granted, there will be time enough to address the First Amendment issues that may then be presented."
As a consequence, the Justices split 4–4 on the First Amendment question and so no precedent was set for future cases.
Dissents
Chief Justice Burger filed a dissenting opinion in which Justices Powell, Rehnquist, and O'Connor joined. Justices Powell and O'Connor each filed an additional dissenting opinion. Justice Rehnquist filed a dissenting opinion in which Chief Justice Burger and Justice Powell joined.
Chief Justice Burger's dissent
Writing about the plurality opinion, Burger stated, "Were this to become the law, this Court would come perilously close to becoming a 'super censor' of school board library decisions."  Pico, 457 U.S. at 885 (Burger, C.J., dissenting). Justice Burger disagreed with the plurality's view that students have an enforceable right to receive information and ideas that are contained in junior and senior high school library books: "[n]o such right... has ever been recognized."Pico, 457 U.S. at 887. Discussing the role and obligation of school boards, he stated:
He also disagreed with the plurality's distinction between acquisition decisions and removal decisions of the library: "It does not follow that the decision to remove a book is less 'official suppression' than the decision not to acquire a book desired by someone."Pico, 457 U.S. at 890. He ended, "I categorically reject this notion that the Constitution dictates that judges, rather than parents, teachers, and local school boards, must determine how the standards of morality and vulgarity are to be treated in the classroom."
Justice Powell's dissent
Justice Powell's dissenting opinion reflected his belief that "the States and locally elected school boards should have the responsibility for determining the educational policy for the public schools."Pico, 457 U.S. at 893 (Powell, J., dissenting). He believed that school boards were "uniquely local and democratic institutions" and that the school boards were in the best position to decide what educational policy decisions should be made in their school district.Pico, 457 U.S. at 894. He closed his dissenting opinion by calling the plurality's decision "a debilitating encroachment upon the institutions of a free people".Pico, 457 U.S. at 897.
Justice Rehnquist's dissent
Justice Rehnquist's dissenting opinion first focused on the procedural posture of the case and disagreed with the approach taken by the plurality opinion: "I entirely disagree with Justice Brennan's treatment of the constitutional issue, I also disagree with his opinion for the entirely separate reason that it is not remotely tailored to the facts presented in this case."Pico, 457 U.S. at 907 (Rehnquist, J., dissenting).
He found a distinction between the actions of the government as educator and the actions of the government as sovereign:
He also took issue with the plurality's decision to find the "right to receive information" as an inherent corollary of the rights of free speech and of the press, which are guaranteed by the First Amendment: "It is the very existence of a right to receive information, in the junior high school and high school setting, which I find wholly unsupported by our past decisions and inconsistent with the necessarily selective process of elementary and secondary education."Pico, 457 U.S. at 910. He considered education to consist of selective presentation and explanation of ideas and that the right to receive information doctrine is improperly placed in elementary and secondary education.
Justice O'Connor's dissent
In a very short dissenting opinion, Justice O'Connor found the school board to take on a special role as educator. She considered educational decisions such as suitable material to be properly relegated to the elected members of the school board: "If the school board can set the curriculum, select teachers, and determine initially what books to purchase for the school library, it surely can decide which books to discontinue or remove from the school library so long as it does not also interfere with the right of students to read the material and discuss it."Pico, 457 U.S. at 921.
Subsequent developments
Two stage musicals have been produced based on the case: The Line, in 1985; and Breaking Out in Harmony, in 1994.
See also
 Book censorship in the United States
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 457
References
External links
 Island Trees School District
 Five Teens Win the Right to Read by Chris Crutcher
 Interview with Barbara Bernstein on the Pico Case - Supreme Court and School Library Censorship, by Mary Minow, LibraryLaw Blog, 10 August 2009.
Category:Student rights case law in the United States
Category:United States children's rights case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1982 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Book censorship in the United States
Category:Education in Nassau County, New York
Category:Libraries in New York (state)
Category:Library law
"""

From "J. D. B. v. North Carolina" ==> """
J.D.B. v. North Carolina, 564 U.S. 261 (2011), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that age and mental status is relevant when determining police custody for Miranda purposes, overturning its prior ruling from seven years before. J.D.B. was a 13-year-old student enrolled in special education classes whom police had suspected of committing two robberies.  A police investigator visited J.D.B. at school, where he was interrogated by the investigator, a uniformed police officer, and school officials. J.D.B. subsequently confessed to his crimes and was convicted. J.D.B. was not given a Miranda warning during the interrogation, nor an opportunity to contact his legal guardian.
During the trial, attempts to suppress the statements given by J.D.B. because he was not given a Miranda warning were denied on the grounds that J.D.B. was not in police custody. J.D.B. appealed.
The North Carolina Supreme Court held that the Supreme Court's ruling in Yarborough v. Alvarado barred them from determining whether or not he was in custody based on his age. The court determined that a reasonable adult would've felt free to leave; consequently, J.D.B. was not in custody. Thus the court affirmed the ruling of the trial court. J.D.B. appealed, and the U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari.
The U.S. Supreme Court argued that the age and mental status of an individual can take part in the psychological effect that he faces during police interaction. It's nearly exact to the reasoning of the 1970 Kentucky Supreme Court case of Allee v. Commonwealth, which held that the age and mental status of an individual is relevant in determining whether his statements are involuntary. Based on these reasons, the U.S. Supreme Court reversed the North Carolina Supreme Court and remanded for further proceedings. The North Carolina Supreme Court on remand then determined that J.D.B. was in custody, and remanded for further proceedings.
Background
Miranda warnings
A Miranda warning is an explanation of a suspect's rights that must be given by law enforcement before interrogation. It stems from the 1966 Miranda v. Arizona case, and is based primarily on the Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination. If a defendant in custody is not notified of their rights via a Miranda warning, any confession they give may not be admissible in court.Miranda Warning, Legal Information Institute, Cornell University Law School. Accessed November 17, 2013 If a defendant is not in police custody, however, police are free to question suspects without informing them of their rights, and their statements may still be admissible.
Police investigation
J. D. B. was a 13-year-old student attending Smith Middle School in Chapel Hill, North Carolina when he was taken out of class by a uniformed police officer and questioned. J. D. B. had been questioned previously by the police when they saw him in the neighborhood where two home break-ins had occurred.  After questioning J. D. B. the first time, police learned that a digital camera matching the description of a stolen item had been seen in the possession of J. D. B. This prompted the juvenile investigator assigned to the case to go to the school to question J. D. B. Upon arriving at the school, the investigator informed the uniformed police officer on detail at the school and members of the school's administration. The uniformed officer interrupted the class J. D. B. was in and escorted him to a school conference room, where J. D. B. was subsequently questioned by the investigator, police officer, and members of the school's administration for 30 to 45 minutes. Prior to the questioning, J. D. B. was neither given Miranda warnings nor an opportunity to speak to his legal guardian, nor was he informed that he was free to leave the room.
Initially J. D. B. denied any wrongdoing. After being confronted with the stolen camera and after the urging of a school administrator, J. D. B. confessed to the break-ins. It was at this point, after the confession, that the investigator informed J. D. B. that he could refuse to answer questions and that he was free to leave. J. D. B. indicated that he understood and then proceeded to provide further details about the crime, including the location of the stolen property. J. D. B. wrote a statement at the investigator's request. He was allowed to leave to catch the bus home.
Trial and appeal
Two juvenile petitions were filed against J. D. B. Each alleged one count of larceny and one count of breaking and entering. J. D. B.'s public defender moved to suppress J. D. B.'s statements and the evidence derived from them, arguing that J. D. B. had been interrogated in police custody without the required Miranda warnings.  The trial court decided that J. D. B. was not in custody, and denied the motion. The North Carolina Supreme Court affirmed with a divided panel, "declin[ing] to extend the test for custody to include consideration of the age... of an individual subjected to questioning by police".
The Supreme Court granted certiorari to determine whether the Miranda custody analysis includes consideration of a juvenile suspect’s age. The American Civil Liberties Union, American Bar Association, and the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers were among the organizations that filed amicus briefs in support of J. D. B. The attorneys general of 30 states and 2 unincorporated territories filed an amicus brief in support of North Carolina.Published Supreme Court Briefs, March 2011, American Bar Association, March 11, 2011, accessed June 21, 2011
Opinion of the court
thumb|upright|Justice Sotomayor authored the Court's opinion.
Associate Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote the opinion for the Court.
The Court held that a child's age properly informs the Miranda custody analysis.
Relevancy of age
The Court underscored the dangers of not applying age to the custody analysis, writing: 
to hold... that a child's age is never relevant to whether a suspect has been taken into custody— and thus to ignore the very real differences between children and adults— would be to deny children the full scope of the procedural safeguards that Miranda guarantees to adults..
The opinion cited Stansbury v. California, where the Court held that a child's age "would have affected how a reasonable person" in the suspect's position "would perceive his or her freedom to leave".  Yarborough v. Alvarado was also cited, where the Court wrote that a child's age "generates commonsense conclusions about behavior and perception".  Finally, the Court pointed out that the law reflects the idea that a child's judgment is not the same as an adult's, in the form of legal disqualifications on children as a class (e.g. limitations on a child's ability to marry without parental consent).
Miranda as an objective test
The Court placed emphasis on the fact that age is an objective circumstance and including it in a custody analysis does not place an undue burden on the police. The Court has repeatedly emphasized that the custody analysis is an objective test. In Thompson v. Keohane the Court wrote that:
The Court wrote that consideration of age involved no consideration of the specific mindset of the individual. Rather, the Court held that age is an objective factor that affects how a reasonable person would perceive his or her freedom to leave.
Dissent
thumb|upright|Justice Alito authored the opinion for the dissent.
Associate Justice Samuel Alito wrote a dissenting opinion for four Justices. The primary objection of the dissent was that the ruling of the majority was inconsistent with one of the main justifications for the Miranda rule: the need for a clear rule that is easily applied in all cases. Alito argued the decision shifted custody determination from a simple test to an inquiry that must account for individualized characteristics. Alito emphasized that age is not the only characteristic that may affect a subject under interrogation and that in future cases the court will be tasked with adding additional characteristics to custody determination or by "arbitrarily distinguishing a suspect's age from other personal characteristics".
Reception and subsequent developments
The case attracted differing opinions from the legal community. Steven Drizin, professor at Northwestern University School of Law, characterized the ruling as "huge", noting that police would no longer be able to choose to question young suspects at a school in order to avoid giving a Miranda warning, a practice he characterized as a "loophole".Sanger, David E. "High Court: Age Must Be Considered In Interrogation", National Public Radio, June 16, 2011, accessed June 17, 2011. The Juvenile Law Center praised the ruling as "a resounding statement" in line with "settled research and basic common sense".Barnes, Robert. "Supreme Court: Children are different when it comes to Miranda warning against self-incrimination", Washington Post, June 16, 2011, accessed June 17, 2011. Steven Shapiro, legal director of the ACLU concurred, stating that "we have to ensure that students' rights are protected... and the decision is a step in that direction."
Other analysts were troubled that the decision would leave "a murky landscape for law enforcement". John Charles Thomas, representing the National District Attorneys Association, concluded "The pressure is basically to err on the side of caution, to give the Miranda warning almost every time." Professor Stephen Saltzburg of George Washington University agreed that the ruling would pressure police to adopt a strategy of "When in doubt, give Miranda warnings", but also opined that it would make little practical difference to young people facing police questioning. "The reality is that even with Miranda warnings, it's doubtful that young people understand exactly what it all means and understand their choices, and so in the long run, I doubt that there will be many fewer confessions because of this opinion."
Notes
References
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:United States children's rights case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Miranda warning case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "J. E. M. Ag Supply, Inc. v. Pioneer Hi-Bred International, Inc." ==> """
J. E. M. Ag Supply, Inc. v. Pioneer Hi-Bred International, Inc., 534 U.S. 124 (2001),.  was a decision of the United States Supreme Court holding for the first time that utility patents may be issued for crops and other flowering (sexually reproducing) plants under 35 U.S.C. § 101.. The Supreme Court rejected the argument that the exclusive ways to protect these plants are under the Plant Variety Protection Act (PVPA), 7 U.S.C. § 2321,. and the Plant Patent Act of 1930 (PPA), 35 U.S.C. §§ 161-164..
Background
Pioneer Hi-Bred International, Inc. (Pioneer) owns patents that cover the manufacture, use, and sale of various hybrid corn seed products (plants and seeds). Pioneer sells its patented hybrid seeds under a limited label license that provides: "License is granted solely to produce grain and/or forage."534 U.S. at 128. The license says that it "does not extend to the use of seed from such crop or the progeny thereof for propagation or seed multiplication,"U.S. Patent No. 5,491,295, at 51 (filed Nov. 22, 1994). and prohibits "the use of such seed or the progeny thereof for propagation or seed multiplication or for production or development of a hybrid or different variety of seed."
J.E.M. Ag Supply, Inc., doing business as Farm Advantage, Inc., purchased patented hybrid corn seeds from Pioneer in bags bearing the foregoing label license. Farm Advantage resold these bags without authorization from Pioneer to do so. Pioneer then sued Farm Advantage (J.E.M.) and several of its distributors and customers. Pioneer alleged that J.E.M. had "for a long-time past been and still [is] infringing one or more [Pioneer patents] by making, using, selling, or offering for sale corn seed” covered under the patents.534 U.S. at 129.
J.E.M. responded that Pioneer’s patents that purport to confer protection for corn plants are invalid because sexually reproducing plants are not patentable subject matter within the scope of 35 U.S.C. § 101  J.E.M. maintained that the Plant Variety Protection Act (PVPA) (and perhaps also the Plant Patent Act of 1930 (PPA)) and set forth the exclusive statutory means for the protection of complex plant life. J.E.M. argued that these statutes are more specific than § 101, and thus carve out subject matter from § 101 for special treatment. J.E.M. said that awarding utility patents for plants upsets the scheme of protection contemplated by Congress. Part of that scheme is that the PVPA provides exemptions for farmers to save seed from their crops for planting subsequent crops.PVPA, 7 U.S.C. § 2543 ("[I]t shall not infringe any right hereunder for a person to save seed produced by the person from seed obtained, or descended from seed obtained, by authority of the owner of the variety for seeding purposes and use such saved seed in the production of a crop for use on the farm of the person."). Utility patents do not contain such exemptions.
Lower court rulings
The district courtPioneer Hi-Bred Int'l, Inc. v. J.E.M. Ag Supply, Inc., 49 U.S.P.Q.2d 1813 (N.D. Iowa 1998). and Federal Circuit rejected J.E.M.’s arguments and held that it infringed Pioneer’s patents.
The case went to the Federal Circuit on an interlocutory appeal of the denial of summary judgment. The only issue on appeal from the district court was whether seeds and plants grown from seeds of sexually reproduced plants are patentable subject matter within the scope of 35 U.S.C. § 101—i.e., are patent eligible.200 F.3d at 1375. There was no other issue, such as whether J.E.M.'s conduct (selling seeds) was patent infringement under 35 U.S.C. § 271(a)Section 271(a) expressly lists selling a patented article as a form of infringement. or whether resale of purchased seed in defiance of a label license prohibiting resale was shielded from infringement liability by the exhaustion doctrineSee the subsequent Supreme Court decision in Quanta Computer, Inc. v. LG Electronics, Inc. or whether growing crops from the seed constituted "making" under that statute. Nonetheless, J.E.M. argued "that the specifications of Pioneer's patents are not enabling; they criticize the written description and the utility of the deposits, and generally challenge validity." The Federal Circuit responded, "These issues were not decided by the district court, and are not before us."200 F.3d at 1378. Addressing the only issue properly before it, the court held  seeds and plants grown from seeds of sexually reproduced plants are patentable subject matter within the scope of 35 U.S.C. § 101.
Supreme Court
Opinion of the Court
right|thumb|Justice Thomas, author of the majority opinion
Justice Clarence Thomas delivered the opinion of a 6-2 court. The majority of the Court considered the case governed by the decision twenty years previous in Diamond v. Chakrabarty, 447 U.S. 303, 312-13 (1980).J.E.M., 534 U.S. at 130-31. The Court said, "[I]n approaching the question presented by this case, we are mindful that this Court has already spoken clearly concerning the broad scope and applicability of § 101." In that case, the Court had upheld the entitlement of a company to a utility patent on a man-made micro-organism capable of digesting oil spills. It rejected the Patent Commissioner's argument that living things could not be patented, saying: "The relevant distinction was not between living and inanimate things, but between products of nature, whether living or not, and human-made inventions.".
The Court said that J.E.M. did not dispute that plants “fall within the terms of § 101's broad language that includes ‘manufacture’ or ‘composition of matter.’ "534 U.S. at 131. The argument that J.E.M. made against Pioneer stood or fell with J.E.M.’s proposition that Congress intended the PVPA (or it and the PPA) to be the sole means for protecting plant inventions.534 U.S. at 132. But the Court said it disagreed.
To be sure, the Court said, when Congress passed the PPA in 1930 it did so because it thought plants could not be protected under the regular patent law (what is now § 101). Among other things it thought living things could not be patented under regular patent law."[I]n 1930 Congress believed that plants were not patentable under § 101, both because they were living things and because in practice they could not meet the stringent description requirement. Yet these premises were disproved over time." 534 U.S. at 134. Congress was mistaken, the Court held, as is shown by the Chakrabarty decision:
As this Court held in Chakrabarty, "the relevant distinction" for purposes of § 101 is not "between living and inanimate things, but between products of nature, whether living or not, and human-made inventions."534 U.S. at 134.
The Court found the same true for the PVPA. Under that law, however, “A farmer who legally purchases and plants a protected variety can save the seed from these plants for replanting on his own farm.”534 U.S. at 140. The PVPA and also the PPA operate in parallel with § 101 of the utility patent law. They provide different degrees of protection and have different requirements for securing protection.534 U.S. at 142-43. The later laws do not supersede the earlier one.
The Court concluded:
For these reasons, we hold that newly developed plant breeds fall within the terms of § 101, and that neither the PPA nor the PVPA limits the scope of § 101's coverage. As in Chakrabarty, we decline to narrow the reach of § 101 where Congress has given us no indication that it intends this result.534 U.S. at 145.
Dissent
thumb|right|Justice Breyer, author of the dissent
Justice Stephen Breyer dissented, joined by Justice John Paul Stevens. They believed the terms “manufacture” and “composition of matter” do not cover crop plants (sexually reproduced or flowering plants) and their seeds. That was because Congress intended the two more specific PPA and PVPA statutes to exclude patent protection under the more generic utility patent statute. Further, "this Court neither considered, nor decided, this question in Chakrabarty."534 U.S. at 147 (Breyer, J., dissenting).
In Chakrabarty the issue was whether the words “manufacture” and “composition of matter” in § 101 “included such living things as bacteria–a substance to which neither of the two specific plant Acts refers.”534 U.S. at 148. The Chakrabarty Court then decided that § 101 covered “a 'new' bacterium because it was 'a non-naturally occurring manufacture or composition of matter' that was 'not nature’s handiwork.'” It said nothing about plants (such as corn). Further a bacterium is not the kind of plant that the PPA and PVPA “had in mind.” Thus, “Chakrabarty neither asked, nor answered . . . the question now before us.”534 U.S. at 149.
He ended by criticizing the majority for not making "an effort to divine the human intent that underlies the statute," based on "an analysis of language, structure, history, and purpose."534 U.S. at 156.
Subsequent history after remand
Ottawa Plant Food, Inc., was one of the companies to which J.E.M. sold bags of Pioneer's patented corn, and Ottawa was added to the case as a defendant during the litigation. After the Supreme Court's 2002 decision, all of the other defendants settled with Pioneer, leaving Ottawa as the only remaining defendant in the case.283 F. Supp. 2d at 1023. The parties then filed cross-motions for summary judgment.
Ottawa argued that the patent exhaustion doctrine shielded it from liability. The court held that the doctrine did not apply because of the Federal Circuit's decision in Mallinckrodt, Inc. v. Medipart, Inc., that a patentee may limit buyers' use of patented products it sells to them by placing restrictive labels (label licenses) on the products before sale.Early in 2015, the Federal Circuit ordered an en banc argument to determine whether recent Supreme Court decisions required it to overrule Mallinckrodt. See Mallinckrodt. The cour therefore held, "The court concludes that it is Pioneer, not Ottawa, that is entitled to summary judgment on Ottawa's 'patent exhaustion' defense."283 F. Supp. 2d at 1033.
Ottawa also argued that "Pioneer's restrictions on resale are unenforceable, as against public policy, because they are anticompetitive in effect, or violate contract principles, so that Pioneer's infringement claim premised on its restrictions on resale must fail."283 F. Supp. 2d at 1042. Turning again to the Mallinckrodt decision, the court rejected Ottawa's argument that the label license was unenforceable as anticompetitive.283 F. Supp. 2d at 1045-46. The court also turned back Ottawa's contract law arguments, holding that Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) § 2-207(2)(c) required Ottawa to have objected to the label license's terms within a reasonable time, which it did not do, in order not to be bound by them.283 F. Supp. 2d at 1049.
Subsequent developments
Bowman case
Several years later, in the 2013 Supreme Court decision in Bowman v. Monsanto Co., the Court operated on the assumption that this case and Chakrabarty had resolved the issues of patent protection of crop plants. Justice Breyer did not renew his dissent that Chakrabarty did not resolve all of the issues, or even address them.Justice Stevens had retired from the Court by then. The Court held, without dissent, that farmers who saved seeds from patented crops and used the seed to grow a subsequent crop committed patent infringement.
Commentary
In a much-cited article,Malla Pollack, Originalism, J.E.M., and the Food Supply, or Will the Real Decision Maker Please Stand Up, 19  495 (2004). Malla Pollack criticized the decision in these terms:
Congress never decided to allow private entities the power to block experimentation on food crops; Congress never decided to allow full utility patents on sexually reproduced plants. The courts and the PTO have illegitimately bypassed representative
government to create and enforce such private power.Pollack, at 534.
She agreed that the Constitution permitted Congress to pass a law establishing such legal protection, if it so chose, because farming was within the "useful Arts" in 1789.Pollack, at 500-01. She insisted, however, that Congress did not choose to pass such a law.Pollack, at 501-04. She also criticized the Court's interpretation of the relevant statutory words: "The Court, however, did not recite any 1790, 1793, or 1952 use of 'manufacture' or 'composition of matter' which, even allegedly, included food crops."Pollack, at 506.
Richard H. Stern questioned the J.E.M. Court's precedential reliance on Chakrabarty and the Court's subsequent extension of the J.E.M. decision to a determination that these two cases inexorably led to the outlawing of the saving and "replanting" of patented seed in Bowman v. Monsanto Co. He argued that these two cases did not govern (or address) infringement issues under 35 U.S.C. § 271(a), as contrasted with the validity issues under 35 U.S.C. § 101 that the two earlier cases actually addressed: 
[N]either Chakrabarty nor J.E.M. Ag Supply involved the issue of whether planting and growing a crop from the seed of a patented plant constituted patent infringement.  . . . [T]hat issue turns on the meaning of the statutory word "make," which neither of the earlier two cases addressed.Richard H. Stern, Bowman v Monsanto: Exhaustion versus Making , [2014]  255, 260-61.
On the other hand, Kevin M. Baird applauded the decision because of the economic protection it granted agricultural industry:
In Pioneer, the United States Supreme Court laid to rest the question of whether sexually reproduced plants were statutory subject matter under section 101. The Court made clear that if inventors of new varieties of plants are able to meet the stringent patentability standards of section 101 and section 112, they will be entitled to utility patent protection. Additionally, the Court clarified that section 101 can also be reconciled with the PPA and the PVPA. In fact, the three statutes may provide overlapping protection and are not mutually exclusive. Thus, inventors of new plant varieties are free to apply for protection under each regime and may benefit from the protection provided by each regime.Kevin M. Baird, Pioneer Hi-Bred International v. J.E.M. AG Supply: Patent Protection of Plants Grows under the Supreme Court's Latest Decision, 2002  269, 279-80 (2002).
Timothy P.Daniels considered the decision from the standpoint of universities and their agricultural research programs:
The benefit of the J.E.M. decision is that universities will be able to more easily capture the full economic value of their plant genetic inventions and discoveries. The negative aspect of this case, however, is that professors and universities will be hesitant to publish their findings until they have obtained IP
protection or until they believe the discovery is not worth marketing.
...Developments in plant biotechnology present universities with the problematic issue of biopiracy and with the opportunity to provide significant humanitarian service.Timothy P.Daniels, Keep the License Agreements Coming: The Effects of J.E.M. Ag Supply, Inc v. Pioneer Hi-Bred Int'l Inc on Universities' Use of Intellectual Property Laws to Protect Their Plant Genetic Research, 2003  771 (2003).
Ann Crocker considered the potential international implications of the decision and suggested its possible expansion worldwide:
The international patent scene has become a hotbed of controversy following the decisions of U.S. courts to recognize living things as patentable subject matter. Patent lawyers representing the interest of the U.S. biotechnology industry are in the forefront of the debate, pressing for other countries to adopt more extensive patent laws recognizing living materials as patentable subject matter, just as U.S. courts and the United States Patent & Trademark Office have.
...[B]iotechnology lobbyists and advocates will likely use the J.E.M. Ag Supply decision to push for greater adoption of full patent protection by other nations, pointing out that plants have been receiving full patent protection in the United States for the past twenty years, and that the rest of the world should view western patent law as a model.
The legal and agricultural communities, as well as the public, must be educated to realize that this is not simply an issue of corporate profits. As shown with the example of Roundup Ready soybeans grown in Argentina and Brazil, the future of American agriculture may be jeopardized if American farmers alone bear the costs of the research and development for development of new GM varieties. Extending patent protection for plants to the international level . . . could be an important next step.Anne E, Crocker, Will Plants Finally Grow into Full Patent Protection on an International Level - A Look at the History of U.S. and International Patent Law Regarding Patent Protection for Plants and the Likely Changes after the U.S. Supreme Court's Decision in J.E.M. Ag Supply v. Pioneer Hi-Bred, 8  251 (2003).
 Controversy 
Justice Clarence Thomas, who made the majority decision on the case, was a lawyer for Monsanto in the 1970s, was not required to recuse himself from the case. At the time of the case, Monsanto had been profiting greatly from patenting and selling their GM seeds.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States patent case law
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:Maize
Category:Biological patent law
"""

From "J. McIntyre Machinery, Ltd. v. Nicastro" ==> """
J. McIntyre Machinery, Ltd. v. Nicastro, 564 U.S. 873 (2011), is a decision by the United States Supreme Court holding that a court may not exercise jurisdiction over a defendant that has not purposefully availed itself of doing business in the jurisdiction or placed goods in the stream of commerce in the expectation they would be purchased in the jurisdiction.
Background
An accident severed four fingers off the right hand of Robert Nicastro, who was operating a recycling machine used to cut scrap metal. A British company manufactured the machine and sold it through its exclusive U.S. distributor. Nicastro sued J. McIntyre Machinery, Ltd., the British company, and its U.S. distributor, McIntyre Machinery America, Ltd., in the Bergen County vicinage of the Law Division of the Superior Court of New Jersey, under a strict product liability theory. The British parent company moved to dismiss the suit against it for lack of personal jurisdiction; the Law Division granted the motion. The Appellate Division of the Superior Court reversed the dismissal; the Supreme Court of New Jersey affirmed the Appellate Division's reversal of the Law Division's dismissal, holding that the foreign company had sufficient contacts with the state.
Decision
In a 6–3 decision, the Supreme Court reversed the New Jersey Court, holding that the state court did not have jurisdiction. Three opinions were delivered, none with a majority of the Justices in support.
According to Justice Kennedy's plurality opinion, there were insufficient facts to show that J. McIntyre Machinery, the British Company, targeted New Jersey specifically. Although the company targeted the United States as a whole, only its distributor targeted the specific states. The stream of commerce theory is insufficient to give rise to jurisdiction without specific targeting of a specific state.
Justice Breyer, joined by Justice Alito, concurred in the judgment on narrower grounds. Rather than announce a broad rule, Breyer determined that based on the facts of this specific case New Jersey did not have jurisdiction because so few machines wound up in the state. However, Breyer was open to the possibility that if many machines were flowing into the state, the state might have jurisdiction even absent specific targeting.
Dissenting, Justice Ginsburg, joined by Justice Sotomayor and Justice Kagan, argued that by targeting the United States as a whole, the petitioner had targeted every state sufficiently to subject itself to New Jersey's jurisdiction.
References
External links
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States personal jurisdiction case law
"""

From "J. W. Hampton, Jr. & Co. v. United States" ==> """
J. W. Hampton, Jr. & Co. v. United States, 276 U.S. 394 (1928),. is a landmark. case in the United States in which the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that congressional delegation of legislative authority is an implied power of Congress that is constitutional so long as Congress provides an "intelligible principle" to guide the executive branch.
See also
Separation of powers under the United States Constitution
Fordney–McCumber Tariff
Gundy v. United States
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:1928 in United States case law
Category:United States nondelegation doctrine case law
"""

From "J.E.B. v. Alabama ex rel. T.B." ==> """
J. E. B. v. Alabama ex rel. T. B., 511 U.S. 127 (1994), was a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States holding that peremptory challenges based solely on a prospective juror's sex are unconstitutional.. J.E.B. extended the court's existing precedent in Batson v. Kentucky (1986), which found race-based peremptory challenges in criminal trials unconstitutional,. and Edmonson v. Leesville Concrete Company (1991), which extended that principle to civil trials.. As in Batson, the court found that sex-based challenges violate the Equal Protection Clause.
 Background 
On behalf of T.B., the mother of a minor child, the state sued J.E.B. for child support in Jackson County, Alabama. During jury selection, challenges intentionally targeted male potential jurors resulting in an all-female jury.
 Decision 
The majority opinion was written by Justice Blackmun.  Justice O'Connor wrote a concurring opinion, and Justice Kennedy separately concurred in the judgment.  Chief Justice Rehnquist filed a separate dissenting opinion.  Justice Scalia also filed a dissenting opinion, which was joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justice Thomas.
 See also 
Hoyt v. Florida (1961)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 511
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
 Further reading 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Batson challenge case law
Category:United States civil procedure case law
Category:1994 in United States case law
Category:1994 in Alabama
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:Legal history of Alabama
Category:United States Sixth Amendment jury case law
Category:Jackson County, Mississippi
Category:Child support
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
"""

From "Jack Daniel's Properties, Inc. v. VIP Products LLC" ==> """
Jack Daniel's Properties, Inc. v. VIP Products LLC (Docket 22-148) is a pending United States Supreme Court case involving parody and trademark law. The case deals with a dog toy shaped similar to a Jack Daniel's whiskey bottle and label, but with parody elements, which Jack Daniel's asserts violates their trademark.
Background
thumb|Dog toys, including Silly Squeakers, "Bad Spaniels – The Old No. 2 – on your Tennessee carpet" and others
VIP Products specializes in making dog toys. Among their line is a series of "Silly Squeakers": dog toys that are shaped and look like well known alcoholic beverages, but using dog-related puns. One of these was a product called "Bad Spaniels" which was shaped similarly to the Jack Daniel's whiskey bottle and label, with the dog puns in certain places, such as replacing the "Old No. 7 Brand Tennessee Sour Mash Whiskey" portion of the label with "Old No. 2 on your Tennessee carpet". The toy also including language that it was not associated with Jack Daniel's.
Jack Daniel's filed suit against VIP Products alleging:
 Trademark infringement under the federal Lanham Act's likelihood-of-confusion framework
 Trademark dilution by tarnishment, damaging Jack Daniel's mark by negatively associating it with dog poop
In the United States District Court for the District of Arizona, Judge Stephen M. McNamee ruled in favor of Jack Daniel's, finding that VIP's use of the trademarked elements were not protected by the First Amendment, and diluted Jack Daniel's trademarks, and placed an injunction on VIP from selling the toy.
VIP appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, which reversed most of Judge McNamee's ruling in a unanimous decision. The Ninth Circuit agreed that a more demanding test was required to dismiss the dog toy as an expressive work covered by the First Amendment. It found that the Rogers test applied to the claim of infringement, and remanded for the district court to determine whether either prong of that test was satisfied. The ninth circuit reversed the finding of dilution by tarnishment, invoking the Trademark Dilution Revision Act's exception for "noncommercial use of a mark".
Supreme Court
Jack Daniel's filed a petition for a writ of certiorari in the Supreme Court, asking it to hear the case. Jack Daniel's argued that while there may be First Amendment protections in VIP's product, they are making them at the expense of the Jack Daniel's trademark and public image. Several companies provided amicus briefs urging the Court to take the case, seeking the Court to rule in favor of protecting their trademarks from parody uses. In November 2022, the Court agreed to hear the case. Oral argument took place on March 22, 2023.https://www.reuters.com/legal/us-supreme-court-jack-daniels-case-free-speech-fight-over-dog-toy-2023-03-19/
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Jackson v. Birmingham Board of Education" ==> """
Jackson v. Birmingham Board of Education, 544 U.S. 167 (2005), is a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that retaliation against a person because that person has complained of sex discrimination is a form of intentional sex discrimination encompassed by Title IX.Jackson v. Birmingham Bd. of Ed., .
 Background 
Roderick Jackson, a teacher in the Birmingham, Alabama, public school system, brought suit against the Birmingham Board of Education alleging that the board retaliated against him because he complained about sex discrimination at Ensley High School. Jackson, who had taught for six years prior in the Birmingham school district, was transferred to Ensley High School in August 1999 as a physical education teacher and girls' basketball coach.  Jackson discovered that Ensley High School did not provide equal funding and access to athletic equipment and facilities for the girls' teams.  In December 2000, Jackson began complaining of the unequal treatment, and began receiving negative evaluations.  Jackson was removed as the girls' basketball coach in May 2001.https://www.oyez.org/cases/2004/02-1672 
The United States District Court for the Northern District of Alabama dismissed Jackson's claims on the grounds that Title IX's private right of action does not include claims of retaliation.  The Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit affirmed the district court holding that Title IX does not provide a private right of action for retaliation.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor writing for a 5-4 majority held that retaliation against individuals because they complain of sex discrimination is intentional conduct that violates the terms of Title IX.  O'Connor analogized the case to Sullivan v. Little Hunting Park, Inc.,. which held that 42 U.S.C. § 1982. provided a cause of action for retaliation for advocacy for African Americans.  Because Sullivan interpreted a general prohibition on racial discrimination to cover retaliation against those who advocate the rights of groups protected by that prohibition, so too should Title IX be read to prohibit retaliation for advocacy on behalf of those subjected to sex discrimination.
 Dissent 
Justice Clarence Thomas authored a dissent joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist, Justice Scalia, and Justice Kennedy.  Thomas argued that retaliatory conduct is not discrimination on the basis of sex under the plain terms of Title IX.Jackson, 544 U.S. at 184-85 (Thomas, J., dissenting).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 544
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States education case law
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:2005 in education
Category:2005 in Alabama
Category:Legal history of Alabama
Category:Implied statutory cause of action case law
Category:History of Birmingham, Alabama
Category:Education in Birmingham, Alabama
Category:Sexism
"""

From "Jackson v. Indiana" ==> """
Jackson v. Indiana, 406 U.S. 715 (1972), was a landmark decision of the United States Supreme Court that determined a U.S. state violated due process by involuntarily committing a criminal defendant for an indefinite period of time solely on the basis of his permanent incompetency to stand trial on the charges filed against him.
Background
In general, if a defendant is found incompetent to proceed to trial, the criminal proceedings are suspended. In those cases, where the charges are petty, the charges are often dropped or a plea bargain may be made in which the charges are nolle prossed if the defendant agrees to seek treatment. Otherwise, the defendant is usually committed to a psychiatric hospital for treatment until the defendant is restored to competency, at which point the trial will proceed.
Facts
Theon Jackson, a deaf-mute who could not read, write or communicate in other ways, was charged with two counts of petty theft. Competency evaluations and testimony by the evaluating doctors  showed that Jackson's intelligence was too low for him to understand the nature of the charges against him, even if he were able to develop the ability to communicate, and that the prognosis for restoration of competency was "rather dim" even if he were not a deaf mute. Despite testimony that the state of Indiana had no facilities to treat Jackson's problems, Jackson was committed to a psychiatric hospital for treatment..
Appeals
Jackson filed a motion for a new trial. This was denied.
Appealing on a writ of certiorari to  the Supreme Court of Indiana, Indiana attorneys Frank Spencer and Robert Robinson argued on behalf of the petitioner Jackson that Jackson's commitment was equal to a "life sentence" even though he had not been convicted of a crime. They claimed that petitioner Jackson was being denied equal protection because, without the criminal charges pending against him, the State would have been required to proceed using Indiana's statutory provisions for the feeble-minded or for the mentally ill. Under these provisions Jackson would have been entitled to greater rights. They also claimed that what was essentially an indefinite commitment  deprived him of due process and subjected him to cruel and unusual punishment. However, the State Supreme Court affirmed the denial of the lower court. A rehearing was also denied. The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari.
Ruling
The Supreme Court reversed. With Indiana attorney Robert Robinson present, arguments were presented by Indiana attorney Frank Spencer. (recording here: https://www.oyez.org/cases/1970-1979/1971/1971_70_5009). It held that the state of Indiana cannot constitutionally commit the petitioner for an indefinite period of time on the sole grounds that he was incompetent to stand trial on the charges filed against him, thus violating both the equal protection and due process clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment.
The Court examined Indiana procedure of pretrial commitment of incompetent criminal defendant as set forth in Ind. Ann. Stat. 9-1706a and compared it with the procedures for committing persons who are "feeble-minded, and are therefore unable  properly to  care for themselves" and those for the "mentally ill". The Court found the procedures were essentially similar with one important difference. A person committed as "feeble-minded" may be released "at any time" his condition warrants it in the judgment of the superintendent of the institution. A person committed as "mentally ill" may be released when the superintendent of the institution discharges him, or when he is cured. Committing the criminal defendant indefinitely violates equal protection.
Therefore, the Court ruled that Indiana's indefinite commitment of a criminal defendant solely because  he lacks the capacity to stand trial violates due process.
The Court declined to rule on the issue of the pending charges themselves, reasoning that the issue of petitioner's criminal responsibility at the time of the alleged offenses has not yet been adjudicated, and therefore it would be premature for the Court to dismiss the charges against petitioner.
Significance
Before this landmark case, pre-trial involuntary commitment of incompetent individuals often meant lengthy or even lifetime confinement in a maximum security institution with little concern for treatment. This was true even though they were neither tried for or convicted of a crime. In this case, the Court for the first time put limits on the length of time an incompetent person may be confined. However, the Court offers only general guidelines and by 1994, twenty years after the case, 32 states still had not enacted periodic judicial review of incompetent detainees. Many states still allowed a detention period that exceeded that maximum sentence that person would have received if convicted.
Further, by refusing to rule on the charges themselves, the court did not clarify the proper disposition of criminal charges pending against a person whose competency can not be restored. This means that in those states where the charges are not dismissed, the individual may not be converted to a civil status eligible for civil commitment, resulting in such an individual's continued confinement in a secure prison with little opportunity for treatment and fewer privileges.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 406
 O'Connor v. Donaldson (1975)
 Addington v. Texas (1979)
 Jones v. United States (1983)
 Foucha v. Louisiana (1992)
Footnote citations
External links
Sell v. U.S.: Involuntary Treatment Case or Catalyst for Change?
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States civil commitment case law
Category:Mental health case law in the United States
Category:1972 in United States case law
"""

From "Jackson v. Metropolitan Edison Co." ==> """
Jackson v. Metropolitan Edison Co., 419 U.S. 345 (1974), is an administrative law case of the Supreme Court of the United States holding that extensive state regulation of a public utility does not transform its acts into state action that is reviewable by a federal court under the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution..
Background
The Metropolitan Edison Company, now a unit of FirstEnergy, is an investor-owned private electric company in Pennsylvania that is regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission (PUC), and serves retail customers in York. Under a tariff filed with the PUC, the company may discontinue providing electric service to a customer after a reasonable notice for the non-payment of an electric bill.
Catherine Jackson, a resident of York, received electric service under her name to her home, but her service was discontinued in September 1970 because of a delinquency in payments due for service. A new account for electric service was then opened in the name of James Dodson, another resident of the house, and service was resumed. Dodson left the house in August 1971, and the service was continued but no payments were made.
On October 6, 1971, employees of Metropolitan Edison went to Jackson's house and inquired as to Dodson's present address, and Jackson stated that she did not know where he was living. On the next day, another employee discovered that the electricity meter for the house had been tampered with such that it did not register usage. Jackson denied any knowledge about the meter. She then requested that the account for service to the house be shifted to Robert Jackson, who was later determined to be her 12-year-old son. Because contracts made by a minor cannot be enforced under common law, a 12-year-old cannot open an account for utility service. Four days later and without further notice to Jackson, employees of Metropolitan Edison disconnected electric service to the Jackson house.
Procedural history
Jackson filed suit against Metropolitan Edison in the United States District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania alleging a violation of the Civil Rights Act of 1871, 42 U.S.C. § 1983,. seeking damages for the termination of electric service and an injunction requiring Metropolitan Edison to continue providing power to her home until she had been provided notice, a hearing, and an opportunity to pay any amounts found due. Her claim was based upon an alleged entitlement to reasonably continuous electric service to her home, and that the electric company's termination of service for alleged nonpayment, an action allowed by a provision of the company's general tariff approved by the PUC, constituted state action that deprived her of property in violation of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution.
The district court granted Metropolitan Edison's motion to dismiss the complaint of Jackson on the ground that the termination of service was not state action, and hence was not subject to judicial review under the Fourteenth Amendment. On appeal, the Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit affirmed. The Supreme Court, noting similar decision regarding terminations by other public utility companies, granted certiorari to review the judgment..
Opinion of the Court 
The majority opinion by Justice Rehnquist held that the termination of electric service by the public utility did not constitute state action that subjected the termination to judicial review under the Fourteenth Amendment. The opinion compared the regulation of the utility to the factual situation in Burton v. Wilmington Parking Authority, 365 U.S. 715 (1961),. and Moose Lodge No. 107 v. Irvis, 407 U.S. 163 (1972).. In Burton, state action was found when a state had leased part of a government-owned parking facility to a restaurant that practiced racial segregation because the court found that the state had entangled itself in the business. However, the business in Moose Lodge No. 107 was subject to some state regulation and was privately owned, and the court found that the state regulation did not turn the lodge's acts into state action. In the Jackson case, although tightly regulated, the electric company was privately owned. The court held that the fact that the electric company was at least a partial monopoly in its service territory or that it was subject to extensive state regulation did not turn its termination practices into state action.
Three justices wrote dissenting opinions. Justice Douglas stated that he would have found under the reasoning from Burton that there was state action in the termination of electric service under the lax regulation of the public utility by the state. Justice Brennan in his dissent noted that the electric service had been in the name of a third party, Dobson, rather than the plaintiff Jackson, so there was no live controversy between Jackson and the electric company. Without such a controversy, the Supreme Court would not have a basis for ruling, and should instead have remanded the case with instructions to enter a new judgment of dismissal. Justice Marshall in his dissent indicated that certiorari should not have been granted for this case, and he would have found state action in the termination as the electric company was a monopoly regulated by the state and had used state-approved procedures in the tariff used in the termination.
The Marshall dissent suggests that the majority opinion had, in effect, either overruled or restricted Public Utilities Commission of the District of Columbia v. Pollak, 343 U.S. 451 (1952).. Pollak involved a decision of the District of Columbia Public Utilities Commission that allowed a public transit system to play radio programs on its street cars and busses, which the Supreme Court determined did not violate the First or Fifth Amendments. The majority opinion noted that the court in Pollak did not determine whether the playing of the radio programs on the regulated transit system constituted state action as a result of the regulation by the D.C. PUC, but simply assumed state action for the purposes of evaluating the constitutional questions.
See also
 Metropolitan Edison Co. v. People Against Nuclear Energy
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 419
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States energy case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:FirstEnergy
Category:York, Pennsylvania
"""

From "Jacobellis v. Ohio" ==> """
Jacobellis v. Ohio, 378 U.S. 184 (1964), was a United States Supreme Court decision handed down in 1964 involving whether the state of Ohio could, consistent with the First Amendment, ban the showing of the Louis Malle film The Lovers (Les Amants), which the state had deemed obscene..
Background
Nico Jacobellis, manager of the Heights Art Theatre in the Coventry Village neighborhood of Cleveland Heights, Ohio, was charged with two counts of possessing and exhibiting an obscene film in [378 U.S. 184, 186] violation of Ohio Revised Code (1963 Supp.), convicted and ordered by a judge of the Cuyahoga County Court of Common Pleas to pay fines of $500 on the first count and $2,000 on the second (), or if the fines were not paid, to be incarcerated at the workhouse, for exhibiting the film. Jacobellis' conviction was upheld by the Ohio Court of Appeals and the Supreme Court of Ohio.
Supreme Court
The Supreme Court of the United States reversed the conviction by ruling that the film was not obscene and so was constitutionally protected. However, the Court could not agree as to a rationale, yielding four different opinions from the majority. No opinion, including the two dissenting ones, had the support of more than two justices. The decision was announced by William J. Brennan, but his opinion was joined only by Justice Arthur Goldberg. 
Justice Hugo Black, joined by Justice William O. Douglas, reiterated his well-known view that the First Amendment does not permit censorship of any kind.Jacobellis, 378 U.S. at 196 (Black, J., concurring). Chief Justice Earl Warren, in dissent, decried the confused state of the Court's obscenity jurisprudence and argued that Ohio's action was consistent with the Court's decision in Roth v. United States and furthered important state interests.Jacobellis, 378 U.S. at 199 (Warren, C.J., dissenting). Justice John Marshall Harlan II also dissented; he believed that states should have "wide, but not federally unrestricted" power to ban obscene films.Jacobellis, 378 U.S. at 203 (Harlan, J., dissenting).
The most famous opinion from Jacobellis, however, was Justice Potter Stewart's concurrence, stating that the Constitution protected all obscenity except "hard-core pornography". He wrote, "I shall not today attempt further to define the kinds of material I understand to be embraced within that shorthand description; and perhaps I could never succeed in intelligibly doing so. But I know it when I see it, and the motion picture involved in this case is not that."Jacobellis, 378 U.S. at 197 (Stewart, J., concurring).
Subsequent developments
The Court's obscenity jurisprudence would remain fragmented until 1973's Miller v. California..
See also
Elephant test
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 378
References
External links
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States obscenity case law
Category:Cleveland Heights, Ohio
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Jacobson v. Massachusetts" ==> """
Jacobson v. Massachusetts, 197 U.S. 11 (1905), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld the authority of states to enforce compulsory vaccination laws. The Court's decision articulated the view that individual liberty is not absolute and is subject to the police power of the state. Jacobson has been invoked in numerous other Supreme Court cases as an example of a baseline exercise of the police power.
 Background 
Massachusetts was one of 11 states that had compulsory vaccination laws. Massachusetts law empowered the board of health of individual cities and towns to enforce mandatory, free vaccinations for adults over the age of 21 if the municipality determined it was necessary for the public health or safety of the community. Adults who refused were subject to a $5 fine (about $ in  dollars). In 1902, faced with an outbreak of smallpox, the Board of Health of the city of Cambridge, Massachusetts adopted a regulation ordering the vaccination or revaccination of all its inhabitants.
Cambridge pastor Henning Jacobson had lived through an era of mandatory vaccinations back in his original home of Sweden. Although the efforts to eradicate smallpox were successful in Sweden, Jacobson's childhood vaccination had gone badly, leaving him with a "lifelong horror of the practice". Jacobson refused vaccination saying that "he and his son had had bad reactions to earlier vaccinations" as children and that Jacobson himself "had been caused great and extreme suffering for a long period by a disease produced by vaccination". Jacobson believed that his family may have some sort of hereditary condition that made the smallpox vaccine particularly dangerous. Because of his refusal to get vaccinated, Jacobson was prosecuted and fined $5. Over the next three years until his case reached the Supreme Court of the United States, Jacobson argued that subjecting him to a fine or imprisonment for neglecting or refusing vaccination was an invasion of his liberty, the law was "unreasonable, arbitrary and oppressive", and that one should not be subjected to the law if he or she objects to vaccination, no matter the reason.
 Decision 
left|thumb|Henning Jacobson, 1878
Justice John Marshall Harlan delivered the decision for a 7–2 majority that the Massachusetts law did not violate the Fourteenth Amendment. The Court held that "in every well ordered society charged with the duty of conserving the safety of its members the rights of the individual in respect of his liberty may at times, under the pressure of great dangers, be subjected to such restraint, to be enforced by reasonable regulations, as the safety of the general public may demand" and that "[r]eal liberty for all could not exist under the operation of a principle which recognizes the right of each individual person to use his own [liberty], whether in respect of his person or his property, regardless of the injury that may be done to others."
Furthermore, the Court held that mandatory vaccinations are neither arbitrary nor oppressive so long as they do not "go so far beyond what was reasonably required for the safety of the public". In Massachusetts, with smallpox being "prevalent and increasing in Cambridge", the regulation in question was "necessary in order to protect the public health and secure the public safety". The Court noted that Jacobson had offered proof that there were many in the medical community who believed that the smallpox vaccine would not stop the spread of the disease and, in fact, may cause other diseases of the body. However, the opinions offered by Jacobson were "more formidable by their number than by their inherent value" and "[w]hat everybody knows, ... [the] opposite theory accords with the common belief and is maintained by high medical authority." Therefore, it was left to the legislature, not the courts, to determine which of the "two modes was likely to be the most effective for the protection of the public against disease". No one could "confidently assert that the means prescribed by the State to that end has no real or substantial relation to the protection of the public health and the public safety".
In conclusion, the Court acknowledged that, in "extreme cases", for certain individuals "in a particular condition of ... health", the requirement of vaccination would be "cruel and inhuman[e]", in which case, courts would be empowered to interfere in order to "prevent wrong and oppression". However, the statute in question was not "intended to be applied to such a case" and Jacobson "did not offer to prove that, by reason of his then condition, he was, in fact, not a fit subject of vaccination". The two dissenters in the Court, David J. Brewer, "one of the most influential justices [on] the court at the time", and Rufus Peckham, "a champion of economic liberty", Social Science Research Network did not write dissenting opinions.
 Precedent 
Harlan's decision supported both police power and limits on the power, and his decision would be invoked to support both in later cases. He stated his nuanced opinion on the limits of government power by saying that "general terms should be so limited in their application as not to lead to injustice, oppression or absurd consequence".
 Subsequent developments 
The anti-vaccine movement mobilized following the decision, and the Anti-Vaccination League of America was founded three years later to promote the principle that "health is nature's greatest safeguard against disease and that therefore no State has the right to demand of anyone the impairment of his or her health". The League warned about what it believed to be the dangers of vaccination and the dangers of allowing the intrusion of government and science into private life, part of the broader process identified with the Progressive Movement. The League asked, "We have repudiated religious tyranny; we have rejected political tyranny; shall we now submit to medical tyranny?".
The Supreme Court reaffirmed its decision in Jacobson in Zucht v. King (1922), which held that a school system could refuse admission to a student who failed to receive a required vaccination. Jacobson has been invoked in numerous other Supreme Court cases as an example of a baseline exercise of the police power, with cases relying on it including Buck v. Bell, 274 U.S. 200 (1927) (sterilization of those with intellectual disabilities), Prince v. Massachusetts, 321 U.S. 158 (1944) (limitations on parents having children distribute pamphlets in the street), Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Department of Health, 497 U.S. 261 (1990) (allowing a state to require "clear and convincing evidence" of a patient's wishes for removal of life support), Vernonia School District 47J v. Acton, 515 U.S. 646 (1995) (allowing random drug testing of students), and Gonzales v. Carhart, 550 U.S. 124 (2007) (upholding the federal "partial birth abortion" ban).
The global eradication of smallpox, brought about by an international vaccination campaign, was certified in 1980.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, the federal United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit relied on Jacobson when upholding a Texas regulation halting abortions by including it in its ban on non-essential medical services and surgeries, consistent with Justice Blackmun's citing of the case in Roe v. Wade. (See Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on abortion in the United States.) Jacobson also has been a precedent case in justifying government face mask orders and stay-at-home orders throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. 
The closest COVID-19-related lawsuit to a direct challenge to Jacobson was Does v. Mills, which challenged Maine's vaccine mandate for health care workers. By a 6–3 vote, the Supreme Court in 2021 denied relief to those who were seeking an injunction on the mandate.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 197
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Fuller Court
 Compagnie Francaise de Navigation a Vapeur v. Louisiana Board of Health, case three years earlier where the Court had upheld quarantine laws as a reasonable exercise of police power
 National Federation of Independent Business v. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (2022), case in which OSHA mandating COVID-19 vaccines was ruled as too powerful.
 Vaccination policy
 Vaccine controversies
References
Sources
 George J. Annas, "Blinded by Bioterrorism: Public Health and Liberty in the 21st Century", Health Matrix (2003)
 James Colgrove and Ronald Bayer, "The Legacy of Jacobson v Massachusetts: Manifold Restraints: Liberty, Public Health, and the Legacy of Jacobson v Massachusetts Manifold Restraints: Liberty, Public Health, and the Legacy of Jacobson v. Massachusetts], American Journal of Public Health, vol. 95, no. 4 (2005), 571–576
 Lawrence O. Gostin, "Jacobson v. Massachusetts at 100 Years: Police Power and Civil Liberties in Tension", American Journal of Public Health, vol. 95, no. 4 (2005), 576–581
 Wendy K. Mariner et al., "Jacobson v. Massachusetts: It's Not Your Great-Great-Grandfather's Public Health Law", American Journal of Public Health, vol. 95, no. 4 (2005)
 Michael Willrich, Pox: An American History (Penguin, 2011)
External links
Category:1905 in United States case law
Category:Health law in the United States
Category:Legal history of Massachusetts
Category:Smallpox vaccines
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Vaccination law
Category:Vaccine controversies
Category:Vaccination in the United States
"""

From "Jacobson v. United States" ==> """
Jacobson v. United States, 503 U.S. 540 (1992), is a case decided by the United States Supreme Court regarding the criminal procedure topic of entrapment. A narrowly divided court overturned the conviction of a Nebraska man for receiving child pornography through the mail, ruling that postal inspectors had implanted a desire to do so through repeated written entreaties.
It was the first time the court had considered an entrapment case from outside the realm of controlled-substance enforcement, or one involving conduct that had only recently been criminalized. By relying exclusively on whether the defendant had a predisposition to commit the crime, the court appeared to have finally resolved a lingering issue in its previous decisions on the subject.Lord, Kenneth; Entrapment and Due Process: Moving Toward A Dual System of Defenses , 25 Fl St. U. Law Rev. 473, 1998.
The decision was seen as a rare triumph for defendants before a conservative court that frequently sided with prosecutors.Greenhouse, Linda; April 7, 1992; Justices, in Entrapment Case, Cast a Rare Vote Against Prosecutors; The New York Times; retrieved August 15, 2006 Guidelines for federal law enforcement agents were changed in its wake,Chin, Id., 30, citing Attorney General’s Guidelines on FBI Undercover Operations (Dec. 31, 1980), reprinted in Select Committee to Study Undercover Activities of the Department of Justice, S. Rep. 97-682, at 551 (1982) and The Attorney General’s Guidelines on Federal Bureau of Investigation Undercover Operations  (May 30, 2002). and it was described as having brought entrapment "back from the dead."Paul Marcus, "Presenting, Back from the [Almost] Dead, the Entrapment Defense", 47 Fla L Rev 205 (1995). Cited in Gabriel J. Chin, The Story of Jacobson v United States: Catching Criminals or Creating Crime?, Arizona Legal Studies Discussion Paper N. 06-12, February 2006, retrieved August 10, 2006, 31. This draft is described as a chapter in the forthcoming Criminal Law Stories. 31.
Background of the case
US anti-child pornography legislation and early cases
Until the late 1970s, there were no federal laws specifically addressing the production, distribution or possession of child pornography, and it was readily available to those who sought it. While some was imported from European countries where it was produced, there was also a domestic industry.
Media exposés and popular outrage led Congress to pass by unanimous vote the Sexual Exploitation of Children Act of 1977, which criminalized the production and sale of child pornography.  This act was signed into law by President Jimmy Carter on February 6, 1978. also amended the Mann Act  The legislation was supported by a unanimous decision of the Supreme Court in New York v. Ferber, , that images of children need not meet legal definitions of obscenity to be prohibited by the government, since the state's interest in protecting children from harm trumped First Amendment rights in this instance.
Shortly thereafter, an update to the SEOC Act, the Child Protection Act of 1984, made it illegal to purchase pornographic materials depicting minors through the mail, or possess them, on the grounds that it encouraged child sexual abuse.  While popular with voters, civil liberties advocates warned that the expanded scope of these laws could result in prosecutions of entirely innocent people who had little or nothing to do with the child-porn industry, such as parents taking photos or videos of their children in the nude.  Nevertheless, investigators forged ahead and had, by the mid-1980s, shut down almost all domestic child-porn production.  The government itself was thereafter the biggest marketer, in the form of materials it created to tempt buyers.Lawrence Stanley, The Child Pornography Myth, 7 Cardozo Arts & Ent L J 295, 324 (1989); cited at Chin, 18n54.
Investigation and arrest of Keith Jacobson
In January 1985 inspectors for the United States Postal Service (USPS) in the Great Plains states began "Project Looking Glass", a sting operation under the newly enacted Child Protection Act of 1984,Pub.L. 98-292, 98 Stat. 204 (1984). which made it illegal to send pictures of nude minors through the mail, even for noncommercial purposes (previously, only those who intended to resell them could be prosecuted).Linder, Doug; Evil in the American Justice System; Case 3: Project Looking Glass, retrieved August 10, 2006. Ray Mack, the inspector in charge, meant it to be primarily an intelligence-gathering operation, a way to keep tabs on producers and distributors. It sent mail to those it had known to have ordered such materials while they were legal. Among them were Keith Jacobson, a bachelor 56-year-old U.S. Army retiree turned farmer living with his elderly parents in Newman Grove, Nebraska, who would later describe himself as bisexualMarcus, Ruth; November 6, 1991; Fair Sting or Foul Trap? Child Pornography Investigation Challenged; The Washington Post; retrieved August 13, 2006 although he said he had never had relations with men.Chin, Id., 9. Jacobson had, the previous year, ordered two magazines entitled Bare Boys I and Bare Boys II from Electric Moon, an adult bookstore in San Diego, California, that had been raided and shut down.
USPS investigators decided to send him a letter from a fictitious organization, the "American Hedonist Society", which supposedly sought to lobby for "the right to read what we desire, the right to discuss similar interests with those who share our philosophy, and finally that we have the right to seek pleasure without restrictions being placed on us by outdated puritan morality." Included was a questionnaire attempting to gauge the respondent's interest in various paraphilias, including pedophilia and ephebophilia. Jacobson indicated an "above average" interest in the latter, especially between males, but also stated he was opposed to the former. The USPS decided he was not a promising target and left him alone.
But some time later, Calvin Comfort, a "prohibited mailing specialist" for the region, found Jacobson's name in another file, and the government decided to try again, this time as part of an operation aimed at purchasers. In May 1986, they sent him mail from another fictitious organization, "Midlands Data Research", which was for those who "believe in the joys of sex and the complete awareness of those lusty and youthful lads and lasses of the neophite  age". Jacobson confessed to them that he was "interested in teenage sexuality", asked for more information and that his name be kept confidential. This led to Jacobson getting mail from the "Heartland Institute for a New Tomorrow" (HINT), "an organization founded to protect and promote sexual freedom and freedom of choice. We believe that arbitrarily imposed legislative sanctions restricting your sexual freedom should be rescinded through the legislative process." Jacobson seemed to sympathize, writing in response that sexual freedom and freedom of the press were under attack by "right-wing fundamentalists".
Along with a thank you note from "Jean Daniels" of HINT also came a supposed list of others in the area with similar interests as possible pen pals. But Jacobson never wrote to any of them. So Comfort, under the pseudonym "Carl Long", wrote back using a technique called "mirroring", claiming to have interests calculated to be similar to those believed held by Jacobson, and specifically, to be equally interested in depictions of sex acts between young boys. Jacobson said he, too, liked "good looking young guys (in their late teens and early 20s) doing their thing together". Neither Jacobson nor Comfort made any more explicit reference to pornographic materials and Jacobson stopped writing back after two letters. With no evidence that he had ever watched or possessed any child pornography, the USPS again dropped its efforts against him.
Those were renewed in March 1987 when the United States Customs Service sent similar exploratory material, supposedly from Canada, to Jacobson and others on the USPS's list, and he responded, placing an order that was never filled. A catalog from a "Far Eastern Trading Company" was sent instead, along with other written material bemoaning the infringement of sexual freedoms. This time Jacobson ordered a publication called Boys Who Love Boys, which the catalog said featured "11 and 14 year old boys" who "get it on in every way imaginable. Oral, anal and heavy masturbation. If you love boys," it further read, "you will be delighted with this".
On June 16, 1987, Jacobson received a card in his mail telling him to go to the post office and pick up the envelope that supposedly contained Boys Who Love Boys. Comfort observed him doing so and got a search warrant for his home on that basis. He was arrested shortly thereafter, 26 months after the postal inspectors had first contacted him.Jacobson v. United States, 503 U.S. 540, 544–547
Lower court proceedings
Criminal trial
Jacobson was indicted on one count of knowingly receiving through the mails sexually explicit material depicting a minor18 U.S.C. § 2252(a)(2) in September. At trial in federal court, his attorney, George H. Moyer, noted his exemplary military service record, including a Bronze Star, service in Korea and Vietnam War and lack of a civilian criminal record beyond a drunken-driving conviction in 1958.Chin, Id., 13. He raised the entrapment defense.
Jacobson testified that he had been "shocked and surprised" by the contents of the Bare Boys collections when he received them, as he had not expected the photos to depict very young boys: "I thought these were a nudist type publication. Many of the pictures were out in a rural or outdoor setting. There was – I didn't draw any sexual connotation or connection with that".Jacobson, 503 U.S. 540, 543
The jury convicted him in April 1988. He was sentenced to three years imprisonment, suspended to two years' probation and 250 hours of community service, which he discharged by painting a school bus and working at a library. He had to sell his share of the family farm to his sister to pay his legal bills, and was fired from his job driving a school bus in Newman Grove even though there was no evidence he had ever approached children sexually.Chin, Id., 12, He lowered his profile, often driving to more distant communities to run routine errands.Johnson, Dirk; April 19, 1992; Farmer Caught in Pornography Trap Feels Vindicated, but at a Cruel Cost; The New York Times; retrieved August 11, 2006. Nonetheless, his hometown supported him. "Any of us could be caught up in such a sting," the Newman Grove local newspaper editorialized.
Appeals
A panel of three appellate judges heard the case for the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals. On January 12, 1990, Senior Judge Gerald Heaney and Chief Judge Donald Lay overturned the conviction on the grounds that the government had insufficient grounds to believe that Jacobson was likely to purchase the material it was offering to him.United States v. Jacobson, 893 F2d at 999–1000. Judge George G. Fagg said in dissent that his colleagues had "declared war on the government's power to initiate undercover investigations" and that reasonable suspicion need not be present for such operations to take place.Id. at 1003.
He would carry the day after federal prosecutors appealed for an en banc rehearing by the entire court, reiterating that point for an eight-judge majority and saying that unless Jacobson could demonstrate that a specifically protected right had been violated by the investigation, the conviction should stand. The majority also rejected the entrapment defense, arguing that the postal investigators had merely provided Jacobson with opportunities to purchase child pornography and not sought to affect his predisposition (an important element in entrapment under U.S. law) to do so in any way.United States v. Jacobson, 916 F2d 467 (8th Cir. 1990) (en banc)
Lay and Heaney were the sole dissenters, and wrote separate opinions based upon two different grounds. The former argued that Jacobson had not in fact shown "predisposition" toward breaking the law throughout his life, since the only known prior purchases and basis for belief by prosecutors, were purchases he had made at a time this was a legal act; Lay therefore concluded that without evidence of prior disposition to break the law in this way, he had been entrapped. The latter's dissent was similar to the original panel opinion, arguing that the government had no reasonable belief that Jacobson would purchase child pornography. He also called investigative tactics sufficiently outrageous to justify reversal: "In my view, the government's investigation and prosecution of Jacobson amount to the deliberate manufacture of a crime that would never have occurred but for the Postal Service's overzealous efforts to create it".Jacobson, Id., at 476
Supreme Court case
Certiorari petition
John Paul Stevens, Associate Justice of the Supreme Court supposedly picked Jacobson's case out of a pile of "hopeless" certiorari petitions. After reading it, Justice Byron White made an argument moving and persuasive enough that Justices Harry Blackmun, Thurgood Marshall, and Stevens changed their minds and agreed to accept it. Regardless of how certiorari was granted, arguments before the Court were limited by the grant to the single issue in question, of whether as a matter of law, Jacobson had been entrapped.Murdoch, Joyce and Pryce, Deb; Courting Justice: Gay Men and Lesbians v. the Supreme Court; Basic Books 2001, , 410, cited in Chin.
Entrapment in federal prosecutions
The entrapment defense at the federal level exists entirely in case law. Federal courts first recognized entrapment in Woo Wai v. United States, 223 F 412 (9th Circuit 1915), and the Supreme Court followed suit in Sorrells v. United States, .
The Sorrells court grounded the entrapment defense in what has since been called the "subjective" test, in which the prosecution must overcome it by showing the defendant had a "predisposition" to commit the crime in any event.Chin, Id., 3. In Sherman v. United States, 356 U.S. 369 (1958), Felix Frankfurter, in a concurrence, had argued instead for an "objective" standard, which focuses instead on the conduct of the law enforcement personnel involved and whether the crime would have occurred without their involvement,Sherman v. United States,  (Frankfurter, J., concurring) a call repeated by other justices in later decisions. While the majority of states have chosen to use the objective method, the Supreme Court has held firm to the former.Scott C. Paton, "The Government Made Me Do It": A Proposed Approach to
Entrapment Under Jacobson v. United States, 79 Cornell L. Rev. 995, 1002 n.45 (1994)
Briefings and pre-hearing public awareness
Jacobson's case attracted some national media attention.  Civil liberties advocates including the ACLU  supported him, worried over what they saw as dangerous growth in government police powers during the Reagan and Bush administrations, when law enforcement were alleged to have cracked down on drugs as well as pornography distribution at the behest of the Religious Right. Operation Looking Glass, the USPS claimed, had netted 147 convictions, but only 35 where evidence was found that the offenders had either been involved in producing child pornography or molested children. Critics claimed that the government was exaggerating the child-porn problem at best and contributing to it at worst,App. Reply Brief at 11 & n.5, citing Lawrence Stanley, The Child Pornography Myth, 7 Cardozo Arts & Ent L J 295, 324 (1989) possibly by introducing some consumers to material they might never have developed a taste for otherwise.Amy Adler, The Perverse Law of Child Pornography, 101 Colum L Rev 209, 212 (2001); cited at Chin, 21n77
It was the subject of a 60 Minutes segment, in which Jacobson told Mike Wallace, after pausing for several seconds and looking downward, that he broke down and ordered Boys Who Love Boys because he wanted to see just what it was that he was being so heavily solicited to buy. A postal inspector also admitted to the show that since it had successfully put most child-porn producers out of business, it was now going after consumers with material of its own.CBS News; February 16, 1992; "The Sting"; 60 Minutes.
Interested parties on both sides filed amici. A group of conservative Republicans in both houses of Congress, including Newt Gingrich, Dick Armey, Henry Hyde and Rick Santorum, and the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children both argued for affirming the conviction, pointing to the invaluable nature of undercover investigations in fighting child pornography, worrying that requiring reasonable suspicion beforehand could make such operations impossible. Americans for Effective Law Enforcement said there had been no entrapment and that reasonable suspicion was not required before starting investigations such as Looking Glass. The American Civil Liberties Union, its Nebraska chapter and the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers weighed in on Jacobson's behalf.Chin, Id., 20
Arguments
Moyer, who had never argued before the Supreme Court, continued to represent Jacobson (who was in the audience). In his brief and at oral argument, he said that a mere stated interest in sex among young men did not rise to a level of proving predisposition, that the government should have had evidence in hand that Jacobson was actually willing to break the law to do so. (Kenneth Starr, then Solicitor General, had maintained in the government's brief opposing certiorari that his prior purchase of the Bare Boys magazines was all the proof it needed, even if the action were legal at the time.Starr, Kenneth; March 1991; Brief For The United States In Opposition; United States Department of Justice; retrieved August 11, 2006.) Pressed on other undercover investigative techniques, he admitted that a government-run pawn shop would be a permissible way to apprehend thieves despite a lack of evidence of predisposition because the crimes might well have occurred prior to any contact with the government or its operatives.
During oral argument, Justice Antonin Scalia responded to this by suggesting that some interests a person might express, such as recreational drugs, signified a willingness to violate social norms regardless of whether the conduct was illegal or not. Paul Larkin, who appeared for the government, had to admit to that there was no case law on entrapment where something that had previously been permitted was now prohibited. At one point, trying to argue that Jacobson did not have access to the defense of entrapment by estoppel (where the government persuades an actor that it is legal to do something, only to prosecute them for it), Scalia told Larkin he'd lost him.Chin, Id., 22
Decision
By a 5–4 margin, the justices reversed the conviction, agreeing that Jacobson had been entrapped, on April 6, 1992. It has since been reported that this was one of the rare cases where the decision changed after arguments. The original poll of the justices showed a 7–2 majority for affirmance, with only White and Stevens holding out. But White argued persuasively for reversal to his fellow Justices, and Blackmun and Clarence Thomas, who had replaced Marshall, changed their minds. It has been suggested that Thomas, who later established a reputation for allowing wide latitude to law enforcement similar to other contemporary Republican appointees, was especially sensitive at that time to Jacobson's situation due to the sexual harassment allegations raised by Anita Hill during his own recent confirmation hearings.Chin, Id., 23n64
Justice David Souter later provided the swing vote, and opinions that White and Sandra Day O'Connor had already begun drafting had to be rewritten to reflect the changed outcome of the case.Hutchinson, Dennis J.; The Man Who Once Was Whizzer White: A Portrait of Justice Byron R. White, , 420 (The Free Press 1998), cited by Murdoch & Pryce and in turn by Chin.
Majority
White, reiterating what he had written in Ferber, acknowledged that child pornography was a social evil and that the government could use undercover investigations to enforce laws against it. After reviewing the previous cases on entrapment, he said that the more than two years in which investigators had tried to get Jacobson to buy various child-porn offerings had suggested he did not have a predisposition to do so: "... (I)t is our view that the Government did not prove that this predisposition was independent, and not the product of the attention that the Government had directed at petitioner since January, 1985".Jacobson v. United States, 503 U.S. 540, 550.
Since the Bare Boys purchases were legal at the time, they did not prove that he was willing to break the law to acquire such materials. "... (E)vidence that merely indicates a generic inclination to act within a broad range, not all of which is criminal, is of little probative value in establishing predisposition", he wrote. "Evidence of predisposition to do what once was lawful is not, by itself, sufficient to show predisposition to do what is now illegal, for there is a common understanding that most people obey the law even when they disapprove of it".Jacobson, Id., at 551. He also noted that, at trial, the prosecution had not challenged Jacobson's assertion that he did not know the magazines would contain pictures of minors until he received it.
Furthermore, he suggested, the appeals to political action he received may have given him reasons other than prurient interest to order the material, indeed even suggested he had a duty to order them as a way of taking a stand:
... (T)he strong arguable inference is that, by waving the banner of individual rights and disparaging the legitimacy and constitutionality of efforts to restrict the availability of sexually explicit materials, the Government not only excited petitioner's interest in sexually explicit materials banned by law, but also exerted substantial pressure on petitioner to obtain and read such material as part of a fight against censorship and the infringement of individual rights ... The evidence that petitioner was ready and willing to commit the offense came only after the Government had devoted 2½ years to convincing him that he had or should have the right to engage in the very behavior proscribed by law.Jacobson, Id., at 552
White also dismissed the notion that his responses to the surveys he was sent proved he was willing to order child porn illegally, saying they only indicated "a predisposition to view photographs of preteen sex and a willingness to promote a given agenda by supporting lobbying organizations ... petitioner's responses hardly support an inference that he would commit the crime of receiving child pornography through the mails". He noted that twice beforeStanley v. Georgia, ; Paris Adult Theatre I v. Slaton,  the Court had suggested that an individual's private fantasies are not the government's business, even if it has a strong interest in proscribing the enactment of those fantasies.
"When the Government's quest for convictions", he concluded, "leads to the apprehension of an otherwise law-abiding citizen who, if left to his own devices, likely would have never run afoul of the law, the courts should intervene."Jacobson, Id., 554.
Dissent
O'Connor made two arguments for the dissenting justices: that predisposition was proven by the fact that Jacobson had ordered materials both times he was actually solicited, and that the Court had usurped the jury's rightful role in deciding whether he was entrapped. She also expressed fears that the court had so broadened the definition of predisposition as to make it a viable defense in almost any case.
She began by stating what was, to the minority, the most relevant aspect of the case.
Keith Jacobson was offered only two opportunities to buy child pornography through the mail. Both times, he ordered. Both times, he asked for opportunities to buy more. He needed no Government agent to coax, threaten, or persuade him; no one played on his sympathies, friendship, or suggested that his committing the crime would further a greater good. In fact, no Government agent even contacted him face to face.Jacobson, Id., at 554, O'Connor, J., dissenting
She noted also that Jacobson had written, in a note included with his order, that he would be doing more business with the company later and that he wanted to "(b)e discreet in order to protect you and me".
The majority, she said, had so greatly expanded the government's burden of proof in undercover sting operations as to make future such investigations untenable:
... (A)fter this case, every defendant will claim that something the Government agent did before soliciting the crime "created" a predisposition that was not there before. For example, a bribetaker will claim that the description of the amount of money available was so enticing that it implanted a disposition to accept the bribe later offered. A drug buyer will claim that the description of the drug's purity and effects was so tempting that it created the urge to try it for the first time. In short, the Court's opinion could be read to prohibit the Government from advertising the seductions of criminal activity as part of its sting operation, for fear of creating a predisposition in its suspects.Jacobson, Id., at 557, O'Connor, J., dissenting.
She scoffed at White's claim that the calls to activism were possibly instrumental in creating a predisposition to offend: "The most one finds is letters advocating legislative action to liberalize obscenity laws, letters which could easily be ignored or thrown away ... Nor did the Government claim to be organizing a civil disobedience movement, which would protest the pornography laws by breaking them." It was up to the jury, she said, to decide what Jacobson meant when he said on the stand that he wanted to see "what all the trouble and hysteria was about",Jacobson, Id., at 558–9, O'Connor, J., dissenting. and they had done so.
In Part II, she accused her colleagues of redefining predisposition so that it had to include an awareness that the action to be undertaken was illegal, despite the fact that the CPA did not include specific intent to receive child pornography as an element of the crime. "The elements of predisposition," she said, "should track the elements of the crime".Jacobson, Id., at 560, O'Connor, J., dissenting. The Bare Boys purchases were not, she argued, as dispositive of that as the majority claimed. Her last sentences responded to White's, saying that there was no question that the jury had been properly instructed on entrapment law and thus, their decision that Jacobson could not claim entrapment should be allowed to stand.
Aftermath
Reaction
New York Times''' reporter Linda Greenhouse described the initial verdict as "an anomaly, an extreme misuse of Government power in which an innocent person was led to commit a manufactured crime" and thus not likely to signal a shift back in favor of defendants after a period that had seen a move away from the liberalism of the Warren and Burger Courts towards a more law-and-order–oriented Court. Editorialists at newspapers around the country – the Times,Editorial; April 8, 1992 Entrapment Out of Control; The New York Times; retrieved August 14, 2006. the Chicago Tribune,Editorial; April 7, 1992; "Fighting Crime by Inducing It"; Chicago Tribune. and the Washington PostEditorial; April 10, 1992; "Entrapment, Plain and Simple"; Washington Post. – praised the court's decision, as did Jacobson's hometown paper, the Omaha World-Herald.Editorial; Apr 7, 1992; "Justice For Nebraskan", Omaha World-Herald. Columnists on both sides of the political spectrum, from Clarence PagePage, Clarence; April 9, 1992; "Government Went to Obscene Lengths", St Louis Post Dispatch to William SafireSafire, William; April 13, 1992; The Stingers Stung; The New York Times; retrieved August 14, 2006 joined in celebrating his turn of fate and criticizing the excessive zeal of the postal inspectors. Civil liberties advocates savored what they felt was an overdue triumph against the overreach of law enforcement during the preceding decade. "... (W)hen the State gets behind a moral panic, no one is safe," wrote Bob Chatelle of the political issues committee of the National Writers' Union, pointing to other zealous prosecutions of people with no demonstrable interest in child pornography who had nevertheless fallen afoul of newer laws by taking or possessing pictures of naked children with no apparent sexual content.Chatelle, Bob; 1993; Kiddie Porn Panic ; newsletter of the Political Issues Committee of the American Writers' Union; retrieved August 13, 2006.
Others pointed to what they called the horrific cost of Project Looking Glass. Among its other targets had been another middle-aged Nebraska farmer, Bob Brase, of Shelby. Like Jacobson, his name had been on the mailing list of a porn distributor, and despite neither having a criminal record nor any interest in child porn he was relentlessly solicited, including letters from the same "Carl Long". Finally he ordered a videotape and was arrested and indicted. No other prohibited material was found in his house, either.
Just before he was to be arraigned, he drove into a field and shot himself, leaving behind a wife and two children. His was one of four suicides by Looking Glass targets. Critics wondered if these suicides, which investigators had said they expected, were worth it. In 1999, Comfort also took his own life, citing despondency over the stresses of his job.Associated Press; Apr 2 1999; "Milwaukee Postal Inspector Found Dead In His Parked Van"; cited in Chin, 12.
LegacyJacobson, opined Paul Marcus, a law professor at William & Mary three years later, "brought entrapment back from the (almost) dead." He noted that in its wake, courts were much more willing to allow, and sometimes agree with, entrapment defenses than they had been beforehand. Influential sitting judge Richard Posner had used similar language a year before, writing in an opinion that it had "breathed new life" into the defense. Most significantly, he said, appeals courts were now considering it in cases where the defendant had seemed willing to commit the crime, examining predisposition closely in cases where they would have previously rejected it out of hand.United States v Hollingsworth, 27 F3d 1196, 1198 (7th Cir 1994) (en banc).
Despite vows by prosecutors and heads of federal law enforcement agencies that the decision would not change the way they did undercover operations, there were some noticeable, at least at the federal level. Later versions of the Attorney General's Guidelines on FBI Undercover Operations, widely emulated by other federal agencies, show some changes in language from those published before Jacobson. "Entrapment should be avoided", became "entrapment must be avoided", and investigators were told it must be apparent to them that the activity they were investigating was illegal, rather than just corrupt. A definition of entrapment was included that used the same language as the decision.
Authors Joyce Murdoch and Deb Pryce say another effect of the case was a softening of the Court's attitude towards the gay community. Jacobson was the first such person to come before the Court to receive even the slightest empathy from it, and even a few years earlier his case might have been doomed from the start on that basis alone.Murdoch & Pryce, Id., 406. Cited in Chin.
Subsequent lower-court jurisprudenceJacobson remains the Court's current standard on the issue as it has not considered an entrapment case since. Similar sting operations continue to be widely used against all types of targets and in new ways. Most significantly, the rise of the Internet has led to operations where investigators pose as minors of either sex in chat rooms, trying to entice online predators to come meet them in person and have sex. When they do, they are arrested. These operations have become popular viewing on Dateline NBCs "To Catch A Predator" segments and other television shows.
Most such operations are over very quickly and result in guilty pleas, but entrapment is sometimes alleged, and a protracted investigation of a Florida man led to the first Internet entrapment case to be considered at the appellate level. Writing for a Ninth Circuit majority (the arrest occurred in California) in Poehlman v United States, 217 F3d 692 (9th Cir 2000), Judge Alex Kozinski reversed the conviction, saying the defendant had met the Jacobson'' standard and shown that the idea of crossing state lines to have sex with a minor had been implanted only after extensive email correspondence with an undercover FBI agent.Chin, Id., 32n95. In 2014 a case resulting from a sting operation was ruled by a Federal court to have been "cut from whole cloth" by ATF operatives and to have constituted as entrapment by the ATF; the case was thrown out.
Other analysis and commentary
Kenneth Lord notes that the decision did not address the subjective vs. objective test question at all. He observes that the decision adds two new strictures as part of its general rule that prosecutors must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant was predisposed to commit the crime prior to any contact by government agents:
 Conduct by the defendant which was legal at the time but later made illegal does not suffice to prove predisposition, and
 The defendant's predisposition must be evaluated based on his or her conduct prior to the commencement of any investigation.Id. 463, 476 and 479.
But beyond that, it makes no effort to address the subjective vs. objective question, nor does its discussion of intent delve into the matter of specific vs. general intent. Some appeals courts, however, have developed more specific entrapment tests on their own.Id., 477-78.
University of Arizona law professor Gabriel J. Chin points out that the entire federal entrapment defense rests on statutory construction, which allows for the possibility that Congress could simply repeal or modify it so that operations implanting suggestion of criminal activity such as the one that ensnared Jacobson were specifically authorized by law. Since the majority had shown such distaste for it, how, he wondered, would it rule on the constitutionality of such a law if it were to be challenged?Chin, Id., 33.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 503
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
Further reading
External links
 Request form for April 6, 1992 CBS Evening News report on decision at Vanderbilt Television News Archive.
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States entrapment case law
Category:Sex case law
Category:1992 in United States case law
"""

From "Jaffee v. Redmond" ==> """
Jaffee v. Redmond, 518 U.S. 1 (1996), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court created a psychotherapist-patient privilege in the Federal Rules of Evidence.  
 Background 
Mary Lu Redmond was a police officer for the Village of Hoffman Estates, Illinois.  On June 27, 1991, she was the first to respond to a fight-in-progress call. She arrived to find Ricky Allen chasing another man and brandishing a butcher knife.  Redmond repeatedly ordered Allen to drop the knife, but Allen ignored her.  At one point in the chase, it appeared to Redmond that Allen was about to stab the man he was chasing, and so she shot Allen.  Allen died at the scene.
Acting as the representative of Allen's estate, Jaffee filed suit under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, claiming that Redmond had used excessive force during the altercation.  Witnesses testified that Allen was not armed during the altercation.  During discovery, Jaffee discovered that Redmond had sought counseling from a licensed clinical social worker.  Jaffee sought the social worker's notes for the purpose of cross-examining Redmond at the trial.  Redmond opposed the request, claiming that the notes were protected by the psychotherapist-patient privilege.  The trial judge rejected this argument, and the jury later awarded Allen's estate $545,000 in damages.
Redmond appealed to the Seventh Circuit, which vacated the decision of the trial court and remanded.  In its opinion, the privilege of which Redmond sought to avail herself did exist in federal law, and the trial court should have applied it.  Jaffee asked the Supreme Court to review the Seventh Circuit's decision, and it agreed to do so.
Majority opinion
When the United States Congress enacted the Federal Rules of Evidence in 1975, it expressly left the development of evidentiary privileges to the courts.  The "privilege of a witness... shall be governed by the principles of the common law as they may be interpreted... in the light of reason and experience."  Under these common-law principles, the law favors compelling witnesses to give whatever evidence they can, unless there is some other "public good transcending the normally predominant principle of utilizing all rational means for ascertaining truth."
The psychotherapist-patient privilege, like the attorney–client and spousal privileges, flows from society's desire to facilitate certain relationships of confidence and trust.  "Effective psychotherapy... depends upon an atmosphere of confidence and trust in which the patient is willing to make a frank and complete disclosure of facts, emotions, memories, and fears. Because of the sensitive nature of the problems for which individuals consult psychotherapists, disclosure of confidential communication made during counseling sessions may cause embarrassment or disgrace.  For this reason, the mere possibility of disclosure may impede disclosure of the confidential relationship necessary for successful treatment."  These are the important societal interests the psychotherapist-patient privilege works to protect.
By contrast, if there existed no privilege for communications between psychotherapists and their patients, people would decide not to seek treatment for mental illness, particularly illnesses and traumas that are likely to result in litigation.  If there were no privilege, evidence such as that sought from Redmond by Allen's estate would not likely arise in the first place, and would remain out of court just as if it were privileged.
Two other considerations favored recognizing a federal psychotherapist-patient privilege.  First, all 50 states recognized some form of the psychotherapist-patient privilege; thus, the "reason and experience" of those states counseled in favor of recognizing the privilege in federal courts.  Indeed, as long as federal courts declined to recognize the privilege, those courts undermined the promise made by the states that afforded the privilege to their citizens.  The secrets they shared with their psychologists could still be revealed to the world in federal courts housed across the street from the courts of their own states.
Second, the proposed draft of the Federal Rules of Evidence included nine specific privileges, one of which was a psychotherapist-patient privilege.  In the past, the Court had rejected an attempt to create a state legislative privilege within the Federal Rules of Evidence because that privilege was not included in the draft version of the Rules.  When it rejected the draft including specific privileges, Congress did not specifically intend to reject the individual privileges.  It simply intended to leave the contours of the privileges to the Courts.  For all these reasons, the Court held that a psychotherapist-patient privilege existed within the Federal Rules of Evidence.
The Court also had no trouble applying it to therapy provided by a licensed clinical social worker.  Social workers provide a significant amount of mental health treatment.  Their clients often are of modest means and cannot afford the assistance of psychiatrists and psychologists.  The vast majority of states explicitly extend a testimonial privilege to social workers.  Thus, the Court saw no reason to delimit the privilege so as to exclude social workers from the privilege.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Scalia disputed every major logical premise on which the majority's decision rested.  The heart of his dissent, however, stemmed from two basic propositions.  First, that the relative social importance of psychotherapy was not established.  Effective psychotherapy undoubtedly is beneficial to individuals with mental problems, and surely serves some larger social interest in maintaining a mentally stable society.  But merely mentioning these values does not answer the critical question:  Are they of such importance, and is the contribution of psychotherapy to them so distinctive, and is the application of normal evidentiary rules so destructive to psychotherapy, as to justify making our federal courts occasional instruments of injustice [by excluding truthful evidence from court]?
Second, the lack of sufficient basis to distinguish psychotherapists from others in society in whom people place valuable confidences.  "For most of history, men and women have worked out their difficulties by talking to... parents, siblings, best friends, and bartenders—none of whom was awarded a privilege against testifying in court."  As a result, he could not see how extending an evidentiary privilege to psychotherapists would facilitate mental health treatment.  
From Scalia's vantage point, two flaws in the majority's argument were most troubling.  Although all states had a psychotherapist privilege as part of their law, those states had enacted the law through legislation.  The majority, by contrast, was creating one judicially after Congress had expressly declined to do so.  The majority's justification—that the federal privilege was necessary to avoid undermining the laws of the states—seemed to Scalia to be an inverse form of preemption.
Also, the states were not uniform in their treatment of the question presented in the case—whether the testimony of a licensed social worker should be privileged from disclosure in court.  Social workers serve a variety of roles and have a variety of backgrounds and training.  "Does a social worker bring to bear at least a significantly heightened degree of skill — more than a minister or rabbi, for example?  I have no idea, and neither does the Court."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 518
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
External links
 www.jaffee-redmond.org
  "The Psychotherapist-Patient Privilege After Jaffee v. Redmond: Where Do We Go from Here?", 76 Wash. U. L.Q. 1341 (1998)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1996 in United States case law
Category:Federal Rules of Evidence case law
Category:United States evidentiary privilege case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Jam v. International Finance Corp." ==> """
Jam v. International Finance Corp., 586 U.S. ___ (2019), was a United States Supreme Court case from the October 2018 term. The Supreme Court ruled that international organizations, such as the World Bank Group's financing arm, the International Finance Corporation, can be sued in US federal courts for conduct arising from their commercial activities. It specifically held that international organizations shared the same sovereign immunity as foreign governments. This was a reversal from existing jurisprudence, which held that international organizations (unlike foreign governments) had near-absolute immunity from lawsuits under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act and the International Organizations Immunities Act. 
This case is notable because for the first time the Court established that US-based international organizations, such as the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank, could be sued if their overseas investment activities caused harm in local communities. It overturned a decades-old standard established in the aftermath of World War II when newly-formed international agencies were first being established with headquarters in the United States.
 Background 
The World Bank Group is a group of international organizations that finances infrastructure projects, mostly in developing countries. The International Finance Corporation (IFC), headquartered in Washington, DC is the arm of the World Bank Group that specializes in lending to private sector business interests in developing countries. In the 2000s, the IFC provided $450 million USD to Coastal Gujarat Power Ltd. to fund the construction of the Tata Mundra power plant in Gujarat, a coastal state in western India. As part of the lending agreement (the IFC's Performance Standards on Environmental and Social Sustainability), the IFC requires loan recipients, including the power plant, to adhere to stringent human rights safeguards and environmental protections. The agreement allowed the IFC to revoke financial support for the plant if the plant failed to adhere to these requirements. 
However, the plant, which opened in 2012, emitted pollution which drained into local waterways and farmland, damaging the environment and creating hardship for local fishermen in the Kutch district. An internal audit conducted by the IFC's social responsibility division found that the IFC failed to provide appropriate levels of oversight. Local fishing and farming communities, with the aid of a not-for-profit group called EarthRights International and Stanford Law School, filed suit against the IFC in United States District Court, alleging breach of contract as well as the torts of nuisance and trespass.
 In lower courts 
Since the IFC's headquarters were in Washington, DC, the plaintiffs filed suit in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia in 2015, relying heavily on the IFC internal audit report as evidence. The IFC successfully moved to dismiss the case, citing absolute sovereign immunity granted to international organizations under the International Organizations Immunities Act (IOIA) in 1945. The IOIA stated in part that international organizations "shall enjoy the same immunity from suit and every form of judicial process as is enjoyed by foreign governments". In 1945, when the IOIA was enacted, the sovereign immunity enjoyed by foreign governments was nearly absolute. 
However, starting in the 1950s, the State Department began to adopt a narrower view of foreign sovereign immunity. Under this new interpretation, foreign governments would continue to enjoy nearly absolute immunity for acts conducted in their capacity as national governments. However, they could be sued in federal court for actions taken when acting as private commercial entities. This more-restrictive view of sovereign immunity, including the waiver of immunity for commercial activities, was eventually codified by Congress into the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act (FSIA) of 1972. 
The IFC successfully argued that international organizations should retain the more expansive version of sovereign immunity that was standard when the IOIA was enacted in 1945, not the more restrictive view that was adopted starting in the 1950s. The plaintiffs appealed the District Court's ruling to the DC Circuit Court of Appeals, which upheld the opinion of the District Court. The plaintiffs finally appealed to the United States Supreme Court, which granted a writ of certiorari agreeing to hear the case in May 2017. Stanford law professor Jeffrey L. Fisher argued the case on behalf of the plaintiffs. Donald Verrilli, the former US Solicitor General (2011-2016), argued the case on behalf of the IFC.
 Supreme Court opinion  
Justice Brett Kavanaugh, who was formerly on the DC Circuit Court which heard the case originally, recused himself and did not participate in the consideration of this case.
In a 7–1 decision authored by Chief Justice John Roberts, the Supreme Court reversed the Circuit Court's opinion.Jam v. Int'l Fin. Corp., . According to the Supreme Court, the most natural reading of the IOIA was that Congress intended to permanently tie the sovereign immunity enjoyed by international organizations and the immunity enjoyed by foreign governments. When Congress established the exception for commercial activities in the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1972, that exception was 'inherited' by international organizations, who (in the language of the IOIA), "enjoy the same immunity from suit […] as foreign governments".  Moreover, the Chief Justice refused to adopt a purpose-focused analysis that would have distinguished between the granting of immunity to states based on principles of comity and reciprocity, compared to international organizational immunity based on the need to carry out their functions without undue interference.  In his decision, Roberts also noted that the IOIA only establishes a default set of rules and that international organizations may, in their charters, specify that they have absolute immunity from lawsuits and that the International Finance Corporation's charter did not include such a clause.
In a dissent, Justice Stephen Breyer stated that Congress's purpose in enacting the IOIA was to confer the same type of immunity to international organizations that foreign governments enjoyed in 1945, when the statute was first enacted. He also encourages a "purpose-based" interpretation framework for the statute, noting that in 1945 Congress was attempting to create a safe harbor for newly created multilateral organizations, including the United Nations (UN), the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and the World Bank, and that the founding charters of these organizations required member states to grant them broad immunity from suit.
As a result of the Supreme Court's ruling, the case was remanded to the lower courts for further proceedings.
 References  
External links
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:Foreign Sovereign Immunity Act case law
Category:United States civil due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:World Bank Group
Category:India–United States relations
"""

From "James v. Dravo Contracting Co." ==> """
James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134 (1937), is a 5-to-4 ruling by the Supreme Court of the United States that a state's corporate income tax did not violate the Supremacy Clause (Article Six, Clause 2) of the United States Constitution by taxing the Federal government of the United States.
Brauch, p. 14. It was the first time the Court had upheld a tax on the federal government. The decision is considered a landmark in the field of federal tax immunity, underpins modern legal interpretations of the Supremacy Clause in the U.S. Constitution, and established the "legal incidence test" for tax cases.CCH Incorporated, p. 60.Drahozal, p. 131-132.
Background
Dravo Contracting Company was a general contracting business incorporated in the state of Pennsylvania.  It was also licensed to do business in the state of West Virginia. In 1932 and 1933, Dravo signed four contracts with the Federal government of the United States to construct locks and dams on the Kanawha River and locks on the Ohio River.
In 1933, the state of West Virginia passed a new law imposing a 2 percent gross income tax on companies doing business within the state.  Subsequently, West Virginia assessed Dravo Contracting $135,761 in taxes and penalties for the income it received on the four contracts it had with the United States government.
Dravo Contracting sued to prevent collection of the tax and penalties. A three-judge panel of the United States District Court for the Southern District of West Virginia enjoined the state from collecting the tax and penalties.  West Virginia appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which granted certiorari.
The Supreme Court heard oral argument on April 26–27, 1937.  However, in a surprise announcement, Associate Justice Willis Van Devanter announced on May 19, 1937 that he would retire on June 2 (just 14 days later)."Capital Is Surprised by the Sudden Resignation of Justice Van Devanter," The New York Times, May 19, 1937; Catledge, "A New Deal Foe," The New York Times, May 19, 1937. Van Devanter's retirement dramatically changed the composition of the court.  Van Devanter was a staunch conservative, and he was replaced by the liberal Senator Hugo Black.Jackson, p. 1-2. Justice Owen Roberts, who had been highly influenced by the conservative bloc, now began adopting a more independent, middle-of-the-road jurisprudence.Jackson, p. 2. In the following term, the Supreme Court overruled 19 constitutional precedents, and seven legislative precedents—and James v. Dravo Contracting Co. was one of the decisions which overruled precedent.
With Van Devanter now absent from the Court, Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes found the Supreme Court deadlocked, and ordered a rehearing on October 12 (with Justice Black participating).Ely, p. 66.
 Opinion of the Court 
Chief Justice Hughes wrote the majority opinion for the Court, in which Associate Justices Louis Brandeis, Harlan F. Stone, Benjamin N. Cardozo, and Hugo Black joined.
Hughes argued that only two questions needed to be answered:  1) Whether West Virginia had jurisdiction over the corporation which would permit it to impose the tax, and 2) Whether the tax impermissibly burdened the operations of the federal government under the Constitution.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 138.
The jurisdictional issue proved highly complex. First, the Court had to confront how much of the work was done outside the state of West Virginia, and, second, it had to determine whether the work on the river constituted the territory of West Virginia. In determining the latter, the Court had to investigate whether work occurred on the river bed, on federal property adjacent to the river, or on private property leased by the corporation to accommodate its work for the federal government. Relying heavily on Hans Rees' Sons, Inc. v. North Carolina, 283 U.S. 123 (1931), Hughes concluded that the tax must be prorated to cover only that work performed within the borders of West Virginia.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 138-140.
Whether the company had done work on land owned by the federal government was a critical issue, because in 1930 the Supreme Court had held in Surplus Trading Co. v. Cook, 281 U.S. 647 (1930), that private personal property on federal land cannot be taxed by the state.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 140; Barsh and Henderson, The Road: Indian Tribes and Political Liberty, 1980, p. 195. Citing numerous Court precedents, Hughes noted that title to the river bed lay with the state even though the Constitution granted the federal government the power to use the river bed "for any structure which the interest of navigation, in its judgment, may require."James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 140-141, quoting Lewis Blue Point Oyster Co. v. Briggs, 229 U. S. 82, 88.  But what about the land adjacent to the river bed which had been acquired by the federal government? Article 1, Section 8, Clause 17 of the U.S. Constitution gave Congress exclusive legislation power over such places so long as the state legislature concurred. Hughes, however, noted that the state had not granted exclusive jurisdiction to the federal government.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 141-142. Clause 17 also required that the construction on "exclusive" land be "needful buildings".  Were dams and locks needful buildings?  Hughes concluded they were, citing several lower court rulings as well as the West Virginia law allowing the United States to purchase the land.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 142-144.  The defendant had argued that West Virginia had ceded exclusive jurisdiction to the federal government, but in a lengthy review of the legislative language Hughes argued for an interpretation which found that only concurrent jurisdiction had been granted.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 144-147. As to private property leased by the company in order to carry out its federal contract, Hughes perfunctorily dismissed any challenge to the jurisdiction of the state over this area.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 149.
Hughes now addressed the second issue: Did the state unconstitutionally tax the federal government?  Citing extensive Supreme Court precedent, Hughes asserted that the tax was not laid directly upon the government, its property, or its officers; that the state had not taxed an "instrumentality" of the government (since the company was an independent contractor); the tax was nondiscriminatory; and the tax did not apply directly to the contract issued by the federal government.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 149-150. Citing several Court precedents, Hughes argued for a close reading of the facts in order to determine the tax's validity:James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 150.
The application of the principle which denies validity to such a tax has required the observing of close distinctions in order to maintain the essential freedom of government in performing its functions, without unduly limiting the taxing power which is equally essential to both nation and state under our dual system.
There were no "[v]ital considerations" involved in taxing corporate income, nor did the tax affect the "permanent relations" between the federal government and its clients or citizens.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 153. The Court was not bound to decide how close or distant from the federal government a tax had to be in order to be valid, Hughes argued. The Court had already held, in Thomson v. Pacific Railroad, 76 U.S. 579 (1869), that there was a clear distinction between taxing the government or one of its instrumentalities and taxing a contract employed by the government.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 153-155. Hughes distinguished Pollock v. Farmers' Loan & Trust Co., 157 U.S. 429 (1895); Gillespie v. Oklahoma, 257 U.S. 501 (1922); and Metcalf & Eddy v. Mitchell, 269 U.S. 514 (1926), from the current case, in part because of the nature of the revenue stream being taxed (bond income, for example, rather than a payment under a government contract) and because of the local (rather than interstate) nature of the work done.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 154-158.
The heart of the taxation argument, Hughes finally concluded, rested on the contention that the business would automatically pass the cost of the tax on to the federal government, thus hindering the government in the provision of goods and services.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 159. That assumption is false, Hughes asserted, and furthermore the Dravo Contracting had already stipulated that it had not done so in the instant case (nor had it passed on the cost of property, unemployment, or other taxes—even though it knew about them ahead of time).James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 159-160.
But even if the tax had been passed on to the federal government, Hughes concluded that it was incidental. Relying heavily on Trinityfarm Construction Co. v. Grosjean, 291 U.S. 466 (1934), Hughes found the 2 percent gross income tax imposed a burden on the federal government that was inconsequential and remote.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 160. Even if the state imposed a tax of 25 or even 50 percent, creating an immediate, direct, consequential burden, Congress had the legislative power to ensure that such a tax did not hinder or unduly burden the federal government.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 160-161.
The majority upheld the validity of the West Virginia tax, and reversed.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 161.
 Dissent 
Associate Justice James Clark McReynolds dissented, and was joined by Associate Justices George Sutherland, Pierce Butler, and Owen Roberts.
McReynolds was deeply concerned about the willingness of the majority to cast aside stare decisis and overrule precedent. "The judgment seems to me to overrule, sub silentio, a century of precedents, and to leave the application of the rule uncertain and unpredictable."
The dissent also took issue with most of the majority's conclusions. Federal immunity from taxation stemmed not from the common law but from the federal nature of the American system of government, he said.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 161-162. He admitted that Dravo Contracting was not an instrumentality of the federal government,James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 162-164. but concluded that the tax did burden the government.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 164-166. Citing Telegraph Company v. Texas, 105 U.S. 460 (1881); Western Union Tel. Co. v. Attorney General, 125 U.S. 530 (1888); and Massachusetts v. Western Union Tel. Co., 141 U.S. 40 (1891), McReynolds noted that none of these cases turned on the unique contractual relationship between the private company and the government (as the majority had distinguished them) but rather on the mere fact that a tax was laid on a corporation engaged in carrying out the duties assigned to it by the federal government under its constitutional mandates.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 166-167. The Court had long held, he claimed, that taxes (such as an estate tax on an estate that held government bonds) which only indirectly impinged on the relationship between the federal government and a private entity were valid.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 167-168. But if a tax on the contract itself were permitted, there would be no end to unlimited taxation on the federal government, he warned.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 168-170.
McReynolds rejected the government's proposed "interference" test as unworkable.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 170-172. The majority's test he also rejected, arguing that no tax, no matter how onerous, could ever truly burden the vast resources of the federal government.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 172. McReynolds further argued that none of the cases cited by the majority supported the majority's opinion, as they were decided narrowly and the facts in each case were so unlike the facts in the instant case that they were inapplicable.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 172-176. The dissent agreed that it is often difficult to determine whether a tax is laid on a company's general operations (which is valid) or on the specific transaction with the federal government (which is not valid), the majority's emphasis on the independent contractor nature of the company was misplaced since every private company is an independent contractor to the federal government.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 176-177.
The government had argued that the tax was nondiscriminatory, and so did not unduly burden the federal government more than any buyer of goods and services.  But the dissent pointed out that many taxes invalidated by the Court in the past were universal in nature, and this argument was unavailing.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 178-180.
The government had argued, and the majority had agreed, that the tax was not burdensome. But McReynolds concluded that this flew in the face of all previous precedent: A tax was a tax, no matter how light or heavy, and taxes on the federal government were invalid.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 179-180. While the federal government has the right to waive its immunity, this did not mean that all taxes on the federal government were automatically valid until the government asserted its immunity, McReynolds said.  This was exactly what the majority had implied, and he rejected that argument.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 181-182.
McReynolds found the majority's reliance on the local nature of the transactions unable to support its conclusions. The interstate nature of the transaction (or lack thereof) did not matter; the tax was on the federal government, and none of the Court's previous decisions had distinguished interstate from local commerce.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 182-185.
McReynolds would have overturned the tax as unconstitutional.James v. Dravo Contracting Co., 302 U.S. 134, 186.
 Subsequent developments 
McCulloch v. Maryland, 17 U.S. 316 (1819), was one of the first landmark decisions of the Supreme Court.  The case invalidated a Maryland state tax on bonds issued by the Second Bank of the United States which had not been issued by a Maryland bank.  More importantly, however, the case established two fundamental principles of American constitutional law:  1) The Constitution grants implied powers to the federal government powers which are not explicitly stated in the Constitution but which must be granted to it in order for its explicit powers to be exercised, and 2) States may not impede the federal government in the proper carrying out of its duties.Drahozal, p. 129. Although the Maryland tax was clearly designed to impede the federal government (Maryland had strongly opposed the creation of the Second Bank of the United States), the Supreme Court subsequently extended McCulloch over the next century to all taxes imposed on the federal government—whether they impeded the federal government or not.Drahozal, p. 129-131.Schultz, p. 381. The Court fashioned what came to be known as the "economic incidence test," under which any state tax that placed any economic burden whatsoever on the federal government was constitutionally invalid.Drahozal, p. 130-131.
McCulloch v. Maryland and Osborn v. Bank of the United States, 22 U.S. 738 (1824), had both established that states could not levy taxes on the federal government.Brauch, p. 13. But James v. Dravo Contracting Co. established the "legal incidence test," under which the economic impact of the tax was not the critical point but whether the tax was levied statutorily on the federal government or not. In Dravo, the Court for the first time held that the state taxes were constitutionally permissible so long as the tax was laid on an instrumentality of the federal government (such as a contractor) or was only indirectly affected economically (e.g., the tax raised the cost of materials).
The Supreme Court's upholding of the West Virginia tax in James v. Dravo Contracting Co. would later be expanded to state income taxes on federal workers in Graves v. New York ex rel. O'Keefe 306 U.S. 466 (1939),Emanuel, p. 98. state sales taxes in Alabama v. King & Boozer, 314 U.S. 1 (1941), and use taxes in Curry v. United States, 314 U.S. 14 (1941).Drahozal, p. 132-133. Both cases also  used the "legal incidence test." The Supreme Court also later expanded the rationale for upholding state taxes on companies doing business with the federal government in two cases.  In United States v. Detroit, 355 U.S. 473 (1958), the Court held that private, for-profit companies should not gain tax-exempt status merely because they do business with the federal government.Ballati, p. 15—25.Drahozal, p. 133. And in United States v. New Mexico, 455 U.S. 720 (1982), the Court enunciated a general policy of upholding taxes against private parties doing business with the federal government absent a specific constitutional or legislative mandate.
However, in Kern-Limerick, Inc. v. Scurlock, 347 U.S. 110 (1954), the Supreme Court held that when a contractor was merely the federal government's purchasing agent, the legal incidence of the tax fell on the United States and hence the tax was invalid. Further rulings by the Supreme Court, however, indicated that Kern-Limerick has extremely limited implications for Supremacy Clause jurisprudence and the ruling is limited to the facts in that case.Drahozal, p. 135. States countered by imposing use taxes on corporations instead, and the Supreme Court upheld such taxes in United States v. Boyd, 378 U.S. 39 (1964.) The Court also held in United States v. California, 507 U.S. 746 (1993), that the mere fact that the United States reimburses a contractor for payment of state taxes does not violate the legal incidence test.
The "legal incidence test" has had important repercussions for case law governing Native American tribes.  The Supreme Court has repeatedly affirmed that states have no power to tax Native American tribes or their members on tribal lands.Duthu, p. 122. The Court has upheld such taxes only when they fall on non-Indians or Indians who are not tribal members and who are on tribal land, or if the tax is otherwise supported by federal law (such as federal taxes on cigarettes or motor fuels).
References
Sources
 Ballati, Deborah. Privatizing Governmental Functions. New York: Law Journal Press, 2001.
 Barsh, Russel Lawrence and Henderson, James Youngblood. The Road: Indian Tribes and Political Liberty. Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press, 1980.
 Brauch, John J. "Immunity of Military Exchanges From Federal, State and Local Taxes." United States Air Force JAG Law Review. 9:2 (March–April 1967).
 CCH Incorporated. U.S. Master Sales and Use Tax Guide. Chicago, Ill.: CCH, 2008.
 Drahozal, Christopher R. The Supremacy Clause: A Reference Guide to the United States Constitution. Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 2004.
 Duthu, N. Bruce. American Indians and the Law. New York: Viking, 2008.
 Ely, Jr., James W. Reform and Regulation of Property Rights. Reprint ed. Florence, Ky.: Routledge, 1997.
 Emanuel, Steven. Constitutional Law. New York: Aspen Publishers, 2008.
 Jackson, Percival E. Dissent in the Supreme Court: A chronology. Norman, Okla.: University of Oklahoma Press, 1969.
 Schultz, David A. Encyclopedia of the United States Constitution. New York: Facts On File, 2009.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1937 in United States case law
Category:Supremacy Clause case law
Category:Taxation in West Virginia
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
"""

From "James v. Illinois" ==> """
James v. Illinois, 493 U.S. 307 (1990), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court forbade the admission of evidence obtained in violation of the Fourth Amendment for the use of impeaching statements made by a defense witness. 
Background
On August 30, 1982, a group of eight boys was confronted by another group of boys who demanded money. The group of eight refused and was fired upon, resulting in the death of one boy and injury to another. After police arrived on the scene the group of eight acted as witnesses by recounting their experience to the police. Darryl James was eventually brought into custody as a suspect. He was arrested in his mother's beauty salon. The police questioned him about his hair color to which he responded that although his hair was currently black and curly it had previously been reddish-brown and slicked back. After arriving at the police station James was again questioned and he then told police he changed his hair color to alter his appearance.
James was eventually indicted for murder and attempted murder. James attempted to suppress the statements he had previously made about his hair as being "fruit of the poisonous tree" obtained in violation of the Fourth Amendment, as there had been no probable cause for his arrest.
Lower courts
At trial the state's witnesses testified that the shooter had reddish hair that was slicked back. Each witness also identified James from weeks prior where they admitted he met the description, although one witness, Henderson, said James' hair was black on that day. Although James objected to the testimony, the trial court allowed James' statements regarding his hair to impeach Henderson, and James was subsequently convicted.
The Illinois Appellate Court reversed the conviction, holding that James' statements should have been suppressed as "fruit of the poisonous tree", even to impeach Henderson. The Illinois Supreme Court reversed this decision, holding that there was no Fourth Amendment violation and thereby reinstating the murder conviction.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Brennan delivered the opinion of the Court in a 5–4 decision in favor of James, reversing both his conviction and the decision of the Illinois Supreme Court. He noted that James' statements could not be used in a court of law and that the Illinois Supreme Court "wrongly expanded the practice" of illegally obtaining evidence to impeach a defendant's own testimony. Justice Brennan noted that this expansion "would frustrate rather than further the purposes underlying the exclusionary rule.".
 References 
External links
Category:1990 in United States case law
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "James v. United States (1961)" ==> """
James v. United States, 366 U.S. 213 (1961), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that the receipt of money obtained by a taxpayer illegally was taxable income even though the law might require the taxpayer to repay the ill-gotten gains to the person from whom they had been taken.James v. United States, .
Facts
The defendant, Eugene James, was an official in a labor union who had embezzled more than $738,000 in union funds, and did not report the amounts on his tax return. He was tried for tax evasion and claimed in his defense that embezzled funds were not taxable income. His argument was that just as the receipt of loan proceeds is not taxable to the borrower because of the borrower's corresponding obligation to repay the loan, the person who embezzles money should not be treated as having received income since that person is legally required to return those funds to their rightful owner.
Indeed, Eugene James pointed out that the Supreme Court had made such a determination in Commissioner v. Wilcox.. However, the defense was unavailing in the trial court, which Eugene James and sentenced him to three years in prison.
Issue
The Supreme Court was called upon to determine whether the receipt of embezzled funds was income taxable to the wrongdoer, despite an obligation to repay.
Holding
The Supreme Court ruled that under section 22(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1939 and section 61(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954,I.R.C. § 61(a) (). the receipt of embezzled funds was included in the gross income of the wrongdoer and was taxable to the wrongdoer even though the wrongdoer was required to return the funds to the rightful owner.
Rationale
The Court was divided between several different rationales. The majority opinion was written by Chief Justice Earl Warren, joined by Justices Brennan and Stewart. That opinion held that if a taxpayer receives income legally or illegally without consensual recognition of obligation to repay, the income is taxable.
The Court noted that the scope of the Sixteenth Amendment was not limited to "lawful" income, a distinction that had been found in the Revenue Act of 1913. The absence of the "lawful" modifier indicated that the framers of the Sixteenth Amendment had intended no safe harbor for illegal income. The Court expressly overruled Commissioner v. Wilcox and ruled that James was liable for the federal income tax that was due on his embezzled funds. The Court also ruled, however, that Eugene James could not be held liable for the willful tax evasion because it is not possible to violate laws willfully that were not established at the time of the violation.
Concurrences and dissents
Justice Whittaker, joined by Justice Black and Justice Douglas, wrote an opinion concurring in the dismissal of the indictment against James but dissenting from the overruling of Wilcox. Justice Black raised an argument on federalism that the ruling was a preemption of state criminal jurisdiction.
Justice Harlan, joined by Justice Frankfurter, wrote an opinion concurring with the overruling of Wilcox but contending that James should have been set for a new trial, rather than set free of criminal liability. Justice Clark wrote a brief concurrence, also agreeing with the overruling of Wilcox but also stating that James's conviction should have been upheld.
Aftermath
Although Eugene James avoided criminal liability, the Supreme Court left James in a situation In which he would be required not only to repay the embezzled $738,000 to the union but also to pay federal income taxes on the receipt of those funds, just as if he had been able to keep them.
See also
Taxation of illegal income in the United States
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 366
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1961 in United States case law
Category:Embezzlement
"""

From "James v. United States (2007)" ==> """
James v. United States, 550 U.S. 192 (2007), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States that held that attempted burglary could serve as a predicate felony under the federal Armed Career Criminal Act (ACCA), which provided that a person convicted of being a felon in possession of a firearm with three prior convictions for either serious drug offenses or violent felonies must be sentenced to a mandatory minimum 15-year prison term.
 Background 
Alphonso James pleaded guilty to one count of being a felon in possession of a firearm and admitted having three prior felony convictions, including one for attempted burglary of a dwelling under Florida law. The Government argued for the mandatory 15-year sentence available under the Armed Career Criminal Act because the attempted burglary count is a "violent felony" under the ACCA.  The district court and the Eleventh Circuit agreed.  James asked the U.S. Supreme Court to review the case, and it agreed to do so.
Majority opinion
The statutory scheme
Under the Armed Career Criminal Act (ACCA),
In the case of a person who [is convicted of being a felon in possession of a firearm] and has three previous convictions by any court... for a violent felony or a serious drug offense, or both, committed on occasions different from one another, such person shall be... imprisoned not less than fifteen years.  
A "violent felony" is
any crime punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year, or any act of juvenile delinquency involving the use or carrying of a firearm, knife, or destructive device that would be punishable by imprisonment for such term if committed by an adult, that—
 has as an element the use, attempted use, or threatened use of physical force against the person of another; or
 is burglary, arson, or extortion, involves use of explosives, or otherwise involves conduct that presents a serious potential risk of  physical injury to another.
At the time of James's crime, Florida law defined "burglary" as "entering or remaining in a structure or a conveyance with the intent to commit an offense therein, unless the premises are at the time open to the public or the defendant is licensed or invited to enter or remain."  Florida law also defined an "attempt" as requiring the defendant to commit "any act toward the commission of" the target offense.
The attempted burglary did not qualify under the first prong of the definition of "violent felony", since it did not involve the use of force against any person.  And it was not any of the enumerated offenses in the second prong—it was not robbery or extortion, and it did not involve the use of explosives.  Attempted burglary did not satisfy the categorical definition of burglary set forth in Taylor v. United States, , because it did not involve an actual entry into or remaining in a building.  (If it did, it would not be attempted burglary; the crime of burglary would be complete.)  
The question in this case was therefore very narrow:  Was attempted burglary a crime that "otherwise involves conduct that presents a serious potential risk of physical injury to another"?
Attempt is not categorically excluded
James first argued that no attempt crime at all could qualify as posing a serious potential risk of injury.  Because the first prong of the definition included the word "attempt", if Congress had meant for the catch-all provision in the second prong to include attempts it would have said so expressly.  But the Court pointed out that the second prong had a catchall prong, whereas the first did not, and thus it was necessary to determine which crimes fit inside that catchall group.  An expansive phrasing could not be specific and limited.
James also argued that, by the statutory canon of ejusdem generis, the catchall phrase should be read to include only completed crimes because the other crimes listed were completed crimes.  This was not so, the Court reasoned, because the category of crimes involving explosives was not limited to completed crimes.  "In any event, the most relevant common attribute of the enumerated offenses of burglary, arson, extortion, and explosives is not 'completion'.  Rather, it is that all of these offenses, while not technically crimes against the person, nevertheless create significant risks of bodily injury or confrontation that might result in bodily injury".  The broad residual provision was meant to sweep up other crimes that, like burglary, arson, extortion, and explosives offenses, posed a serious risk of physical injury to others.
Legislative history
When Congress was debating in 1984 the bill that became ACCA, it considered expressly including attempt as a predicate offense that would trigger the 15-year sentence.  But when it ultimately passed the bill in 1986, Congress had dropped the word "attempt", opting to define "violent felony" as either "robbery or burglary, or both".  The Court did not find this history probative, because Congress intended to expand the predicate crimes in its 1986 enactment, and it used broad language in order to achieve this goal.
Attempted burglary under the residual clause
The Court next considered the crucial question—whether attempted burglary, as defined by Florida law, involved conduct that presented a serious risk of physical injury to another person.  Under the categorical approach of Taylor, the Court could only look to the elements of the crime to answer the question.  Although, on the face of Florida's attempt statute, it appeared that "any act toward the commission" of the burglary would render the defendant guilty of attempted burglary, the Florida Supreme Court had narrowed the scope of the statute to require that the defendant take some "overt act directed toward entering or remaining in a structure or conveyance".  "The main risk of burglary arises not from the simple physical act of wrongfully entering onto another's property, but rather from the face-to-face confrontation between the burglar and a third party—whether an occupant, a police officer, or a bystander—who comes to investigate.  That is, the risk arises not from the completion of the burglary, but from the possibility that an innocent person might appear while the crime is in progress".  Viewed from this perspective, the only difference between completed burglary and attempted burglary under Florida law was the fact that, in an attempted burglary, the would-be burglar was caught before entering the building he sought to invade.
To be sure, some attempted burglaries might not pose a realistic risk of confrontation to anyone, as when the target of the attempted burglary was an unoccupied building.  But the definition of "violent felony" in ACCA was couched in terms of probabilities, and those probabilities had to be measured against the probability of harm entailed in a completed burglary, because that crime was explicitly included in the definition of "violent felony".  And in any event, the categorical approach of Taylor does not require that every conceivable factual pattern covered by a statute must present a serious risk of physical injury before the offense is a "violent felony".  It is enough that the conduct described by the elements of the offense would, in the ordinary case, present a serious risk of injury.
Dissenting opinions
Justice Scalia's dissent
Justice Scalia, joined by Justice Stevens and Justice Ginsburg, faulted the Court's opinion for failing to "provide guidance concrete enough to ensure that the ACCA residual provision will be applied with an acceptable degree of consistency by the hundreds of district judges that impose sentences every day".  How should these judges know whether burglary, arson, or extortion is the most analogous to the crime of which the defendant had been previously convicted?  What if none of these three was most analogous, as would be the case for a prior conviction for driving under the influence?  Such vagueness could not be tolerated, Scalia argued.
Scalia argued that a better way to determine whether a prior conviction qualified as a "crime of violence" under the residual provision would be to see whether it posed at least as much risk of injury as the enumerated crime that posed the least such risk.  That crime could not be arson or the explosives crime, and so Scalia was left with burglary or extortion.  In Taylor the Court ruled that "burglary" in the ACCA's definition of "violent felony" had a generic meaning—unlawful or unprivileged entry into or remaining in a building or structure with the intent to commit a crime.  Scalia posited a generic definition of extortion:  obtaining something of value from another with his consent induced by the wrongful use or threatened use of force.  As between the two, burglary posed less of an inherent risk of harm because it did not, by definition, in its generic sense, involve the use of force.  "The burglar may be prepared to flee at the first sign of human presence", after all.
Having concluded that burglary was the least dangerous of the four crimes, Scalia contended that attempted burglary was less risky than completed burglary.  By definition, in a completed burglary, the burglar has entered the building, where the closer proximity of prowler and victim increases the likelihood that injury will result from any confrontation between the two.  "The so-called 'confrontation' the Court envisions between a would-be burglar and a third party while the burglar is still outside the home is likely to consist of nothing more than the occupant's yelling 'Who's there?' from his window, and the burglar's running away".  The danger posed by burglary arises from the fact that the burglar has entered the building, and thus attempted burglary is categorically less dangerous than completed burglary.
Justice Thomas's dissent
Justice Thomas reiterated his view that the Sixth Amendment required a jury to determine the facts of the prior convictions that supported the ACCA sentence beyond a reasonable doubt.
Case law
Past case law about attempt or impossibility include People v. Lee Kong (Cal., 1892), State v. Mitchell (Mo., 1902) and United States v. Thomas (U.S.C.M.A, 1962).
External links
  Transcript of oral argument
  Brief of petitioner James
  Brief of the Government
  Opinion of the 11th Circuit
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:Void for vagueness case law
Category:Armed Career Criminal Act case law
Category:Attempt
"""

From "Jamison v. Texas" ==> """
Jamison v. State of Texas, 318 U.S. 413 (1943), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a Dallas city ordinance, which prohibited distribution of handbills on the streets, violated the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment because the material being distributed is religious in its nature..
 Facts of the case 
Jamison, a member of the Jehovah's Witnesses, was charged with distributing handbills on the streets of Dallas, Texas, in violation of an ordinance of that city which prohibits their distribution. She was convicted in the Corporation Court of Dallas, and appealed to the County Criminal Court where, after a new trial, she was again convicted and a fine of $5.00 and costs was imposed.
Decision of the Court
Justice Black delivered the opinion of the Court: "The state can prohibit the use of the street for the distribution of purely commercial leaflets, even though such leaflets may have 'a civic appeal, or a moral platitude' appended.  They may not prohibit the distribution of handbills in the pursuit of a clearly religious activity merely because the handbills invite the purchase of books for the improved understanding of the religion or because the handbills seek in a lawful fashion to promote the raising of funds for religious purposes."
 See also 
 Largent v. Texas: A similar case in Paris, Texas
References
External links
Category:1943 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:History of Dallas
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
Category:1943 in religion
"""

From "Janus Capital Group, Inc. v. First Derivative Traders" ==> """
Janus Capital Group, Inc. v. First Derivative Traders, 564 U.S. 135 (2011), was a case before the Supreme Court of the United States in which the Court held that a service provider cannot be held liable in a private action under SEC Rule 10b-5.Janus Capital Group v. First Derivative Traders United States Supreme Court, Syllabus p. 1, 
"Held: Because the false statements included in the prospectuses were
made by Janus Investment Fund, not by JCM, JCM and JCG cannot
be held liable in a private action under Rule 10b–5."
 References 
External links
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Janus v. AFSCME" ==> """
Janus v. American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees, Council 31, No. 16-1466, 585 U.S. ___ (2018), abbreviated Janus v. AFSCME, was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court on US labor law, concerning the power of labor unions to collect fees from non-union members. Under the Taft–Hartley Act of 1947, which applies to the private sector, union security agreements can be allowed by state law. The Supreme Court ruled that such union fees in the public sector violate the First Amendment right to free speech, overturning the 1977 decision in Abood v. Detroit Board of Education that had previously allowed such fees.
 Background 
Abood v. Detroit Board of Education
The National Labor Relations Act of 1935 authorized trade unions in the private sector to be established to represent employees in collective bargaining for wages and other benefits from employers. Frequently, unions also engage in political activity to support their goals by donating to political campaigns. These activities are paid for through fees and dues collected from its members. Some unions are also able to collect fees from non-members in the same workplace through agency shop or union equity agreements. For unions within the public sector (unions that include members working for state and local governments), which are governed by individual state laws, the use of such agreements had been previously allowed by the Supreme Court in Abood v. Detroit Board of Education, , which determined that as long as such dues collected from non-members were used only for the union's purposes of collective bargaining, contract administration, and grievance adjustment, it did not violate the non-members' First Amendment rights. It was also determined in Marquez v. Screen Actors Guild Inc., , that private-sector unions have a duty of fair representation to all workers in a bargaining unit under the National Labor Relations Act, and that unions were allowed to negotiate agreements which state that "membership" was required as a condition of continued employment, even though the Taft-Hartley Act of 1947 had outlawed agreements requiring formal union membership. About 22 states have unions with these collective agreements in place that apply to their public sector workers.
Challenges to Abood
Since about 2006, with the appointment of Justice Samuel Alito, which gave the Court a conservative advantage, groups opposing agency fees, such as the National Right to Work Legal Defense Foundation, have brought cases challenging Abood. These groups contended that within the public sector all union activities could be considered political, since they ultimately seek to influence government policy, and thus violate the First Amendment.
In 2012, the Supreme Court ruled in Knox v. Service Employees International Union, Local 1000, , which considered a "Temporary Special Assessment to Create a Political Fight-Back Fund" imposed upon a class of 42,000 State of California employees who were nonmembers, the Court held that a union had violated their rights by collecting fees in the absence of the notice and procedural requirements of Teachers Local No. 1 v. Hudson, 475 U.S. 292 (1986). While the case did not directly challenge Abood, the Court called into question the continued viability of Abood, as well as an earlier decision, Machinists v. Street, 367 U.S. 740 (1961), stating that "dissent is not to be presumed—it must affirmatively be made known to the union by the dissenting employee", which has been used by unions to justify payment of full union dues from nonmembers who do not, in addition to remaining nonmembers, object to paying fees equal to full union dues.
In 2014, the Supreme Court ruled in Harris v. Quinn, , which considered the validity of an agency fee policy affecting home health care workers receiving public funds in the state of Illinois; the Court held that the health care workers were not public-sector employees and thus could not be required to pay agency fees. While the Court did not rule directly on the First Amendment challenges to Abood in this decision, the majority opinion questioned the validity of Abood. Justice Alito, writing for the Court, stated in the decision from Harris that within the public sector, every activity of a public sector union could be considered political. "In the public sector, core issues such as wages, pensions, and benefits are important political issues, but that is generally not so in the private sector.  ...  [A]s state and local expenditures on employee wages and benefits have mushroomed, the importance of the difference between bargaining in the public and private sectors has been driven home."
Procedural history
The immediate case began in 2015 when newly-elected Illinois governor Bruce Rauner took office. Rauner had run on an anti-union platform, and once in office, he issued an executive order that suspended collection of agency fees from non-union members who benefitted from a contract negotiated by the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME), which represented Illinois public sector employees. Rauner also preemptively filed a lawsuit in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois against the AFSCME to challenge agency shop agreements as unconstitutional violations of the First Amendment. (Case 15-C-1235). Rauner used the decision from Harris to support these actions, arguing that agency-shop agreements violate nonmembers' right to free speech. Rauner's executive order and comptroller instructions were challenged by AFSCME and other unions.
In Rauner's federal case, the unions sought to dismiss the case, claiming he had no standing. In May 2015, the District Court judge found that Rauner lacked sufficient standing to issue the challenge, as he had "no personal interest at stake." Three state employees attempted to join the suit as co-plaintiffs, but the judge denied this order. Instead, the judge allowed the case to continue with the three employees as the sole plaintiffs. These employees included Mark Janus, an Illinois child support specialist, who had contested the fees.
Janus claimed that he should not need to pay fees to AFSCME because doing so constitutes paying for political speech with which Janus disagrees. Under Illinois law, state government can require its employees to pay fees to a government union as a condition of employment. In March 2015, the three government employees represented by attorneys from the Illinois-based Liberty Justice Center and Virginia-based National Right to Work Legal Defense Foundation took legal action to intervene in the case. In May 2015, after Rauner was dropped from the case, it proceeded under the name Janus v. AFSCME.
Meanwhile, the case of Friedrichs v. California Teachers Ass'n, , had been working its way to the Supreme Court, which dealt with a similar complaint. In July 2015, after Friedrichs had been issued certiorari by the Supreme Court, the Illinois suit was put on hold pending Friedrichs. The Supreme Court  heard the case, which challenged the Ninth's Circuit's decision affirming Abood. Before the Court could issue the decision, however, Justice Antonin Scalia died in February 2016, and the case was decided 4–4, leaving in place the Ninth Circuit decision. Observers believed that the Court would have likely ruled against agency fees based on the progression of the case.
With no decision from Friedrichs, the Illinois cases were restarted. A new complaint was filed by Janus and other plaintiffs, alleging that the fees they paid under an agency-shop agreement violated their First Amendment rights. The unions sought to dismiss the case, arguing that Abood was settled law. The District Court dismissed the case. On appeal in May 2017, the Seventh Circuit affirmed the District Court's ruling to dismiss the case on the basis of Abood. (16-3638).
 Supreme Court 
On April 10, 2017, Neil Gorsuch was appointed to succeed the late Justice Antonin Scalia. Justice Gorsuch was widely expected to side with conservative bloc, who ruled against the unions in Friedrichs.  Observers believed that based on the past deliberations, the decisions in Harris and Friedrichs, and Gorsuch's conservative jurisprudence, Janus would likely prevail before the Supreme Court. Janus petitioned for a writ of certiorari from the Supreme Court, which was granted on September 28, 2017.   The Supreme Court heard the oral argument of the parties on February 26, 2018.
Opinion of the Court
On June 27, 2018, the Court ruled in a 5–4 decision that the application of public sector union fees to non-members is a violation of the First Amendment, ruling against AFSCME. Justice Alito wrote for the Court, joined by Justices Roberts, Kennedy, Thomas, and Gorsuch. Alito wrote that agency-shop agreements violate "the free speech rights of nonmembers by compelling them to subsidize private speech on matters of substantial public concern." Alito recognized that losing these fees would put a financial burden on the public sector unions, who would continue to have to represent nonmembers even without their agency fees, but stated that "we must weigh these disadvantages against the considerable windfall that unions have received." In the decision, the Court held that the conclusion reached by Abood was inconsistent with the First Amendment and thus overruled that decision.
Dissent
Justice Elena Kagan wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justices Ginsburg, Breyer, and Sotomayor. Kagan criticized the majority opinion as one that "overthrows a decision [Abood] entrenched in this nation's law — and in its economic life — for over 40 years." Justice Sotomayor wrote her own separate dissent, critical of the weight given to First Amendment protections that had been established in Sorrell v. IMS Health Inc.,  and subsequently used by the Court in cases like National Institute of Family and Life Advocates v. Becerra, .
Subsequent developments
Public-sector union officials predicted that they would lose 10 to 30 percent of their members and tens of millions of dollars in revenue in the states that would be affected. The nation's two largest public sector unions lost the vast majority of agency-fee payers after the ruling. American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees went from 112,233 agency-fee payers to 2,215 (a 98% decline) while Service Employees International Union went from 104,501 to 5,812 (94%), as per 2018 filings. However, there was little change in numbers of dues-paying members, and AFSCME retained 94% of members and agency-fee payers.Eric Boehm (April 9, 2019). After the Supreme Court Said Unions Can’t Force Non-Members to Pay Dues, Almost All of Them Stopped. Reason.com, accessed 11 April 2019
Following the Supreme Court ruling, Mark Janus left his job with the state of Illinois to join the Illinois Policy Institute, a conservative think tank that funded his case.
Professionals in other fields have raised legal challenges to mandatory dues. For example, attorneys in Wisconsin have challenged the "integrated bar" requirement in their state, which (like more than half of US states) requires all practicing attorneys to be dues-paying members of the state bar association, under the same reasoning as Janus. The case, Jarchow v. State Bar of Wisconsin, was initially dismissed by the Western District Court of Wisconsin. The 7th Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the District Court's decisions and the plaintiffs subsequently appealed this case to the Supreme Court, where their writ of certiorari was denied on June 1, 2020, over the dissents of Justices Thomas and Gorsuch.https://www.supremecourt.gov/orders/courtorders/060120zor_g3bi.pdf 
Award to Janus opposed
Janus received the Whittaker Chambers Award from the National Review Institute – an award opposed by the family of Whittaker Chambers, which caused the NRI to discontinue the award two years after its creation.
 See also 
United States labor law
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
 Franchise Tax Board of California v. Hyatt (2019)
 Knick v. Township of Scott, Pennsylvania (2019)
 Notes 
 References 
 External links 
 Case page at SCOTUSblog
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees
Category:United States public employment trade union case law
"""

From "Jarecki v. G.D. Searle & Co." ==> """
Jarecki v. G.D. Searle & Co., 367 U.S. 303 (1961), was a U.S. Supreme Court case.
Jarecki is an example of the maxim noscitur a sociis—a word is known by the company it keeps.  The Court noted that noscitur a sociis is not an inescapable rule.  It further noted that the maxim is often wisely applied where a word is capable of many meanings.  The reason that it is applied in the case of many meanings is that it avoids giving unintended breadth to Acts of Congress.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 367
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1961 in United States case law
"""

From "Jefferson Parish Hospital District No. 2 v. Hyde" ==> """
Jefferson Parish Hospital District No. 2 v. Hyde, 466 U.S. 2 (1984), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held the analysis of the tying issue must focus on the hospital's sale of services to its patients, rather than its contractual arrangements with the providers of anesthesiological services. 
In making that analysis, consideration must be given to whether petitioners are selling two separate products that may be tied together, and, if so, whether they have used their market power to force their patients to accept the tying arrangement. It set a permissive precedent in antitrust law, as some viewed tying as always anticompetitive.
 Rationale 
Any inquiry into the validity of a tying arrangement must focus on the market or markets in which the two products are sold, for that is where the anticompetitive forcing has its impact. Thus, in this case, the analysis of the tying issue must focus on the hospital's sale of services to its patients, rather than its contractual arrangements with the providers of anesthesiological services. In making that analysis, consideration must be given to whether petitioners are selling two separate products that may be tied together, and, if so, whether they have used their market power to force their patients to accept the tying arrangement.
There is no evidence that the price, quality, or supply or demand for either the "tying product" or the "tied product" has been adversely affected by the exclusive contract, and no showing that the market as a whole has been affected at all by the contract. The case invokes the Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914, a notable piece of antitrust legislation.
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:Jefferson Parish, Louisiana
Category:Hospitals in Louisiana
Category:1984 in United States case law
"""

From "Jencks v. United States" ==> """
Jencks v. United States, 353 U.S. 657 (1957), is a decision of the U.S. Supreme Court in which the court held that the federal government must produce documents relied upon by government witnesses in federal criminal proceedings.
The petitioner, Clinton Jencks appealed, by certiorari, his conviction in a federal district court of violating 18 U.S.C. 1001 by filing, under 9 (h) of the National Labor Relations Act, as president of a labor union, an affidavit stating falsely that he was not a member of the Communist Party or affiliated with such Party.  Crucial testimony against him was given by two paid undercover agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who stated on cross-examination that they made regular oral or written reports to the FBI on the matters about which they had testified.
Jencks moved for production of these reports in court for inspection by the judge with a view to their possible use by the petitioner in impeaching such testimony.  His motions were denied.
Jencks appealed this issue by petitioning the U.S. Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari. The Court held that the denial of the motions for production of the documents was erroneous, and the conviction was reversed..
Issues
1.) The Court was asked to rule on the appropriateness of the Government withholding documents or statements made by, or relied upon, by government witnesses in federal criminal prosecutions.
2.)  Further error was alleged because the jury had not been instructed on the affiliation, membership, and the credibility of the government informants who testified at trial against Jencks.
Holdings
(a.) The Petitioner was not required to lay a preliminary foundation for his motion, showing inconsistency between the contents of the reports and the testimony of the government agents, because a sufficient foundation was established by their testimony that their reports were of the events and activities related in their testimony.Jencks, 353 U.S. at 666-668 (citing ).
(b.) Petitioner was entitled to an order directing the Government to produce for inspection all written reports of FBI agents in its possession, and, when orally made and recorded by the FBI, statements bearing upon events and activities as to which they testified at trial.Jencks, 353 U.S. at 668.
(c.)  Petitioner is entitled to inspect the reports to decide whether to use them in his defense.Jencks, 353 U.S. at 668-669.
(d.)  The practice of producing government documents to the trial judge for his determination of relevancy and materiality, without a hearing involving the accused, is disapproved.Jencks, 353 U.S. at 669.
(e.)  Only after inspection of the reports by the accused, must the trial judge determine admissibility of the contents and the method to be employed for the elimination of parts immaterial or irrelevant.
(f.)  Criminal action must be dismissed when the Government, on the ground of privilege, elects not to comply with an order to produce, for the accused's inspection and for admission in evidence, relevant statements or reports in its possession of government witnesses touching the subject matter of their testimony at trial.Jencks, 353 U.S. at 669-672.
(g.)  The burden is the Government's, not to be shifted to the trial judge, to decide whether the public prejudice of allowing the crime to go unpunished is greater than that attendant upon the possible disclosure of state secrets and other confidential information in the Government's possession.Jencks, 353 U.S. at 672.
(h.)  The proper remedy in cases which the Government chooses not to disclose or produce documents it deems sensitive, or wants to keep private for security reasons is dismissal of the criminal charges..
Facts and background
On April 28, 1950, the petitioner Jencks, who was president of the  Amalgamated Bayard District Union, Local 890, International Union of Mine, Mill & Smelter Workers, filed an "Affidavit of Non-Communist Union Officer" with the National Labor Relations Board, pursuant to 9 (h) of the National Labor Relations Act.61 Stat. 143, 146, as amended, 65 Stat. 602, 29 U. S. C. 159 (h).  He was convicted under a two-count indictment Jencks, 353 U.S. at 659.  charging  that he violated 18 U. S. C. 1001 62 Stat. 749 by falsely swearing in that affidavit that he was not on April 28, 1950, a member of the Communist Party or affiliated with such Party. The Court of Appeals of the Fifth Circuit affirmed the conviction 226 F.2d 540 and also an order of the District Court denying the petitioner's motion for a new trial.226 F. 2nd 553 The United States Supreme Court granted certiorari..
Two errors in the trial were alleged.  Harvey Matusow and J. W. Ford, the Government's principal witnesses, were Communist Party members paid by the FBI contemporaneously to make oral or written reports of the Communist Party activities in which they participated.  They made such reports to the FBI of activities allegedly participated in by the petitioner, Jencks, about which they testified at the trial.  Error is asserted by the trial judge of the petitioner's motions to direct the Government to produce these reports for inspection and use in cross-examining Matusow and Ford.  Error is also alleged in the instructions given to the jury on membership, affiliation and the credibility of the informers.
Former Party members testified they and the petitioner, as members of the Communist Party of New Mexico, had been expressly instructed to conceal their membership and not to carry membership cards.  They also testified the Party kept no membership records or minutes of membership meetings, and  such meetings were secretly arranged and clandestinely held.  One of the witnesses said that special care was taken to conceal the Party membership of members like the petitioner.Jencks, 353 U.S. at 660.  It was stated at trial, "occupying strategic and important positions in labor unions and other organizations where public knowledge of their membership to non-Communists would jeopardize their position in the organization", had been a goal of the Communist Party of the United States.
Because of this, the Government did not attempt to prove Jencks was an actual member of the Communist Party.  Instead, the prosecution relied on entirely circumstantial evidence.  Matusow testified he had conversations with the petitioner, concerning his activities in the Communist Party.  The Government also attached an Affidavit of Non-Communist Union Officer in which the petitioner had affirmed that he was not a member of the Communist Party.
Further testimony indicated the petitioner, who was a World War II veteran had encouraged Communist Party members to join various veteran groups in the United States with the intent of converting them to the Communist cause.  This was alleged to have occurred in 1946.
Later in 1946, Jencks was employed in the International Union of Mine, Mill & Smelter Workers as business agent for several local unions in the Silver City-Bayard, New Mexico area.  It was testified one of the first acts Jencks performed as a union official was to meet with the Communist Party organizer for the area.  The plan was to move the Amalgamated Union Local 890 into the Communist Party.
J. W. Ford was a member of the Communist Party of New Mexico from 1946 to September 1950, holding important positions within the Party.  In 1948, he testified he became a paid informant for the FBI. He was paid approximately  $3,325 for his services during the time covered in the Jencks trial.
It was planned that Jencks would run for Congress on the Progressive Party ticket in 1948.  It was also anticipated that the Mexican-American Association of Phoenix would be infiltrated and converted to the Communist cause.Jencks, 353 U.S. at 662.  Attempts would be made of a similar nature in the Mexican-American Association of Albuquerque.
Ford's duties in the Party were to report "any particular defections from the Communist philosophy or any peculiar actions, statements or associations which would endanger the Communist Party of the state."  If a defection reported was considered important, the member "would be called in and would be either severely reprimanded or expelled."  Ford later quit the Party without apparent reprisal.
The testimony indicated there had been competing interests in the labor union, in which certain members had wanted to end all affiliation with any Communist organization. Party members were instructed to not carry membership cards and deny any association with the Communist Party.  It was in this  context that Jencks filled out the affidavit required by the Taft-Hartley Act testifying that he was not a member of the Communist Party.  General instructions from the Party were to not sign the affidavit, at all.
Harvey Matusow was a member of the Communist Party of New York and was a paid undercover agent of the FBI.  In July or August 1950, he traveled to New Mexico where he met with Jencks.  He testified that Jencks was excited that Matsuow might relocate to New Mexico.  At trial, he testified Jencks said, "we can use you out here, we need more active Party members."  Jencks, 353 U.S. at 664.   Subsequently, Matusow began programs in New Mexico to applaud the Soviet Union for disarming, denouncing the United States as the aggressor in Korea, and calling for world peace.  He and Jencks discussed ways to slow down the war effort in Korea by strikes at New Mexico mines.
At trial, Ford and Matusow were subjected to vigorous cross-examination.  A request for documents they had relied upon for testimony was denied without explanation by the trial judge.
Majority Opinion by Brennan
Mr. Justice William J. Brennan delivered the decision of the Court. 
Aftermath of the decision
thumb|right|Clinton Jencks starring in Salt of the Earth, a movie based on his story, made in 1954 
In the wake of the decision, the United States Congress enacted legislation that came to be known as the Jencks Act..   It instructs the federal courts, in criminal matters to require production of verbatim transcripts and other notes or documents related to testimony by government agents, employees or witnesses.  The request for the production of such documents must be made by the defendant.  Production is required only after the witnesses have testified and are not generally available in pre-trial hearings.  The Jencks Act sometimes corresponds with the requirement in Brady v. Maryland that exculpatory evidence be provided to the defense.  Many federal administrative agencies have incorporated Jencks standards into their procedures.  Most state courts have not.
References
Further reading
 Caballero, Raymond. McCarthyism vs. Clinton Jencks. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 2019.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1957 in United States case law
Category:United States criminal discovery case law
"""

From "Jenkins v. Anderson" ==> """
Jenkins v. Anderson, 447 U.S. 231 (1980), is a United States Supreme Court case regarding the Fifth Amendment  right against self-incrimination.
Holding
The Supreme Court held that a defendant's silence prior to a Miranda warning can be used by the prosecution to imply an admission. In Doyle v. Ohio, the Court held that silence after a Miranda warning cannot be used against the defendant to imply admission to guilt.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 447
Miranda v. Arizona, 
Summary of case from OYEZ
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:1980 in United States case law
"""

From "Jenkins v. Georgia" ==> """
Jenkins v. Georgia, 418 U.S. 153 (1974), was a United States Supreme Court case overturning a Georgia Supreme Court ruling regarding the depiction of sexual conduct in the film Carnal Knowledge.
The changes in the morals of American society of the 1960s and 1970s and the general receptiveness to the public to frank discussion of sexual issues was sometimes at odds with local community standards.  A theatre in Albany, Georgia showed the film. On January 13, 1972, the local police served a search warrant on the theatre, and seized the film. In March 1972, the theatre manager, Mr. Jenkins, was convicted of the crime of "distributing obscene material". His conviction was upheld by the Supreme Court of Georgia.
On June 24, 1974, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the State of Georgia had gone too far in classifying material as obscene in view of the Court's prior landmark decision in Miller v. California,  (the Miller standard), and overturned the conviction. The court said,
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 418
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States obscenity case law
Category:1974 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Georgia (U.S. state)
"""

From "Jennings v. Rodriguez" ==> """
Jennings v. Rodriguez, 583 U.S. ___ (2018), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that detained immigrants do not have a statutory right to periodic bond hearings.
The case was brought about by Mexican citizen and lawful U.S. permanent resident Alex Rodriguez. After a 2004 incident, he was detained on the grounds of 8 U.S.C. 1226, which states that under a warrant by the Attorney General immigrants may be arrested and detained while their case status is decided. Rodriguez challenged this justification in 2007 through habeas corpus, claiming immigrants had the right to a bond hearing without "prolonged" detention according to 8 U.S.C. 1225. The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed his entry deciding detained immigrants had the right to a periodic hearing if one had not already been held after 6 months. 
The Court of Appeal's decision was reversed by the Supreme Court in a plurality opinion after granting a writ of certiorari in June 2016. Justice Samuel Alito wrote for the majority and concluded that no provision of 8 U.S.C. 1225 limits length of detention to six months, or suggests length of detention should be a factor when deciding on release of a detained immigrant..
 References 
External links
 Case page at SCOTUSblog
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:2018 in United States case law
"""

From "Jennings v. The Perseverance" ==> """
Jennings v. The Perseverance, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 336 (1797), was a United States Supreme Court case holding that: "The decision in Wiscart v. Dauchy, (3 P. 321,) confirmed. An objection that counsel fees were allowed in the court below as part of the damages, can not be entertained unless the fact appears by the record. If a prize is sold by agreement, and the money stopped in the hands of the marshal, by a third person, not a party to the agreement, increased damages are not allowed, but only interest on the debt.."Reports of decisions in the Supreme Court of the United States: with notes, and a digest, Volume 1 (Little, Brown, and Co., 1870) pg. 251 https://books.google.com/books?id=NEQPAAAAYAAJ
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Ellsworth Court
Category:1797 in United States case law
"""

From "Jesinoski v. Countrywide Home Loans, Inc." ==> """
Jesinoski v. Countrywide Home Loans, Inc., 574 U.S. 259 (2015), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the Truth in Lending Act does not require borrowers to file a lawsuit to rescind loans and that sending written notice is sufficient to effectuate rescission., slip op. at 5. Some commentators described Justice Antonin Scalia's unanimous majority opinion as "terse" and the "shortest opinion of the year".Ronald Mann, Opinion Analysis: Shortest opinion of the year explains TILA rescission right SCOTUSblog, (Jan. 13, 2015, 4:22 PM). Other analysts have described Jesinoski as a "landmark case" in Truth in Lending Act jurisprudence.Milan Prodanovic, Hiding in Plain Sight: Jesinoski and the Consumer's Right of Rescission, 10 Duke J. Const. L. & Pub. Pol'y 141 (2015).
Background
Truth in Lending Act rescission requirements
In 1968, Congress passed the Truth in Lending Act to help consumers "avoid the uninformed use of credit, and to protect the consumer against inaccurate and unfair credit billing."82 Stat. 146, as amended, 15 U.S.C. § 1601(a). The Act gives borrowers the unconditional right to rescind loans within three days of consummation of the loan, after which they may rescind only if the lender failed to satisfy the Act’s disclosure requirements.Jesinoski, slip op. at 2. However, even if lenders never provide the required disclosures, borrowers only retain the right to rescind loans up to three years after the loan's consummation.Jesinoski, slip op. at 1, 2; see also 15 U.S.C. § 1635(a), (f).
Initial lawsuit
On February 23, 2010, exactly three years after borrowing $611,000 from Countrywide Home Loans, Inc. to refinance the mortgage on their home, Larry and Cheryle Jesinoski mailed a letter to Countrywide to rescind the loan agreement.Jesinoski, slip op. at 1. On March 12, 2010, Bank of America Home Loans sent a reply letter in which they refused to acknowledge the validity of the rescission. The Jesinoskis filed suit in federal district court on February 24, 2011 seeking a declaration of rescission and damages. The district court ruled in favor of Bank of America and concluded that the Truth in Lending Act requires borrowers seeking rescission of a loan to file a lawsuit within three years of consummating the loan.Jesinoski, slip op. at 1–2. Because the Jesinoskis filed their lawsuit four years after the loan's consummation, they were not entitled to rescission of the loan. The United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit upheld the decision of the district court.Jesinoski v. Countrywide Home Loans, Inc., 729 F. 3d 1092, 1093 (2013) (per curiam). The Jesinoskis appealed again, and the Supreme Court granted certiorari on April 28, 2014.Jesinoski v. Countrywide Home Loans, Inc., 134 S. Ct. 1935 (2014) (granting certiorari).
Opinion of the Court
thumb|right|upright|Commentators described Justice Antonin Scalia's unanimous opinion as the "shortest opinion of the year."
Writing for a unanimous court, Justice Antonin Scalia ruled that the Truth in Lending Act does not require borrowers to file a lawsuit to effectuate rescission.Jesinoski, slip op. at 2–3. Justice Scalia stated that the plain language of the act "leaves no doubt that rescission is effected when the borrower notifies the creditor of his intention to rescind," but the act "says nothing about how that right is exercised."Jesinoski, slip op. at 2–3 (internal emphasis omitted). Although common law rules for rescission traditionally required "either that the rescinding party return what he received" or a court's "decree [of] rescission," Justice Scalia concluded that the Act did not adopt these common law requirements.Jesinoski, slip op. at 4–5 (internal citations omitted). Instead, he argued that "[n]othing in our jurisprudence, and no tool of statutory interpretation, requires that a congressional Act must be construed as implementing its closest common-law analogue."Jesinoski, slip op. at 4–5. Consequently, the statute has effectively altered common law practice, and borrowers "need only provide written notice to a lender in order to exercise his right to rescind."
Commentary and analysis
After the Supreme Court issued its opinion, analysts described Jesinoski as a "landmark case" in Truth in Lending Act jurisprudence.Frank A. Hirsch Jr. & Richard A. McAvoy, Life After Jesinoski: The New "Wild West" of TILA Rescission, 18  4 (2015). Other commentators praised the court for "correctly read[ing]" the Truth in Lending Act "to mean what it says." Some analysts also described Justice Scalia's opinion as "terse" and the "shortest opinion of the year" with "only six paragraphs of analysis." Others predicted Justice Scalia's textualist approach in Jesinoski would foreshadow a similar analytic approach for the Court's decision in King v. Burwell.Noah Feldman, : How Scalia Could Kill Obamacare (Accessed July 1, 2015).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 574
Notes
References
Further reading
 Milan Prodanovic, Hiding in Plain Sight: Jesinoski and the Consumer's Right of Rescission, 10 Duke J. Const. L. & Pub. Pol'y 141 (2015).
External links
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Jesner v. Arab Bank, PLC" ==> """
Jesner v. Arab Bank, PLC, No. 16-499, 584 U.S. ___ (2018), was a case from the United States Supreme Court which addressed the issue of corporate liability under the Alien Tort Statute (ATS). Plaintiffs alleged that Arab Bank facilitated terrorist attacks by transferring funds to terrorist groups in the Middle East, some of which passed through Arab Bank's offices in New York City. 
When deciding Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum the Supreme Court avoided the question of corporate liability, and the lower court's holding that ATS did not apply to foreign corporate defendants continued to have force as precedent in the Second Circuit. Accordingly, petitioner's ATS claims were dismissed by the District Court and the Supreme Court granted certiorari.
At issue in this case was whether the ATS allows foreign corporations to be sued in U.S. courts. The Supreme Court held, by a 5–4 vote, that foreign corporations cannot be sued under the Alien Tort Statute.. The majority opinion was written by Justice Anthony Kennedy. 
 Background 
 Factual background 
Petitioners in this case (non-U.S. citizens) alleged that they or their relatives were victims of terrorist attacks in Israel, West Bank, and Gaza between 1995 and 2005. Following these events, they brought suit in U.S. courts against Arab Bank, a major financial institution in the Middle East with its headquarters in Amman, Jordan and over 600 branches around the world. Petitioners claimed that the bank facilitated the terrorist acts that caused injury to themselves and their families by maintaining accounts for terrorists and allowing funds to transfer through the bank to terrorist groups. In order to connect their claims to the U.S.—the location of the lawsuit—petitioners specifically alleged that Arab Bank processed transactions through its New York branch that benefited terrorists, and that the New York branch was used to launder money for a Texas-based charity with purported ties to Hamas.
Petitioners filed five separate lawsuits against Arab Bank in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York under the Alien Tort Statute, which allows foreign nationals to bring civil claims in U.S. federal district court.  The district court dismissed the case based on the Second Circuit's decision in Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum Co. that corporations cannot be sued under the Alien Tort Statute.. Petitioners then appealed this decision to the Second Circuit Court of Appeals, which affirmed the district court's ruling. The Supreme Court granted certiorari in October 2016 to consider whether the Alien Tort Statute allows suits against foreign corporations.
 Legal history of the Alien Tort Statute 
Enacted as part of the Judiciary Act of 1789, the ATS allows foreign nationals to bring lawsuits in U.S. district courts for torts "in violation of the law of nations or a treaty of the United States.". 
The Articles of Confederation did not grant the central government the authority to provide remedies to foreign citizens, which at that time caused substantial tensions in foreign-relations. In order to remedy this problem, the First Congress passed the Judiciary Act of 1789, which included what is now known as the Alien Tort Statute. As it stands, the text of the Alien Tort Statute reads: "The district courts shall have original jurisdiction of any civil action by an alien for a tort only, committed in violation of the law of nations or a treaty of the United States."
Though enacted in 1789, the Alien Tort Statute went largely unused for centuries, until 1980, with the case of Filártiga v. Peña-Irala. In Filártiga, a Paraguayan doctor filed suit in the U.S. against Americo Peña-Irala, a former Paraguayan police supervisor living in New York. The doctor claimed that Peña-Irala supervised and participated in the torture of his son. The case reached the Second Circuit Court of Appeals, where the central question before the court was whether torture was considered a violation of the law of nations, as required under the Alien Tort Statute. In a landmark decision, the Second Circuit found that torture did qualify as a violation of the law of nations and therefore U.S. courts had jurisdiction to decide the case under the Alien Tort Statute. This holding opened up U.S. courts to victims of human rights abuses that occurred outside the U.S. through the previously obscure Alien Tort Statute. After Filártiga, plaintiffs increasingly used the Alien Tort Statute to seek damages for human-right violations committed abroad. In 1996, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals again heard a case related to the Alien Tort Statute: Kadic v. Karadzic. The court's decision expanded liability under the Alien Tort Statute beyond state actors to include private actors, which opened the pathway for suits against non-state entities like corporations. 
After a decades-long explosion of Alien Tort Statute litigation post-Filártiga, the Supreme Court began to place limits on the statute's jurisdiction in 2004 with the case of Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain. In Sosa, the Supreme Court held that courts may recognize "a narrow set of common law actions derived from the law of nations," which meet a "specific, universal, and obligatory" standard, but that the statute itself does not provide a cause of action.. The court noted that while the door to "further independent judicial recognition of actionable international norms" is still "ajar," it must be subject to "vigilant doorkeeping" by the courts. Nine years later, the Supreme Court addressed questions on the extraterritoriality of the Alien Tort Statute in the Kiobel case. In Kiobel, the court held that the statute presumptively does not apply extraterritorially, but that petitioners can overcome this presumption if their claims "touch and concern" the U.S. with sufficient force.  Therefore, foreign plaintiffs cannot bring claims against foreign defendants under the Alien Tort Statute for matters arising entirely outside of the U.S. The Supreme Court opinion did not, however, address the lower court's opinion as to whether corporations can be held liable under the Alien Tort Statute. Many legal scholars agree that the Supreme Court's decisions in both Sosa and Kiobel placed significant limitations on the scope of the Alien Tort Statute—a trend that continued with Jesner.
Jesner Supreme Court Decision 
 Central holding 
On April 24, 2018, in a 5-4 decision the majority ruled that foreign corporations cannot be sued under the Alien Tort Statute, affirming the lower court.
 Reasoning 
The majority's reasoning was driven in large part by separation of powers concerns, noting that the political branches traditionally have responsibility over foreign affairs. Kennedy stated that Congress, not the courts, "is in the better position to consider if the public interest would be served by imposing a new substantive legal liability," because such claims against foreign corporations brought in U.S. courts may impact U.S. foreign relations. Kennedy cited the amicus brief Jordan filed with the court as evidence of increased diplomatic tensions, which the First Congress sought to avoid through the creation of the Alien Tort Statute. Jordan, where Arab Bank is headquartered, characterized the Jesner case as a "grave affront" to its sovereignty that could "undermine its cooperation with the United States." Given these considerations, a five justice majority found "it would be inappropriate for courts to extend ATS liability to foreign corporations." They argued that Congress can explicitly legislate to allow lawsuits against foreign corporations under such circumstances if it wishes to do so. 
The rest of Justice Kennedy's opinion only commanded the support of Justice Roberts and Justice Thomas, and therefore did not reach a majority. Kennedy, Roberts, and Thomas would have gone further than the majority, foreclosing ATS liability for all corporations. Kennedy's plurality opinion argued that there is no norm of corporate liability "under currently prevailing international law," as required in Sosa's "specific, universal, and obligatory" test, since international law only applies to the conduct of states and natural persons.
 Concurrences 
Justice Alito's concurring opinion emphasized the Alien Tort Statute's objective of "avoiding diplomatic strife" and urged the court to reject claims, such as those brought against foreign corporate defendants, that would not advance this congressional purpose. Justice Gorsuch's concurring opinion provided two reasons in support of the court's central holding that foreign corporations cannot be defendants under the Alien Tort Statute. First, Gorsuch argued that "separation-of-powers principles dictate that courts should never recognize new causes of action under the ATS," and second, that the statute requires a domestic defendant, whether a natural person or corporation.
 Dissent 
Justice Sotomayor wrote a dissenting opinion, in which she argued that the "text, history, and purpose of the ATS, as well as the long and consistent history of corporate liability in tort, confirm that tort claims for law-of-nations violations may be brought against corporations under the ATS." Justices Breyer, Ginsburg, and Kagan joined this dissent. Sotomayor wrote that “[n]othing about the corporate form in itself justifies categorically foreclosing corporate liability,” and that consequently, “[e]ach source of diplomatic friction that respondent Arab Bank and the plurality identify can be addressed with a tool more tailored to the source of the problem than a blanket ban on corporate liability.” Additionally, the dissent argued that Kennedy's plurality misapplied the Sosa test by conflating international law's substantive prohibitions on conduct with the mechanisms used to enforce these norms. The Sosa test requires that under the Alien Tort Statute, the violated international law norm must be "specific, universal, and obligatory." Sotomayor writes that this requirement is inapposite to the question of corporate liability, however, because it applies to the substantive prohibition in question, not mechanisms for enforcement. Furthermore, Sotomayor noted that members of the Executive branch and Congress filed briefs with the court supporting the imposition of corporate liability. 
 Significance 
The Court's Jesner decision has led to a debate about how useful the Alien Tort Statute can be as a tool for civil human rights litigation going forward. The central holding leaves open the possibility of suits against domestic corporations or individual employees of foreign corporations, but others emphasize that very few cases will meet the heightened combination of requirements for Alien Tort Statute jurisdiction outlined in Sosa, Kiobel, and Jesner.
 References 
Further reading
Liptak, Adam (24 April 2018). "Supreme Court Bars Human Rights Suits Against Foreign Corporations". The New York Times. p. B2. Retrieved 8 July 2019.
"Jesner v. Arab Bank, PLC: Leading Case". 132 Harv. L. Rev. 397 (2018)
Mulligan, Stephen P., The Alien Tort Statute (ATS): A Primer, Congressional Research Service (June 1, 2018). 
Keitner, Chimène, "ATS, RIP?" LAWFARE (April 25, 2018). 
External links
 Case page at SCOTUSblog
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Alien Tort Statute case law
Category:Jordan–United States relations
"""

From "Jewell Ridge Coal Corp. v. United Mine Workers of America" ==> """
Jewell Ridge Coal Corp. v. United Mine Workers of America, 325 U.S. 161 (1945), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States dealing with the compensation of mine workers for time spent traveling to work sites while underground..
Facts
The employer, Jewell Ridge, sought declaratory judgment against its employee's union to determine whether the time spent traveling underground by the coal miners between the portals of the employer's two bituminous coal mines and the working faces was included in the compensable workweek under § 7 of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, 29 U.S.C. § 207(a).Note: The Fair Labor Standards Act is now Chapter 8 of Title 29 of the United States Code, abbreviated as Ch. 8 of 29 U.S.C.
Judgment
Majority opinion
In an opinion authored by Justice Frank Murphy, the Supreme Court affirmed the appellate court's ruling, holding that underground travel time was compensable under the Act.  Relying on the three elements of 'work' established in Tennessee Coal, Iron & Railroad Co. v. Muscoda Local No. 123 (1944),. the court reasoned that underground traveling was considered compensable work because it (1) required physical and mental exertion that was (2) controlled and required by the employer (3) for the employer's benefit.
The court distinguished underground travel from typical above-ground commuting by non-miners, stating that once below ground the miner is subject to additional dangers.  Furthermore, the court stated that the Fair Labors Standard Act supersedes any previous customs or agreements which excluded such travel time from the compensable work week.
Dissenting opinion
In his dissent, Justice Jackson argued that majority opinion invalidates or ignores collective bargaining agreements between unions and employers, which he said was contrary to the legislative intent of the Fair Labor Standards Act.
Black–Jackson feud
The coal company later filed a petition for rehearing on the grounds that the miners were represented by Crampton P. Harris, who was Justice Black’s former law partner and personal lawyer.  Rehearing of the case was denied by the court on June 18, 1945.. However, despite this apparent conflict of interest, Black lobbied the Court for a per curiam denial of the petition for rehearing.  Justice Jackson objected to a per curiam denial of rehearing and filed a concurring opinion, which disassociated himself from the ruling and, by implication, criticized Black for not addressing the conflict of interest. The infighting between Black and Jackson may also have played a role in the death of Harlan F. Stone two weeks before this ruling, and the nomination of Fred M. Vinson to the Court instead of a current Associate Justice.
Jackson also criticized Black's alleged proposal of handing down the court's decision without waiting for the majority and dissenting opinions.  Jackson claimed that Black's reasoning for this unorthodox proposal was to influence contract negotiations for the ongoing coal strike, in an attempt to strengthen the coal miner's bargaining position.  Jackson accused Black of simply trying to manipulate the court process to suit his own ideological agenda.
See also
US labor law
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 325
Black–Jackson feud
Notes
References
External links
Category:1945 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United Mine Workers of America litigation
Category:Coal mining in the United States
Category:Commuting
"""

From "JI Case Co v National Labor Relations Board" ==> """
JI Case Co. v. National Labor Relations Board, 321 U.S. 332 (1944),J.I. Case Co. v. NLRB, 321 U.S. 332 (1944) is a United States Supreme Court case dealing with labor law. Workers at the company's factory had voted to unionize, but J.I. Case Company had refused to negotiate with the new union, and tried to enforce old contracts instead. The court upheld the NLRB's decision that they'd violated the National Labor Relations Act, but said that the NLRB had to re-word the order it had issued.
Background
J.I. Case Company operated a factory in Rock Island, Illinois, and in 1941 the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) started working to organize the workers there, working to become their union. They received the proper certification from the NLRB for this, and the workers voted to join the union. However, the company refused to begin collective bargaining with the CIO. They argued that most of the workers had signed individual contracts, and these contracts were still binding.
After the union complained, the NLRB said that the company was guilty of unfair labor practices, violating the National Labor Relations Act of 1935. The Board ordered the company to start collective bargaining on terms for a new contract, to stop telling workers that their old contracts were still legally binding, and to stop having new employees sign the old contracts. A Court of Appeals granted an order of enforcement, and the company appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the court 
The court sided with the NLRB in an 8-1 vote. An existing contract would ordinarily continue to have legal force until broken—for example, by a worker quitting or being fired—but under the National Labor Relations Act, collective bargaining agreements had become something of a special case:Accordingly, the fact that there was an older contract between a company and its workers did not prevent the application of the National Labor Relations Act, which required companies to enter collective bargaining with unions. Justice Jackson distinguished this situation from one where negotiations were ongoing, but no agreement had been reached yet; then individual contracts could have effect.
Having decided this, the Court still felt that the wording the NLRB had originally used for its order had been too strong. The wording might have allowed workers to sue the company and yet prohibited the company from defending itself in court; so the Supreme Court issued new wording for the order, which simply told J.I. Case Co. to stop enforcing the old contracts or interfering with collective bargaining, and to tell all workers that they wouldn't be bound by the old contract.
Justice Owen Roberts dissented, but did not write an opinion.
 Historical context 
This dispute was happening not only in the middle of World War II, but also in a period of other labor troubles for JI Case Company; a strike would begin in December 1945 at their factory in Racine, Wisconsin that would last for a historically-long 440 days.
For the Supreme Court, this decision came seven years after West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish, a case that is generally seen as the end of the Lochner era, and the beginning of an era when the Court would uphold government regulations of business and industry more often.
 See also 
United States labor law
References
 External links 
Category:United States trade union case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1944 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
"""

From "Jimenez v. Quarterman" ==> """
Jimenez v. Quarterman, 555 U.S. 113 (2009), was a decision in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that under 28 U.S.C. § 2244(d)(1)(A),. the conviction of a state defendant is not "final" if a state court grants an "out-of-time" appeal and the defendant has not yet filed a federal habeas petition..
Background
In 1996 the United States enacted the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act, which among other provisions set strict limits on the ability of criminal defendants convicted in state courts to file a federal appeal. Under , an appeal had to be filed within one year from the time a judgment became "final."
Carlos Jimenez was convicted of burglary in the state of Texas in 1995. Jimenez appealed to the Texas Court of Appeals; his attorney filed a brief "explaining that he was unable to identify any nonfrivolous ground on which to base an appeal.".Jimenez v. Quarterman, 555 U.S. 113 (2009) (No. 07-6984), p. 2. Through a miscommunication Jimenez never learned of this brief until well after the fact, and his appeal was dismissed on September 11, 1996. Jimenez appealed, and on September 25, 2002, the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals granted Jimenez the right to file a so-called "out-of-time" appeal, acknowledging that his original appeal was flawed. The court affirmed his conviction. Jimenez then filed a habeas petition with the District Court, which dismissed his appeal, arguing that the one-year time limit began on October 11, 1996, in the wake his first (flawed) appeal. Jimenez then appealed to the Court of Appeals, which upheld the District Court.
The Supreme Court granted certiorari.
Decision
In a unanimous opinion authored by Justice Thomas, the Supreme Court held that "the statute requires a federal court, presented with an individual's first petition for habeas relief, to make use of the date on which the entirety of the state direct appellate review process was completed" and that the granting of the right to an out-of-time appeal by the Texas Court of Appeals rendered Jimenez's conviction not final for the purposes of the statute.
The Court reversed the Court of Appeals and remanded the case.Jimenez v. Quarterman, 555 U.S. 113 (2009) (No. 07-6984), p. 7-10.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 555
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2008 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act case law
"""

From "Johanns v. Livestock Marketing Association" ==> """
Johanns v. Livestock Marketing Association, 544 U.S. 550 (2005), is a First Amendment case of the Supreme Court of the United States. At issue was whether a beef producer could be compelled to contribute to beef industry advertising..
Facts and prior history
Congress charters commodity checkoff programs compelling all producers of certain commodities to contribute to common research and advertising programs. The beef industry is covered by the Beef Promotion and Research Act (1985). Cattle producers disagreeing with the fee and represented by the Livestock Marketing Association sued the Department of Agriculture (USDA) in federal district court. The respondents alleged the government-required fee for advertising was compelled speech and  violated their First Amendment right to free speech. The USDA argued the advertising was government speech immune from First Amendment challenge.
The district court and the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals had found for the Livestock Marketing Association previously, ruling that the program violated the First Amendment and that the advertising was compelled and not government speech.
In a parallel petition (No. 03–1165), the Nebraska Cattlemen sided with the USDA and sued the Livestock Marketing Association. At the Supreme Court, the two cases were consolidated.
Court decision
The Supreme Court's decision was announced on May 23, 2005 and delivered by Justice Antonin Scalia. The decision was 6-3 in favor of the USDA's position. Check-offs would continue. Advertising by these industry groups was government speech, therefore there was no infringement of First Amendment rights.
Case revisited
The case is starting another trip through the courts, starting in Montana with Ranchers-Cattlemen Action Legal Fund v. Sonny Perdue. 
The Cattlemen’s Beef Board (CBB) and USDA oversee the collection and spending of checkoff funds. Additionally, all producers selling cattle or calves, for any reason and regardless of age or sex, must pay $1-per-head. The buyer generally is responsible for collecting $1-per-head from the seller, but both are responsible for seeing that the dollar is collected and paid.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
References
External links
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
*National Cattlemen's Beef Association
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Johnson v. Arteaga-Martinez" ==> """
Johnson v. Arteaga-Martinez, 596 U.S. ___ (2022), was a United States Supreme Court case related to immigration detention.
 Background 
Aliens who have been ordered to be deported by immigration courts can be detained by the federal government, pending their removal from the country. The statute that authorizes such detention does not contain a set time limit for the detention, but in Zadvydas v. Davis (2001), the Supreme Court read in a six-month limitation to avoid what it perceived were constitutional issues. Antonio Arteaga-Martinez filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus in the United States District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania, arguing he was detained unlawfully due to the absence of a bond hearing. The district court granted his petition and ordered him released from detention, and after the federal government appealed, the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit summarily affirmed, citing to its previous opinion in Guerrero-Sanchez v. Warden. The government subsequently filed a petition for a writ of certiorari.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case and the companion case Garland v. Gonzalez on August 23, 2021. Oral arguments were held on January 11, 2022. On June 13, 2022, the Supreme Court reversed the Third Circuit in a 8–1 vote, with Justice Sonia Sotomayor writing the majority opinion, Justice Clarence Thomas concurring, and Justice Stephen Breyer concurring in part and dissenting in part.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
"""

From "Johnson v. Eisentrager" ==> """
Johnson v. Eisentrager, 339 U.S. 763 (1950), was a major decision of the US Supreme Court, where it decided that US courts had no jurisdiction over German war criminals held in a US-administered prison in Germany. The prisoners had at no time been on American sovereign territory.
This decision was weakened by the Court's ruling in Braden v. 30th Judicial Circuit Court (1973), when the court found that the key to jurisdiction was whether the Court could process service to the custodians. Braden was relied on by the Court in Rasul v. Bush (2004), in which it held that it did have jurisdiction over the detainees held at Guantanamo Bay detention camp because it could reach their custodians, the policymakers and leaders of the Bush administration, who were responsible for their detention.
 Facts 
On May 8, 1945, the German High Command executed an act of unconditional surrender, expressly obligating all forces under German control at once to cease active hostilities and therefore ending the European Theater of World War II. The prisoners had been convicted in China by an American military commission of violating the laws of war, by engaging in, permitting, or ordering continued military activity against the United States after surrender of Germany and before surrender of Japan. They were transported to the American-occupied part of Germany and imprisoned there in the custody of the US Army. Claiming that their trial, conviction, and imprisonment violated Articles I and Article III, the Fifth Amendment, and other provisions of the US Constitution, laws of the United States, and provisions of the Geneva Conventions, they petitioned the District Court for the District of Columbia for a writ of habeas corpus directed to the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of the Army, and several officers of the Army having directive power over their custodian.
The US government argued:
 A non-resident enemy alien has no access to US courts during wartime.
 The non-resident enemy aliens, captured and imprisoned abroad, have no right to a writ of habeas corpus in a court of the United States. (See Ex parte Quirin)
 The Constitution does not confer a right of personal security or immunity from military trial and punishment upon an alien enemy engaged in the hostile service of a government at war with the United States. (In this section, the Army quoted the Geneva Conventions, implicitly recognizing that the prisoners had rights and obligations under them.)
 Decision 
In their ruling, the Supreme Court justices noted (emphasis added and footnotes removed):
 Aftermath 
Eisentrager and his 20 codefendants were all released from prison early, later in 1950.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 339
Ex Parte Milligan
Ex Parte Quirin
Hamdi v. Rumsfeld
Rasul v. Bush
Rumsfeld v. Padilla
Hamdan v. Rumsfeld
Boumediene v. Bush
Notes
External links
Category:Extrajudicial prisoners of the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:1950 in United States case law
Category:United States Fifth Amendment case law
Category:Geneva Conventions
Category:United States Nuremberg Military Tribunals
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
"""

From "Johnson v. Guzman Chavez" ==> """
Johnson v. Guzman Chavez, 594 U.S. ___ (2021), was a United States Supreme Court case related to immigration detention.
 Background 
The respondents in this case were deported by the federal government and later reentered the country, claiming asylum. They then sought release from detention via bond hearings. The district court sided with their claims, and the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit affirmed, over the dissent of Judge Julius N. Richardson. The federal government filed a petition for a writ of certiorari.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted on June 15, 2020. The Supreme Court held oral arguments on January 11, 2021. On June 29, 2021, the Supreme Court reversed the Fourth Circuit, holding that the respondents were not entitled to bond hearings for release.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
"""

From "Johnson v. Louisiana" ==> """
Johnson v. Louisiana, 406 U. S. 356 (1972), was a court case in the U.S. Supreme Court involving the Due Process Clause and Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the Louisiana law that allowed less-than unanimous jury verdicts (9 to 12 jurors) to convict persons charged with a felony, does not violate the Due Process clause. This case was argued on a similar basis as Apodaca v. Oregon.
 Background 
The Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution includes the Due Process Clause and the Equal Protection Clause. These clauses are part of the procedural due process right afforded to United States citizens when the government seeks to limit, restrict or deny a citizen of their "Life, liberty and property".
Despite the Sixth Amendment and the Seventh Amendment to the United States Constitution assuring the right to a jury trial, the states are able to decide the requirements for a conviction of a defendant. At that time, the Louisiana State Constitution and Code of Criminal Procedure allowed for a less-than-unanimous jury to convict a defendant of a crime where hard labor is available as punishment. Under those laws, nine members of a twelve-juror panel were enough to secure the conviction of the accused.
The petitioner for this case, Frank Johnson, was convicted of armed robbery by nine members of a jury of twelve. He sought to overturn his conviction under the Due Process Clause, arguing that the majority of the jury voting for the conviction was unable to do so beyond a reasonable double when the minority is arguing for acquittal, that 3 members of the 12 member jury refused to convict him of the crime, and that therefore, there was a reasonable doubt of the conviction. He petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court for review.
 Decision 
 Opinion of the court 
In a 5-4 decision, the court ruled that a non-unanimous jury verdict does not violate the Due Process Clause or the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Authored by Justice Byron White, the opinion was joined by justices Warren E. Burger, Harry Blackmun, Lewis F. Powell Jr. and William Rehnquist. The majority rejected the arguments by the petitioner, reaffirming the preceding ruling by the Supreme Court of Louisiana.
The court rejected the first argument made by the appellant, stating that all juror would have independently excessed the guilt of a defendant and would not have excused the minority's argument while making their decision in the case. Instead, they would have considered their argument and their decision to convict is enhanced due to there being no "reasonable doubt" for them to have reach such a conclusion, therefore such an argument is not excepted by the court.
Justice Byron White stated:
The court also rejected the second argument made by the appellant, that there having a less-than-unanimous jury verdict insinuates the fact that the jury has a reasonable doubt towards the conviction. The court expressed the respondent's case could have a greater standing if there were more people on the jury to affirm the conviction. However, the vast majority of the jury agreeing to convict the man was sufficient and their decision is not merely invalidated by the dissenting minority, thereby quashing the "reasonable doubt approach" to this case.
Justice Bryon White stated:
Additionally, the appellant also appealed against his conviction under the equal protection clause, pointing towards other capital cases and five-jury verdicts needing a unanimous verdict to convict, unlike his case.
The court similarly reject this, with Justice Bryon White stating:
Lastly, the appellant argued that his nighttime, warrantless arrest was unconstitutional under the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution, the court rejected the claim as that was not the question presented to the court.
 Concurrences 
 Justice Blackmun's concurrence 
Justice Blackmun's concurrence highlights him affirming the court decision that the verdict given by the jury is valid, however, he clarifies that he is not in favor of a split-verdict system.
 Justice Powell's concurrence 
Justice Powell concurred with the majority that the less-than-unanimous ruling "undercuts the applicable standard of proof in criminal prosecutions in that State." He also rejected the equal protection clause argument based on the fact the state did not discriminate different tiers of defendant as the have a rational basis to do so.
However, justice Powell disagreed on the crux of the argument. He emphasized on the difference between the 6th amendment and 14th amendment right to jury trial.
He wrote:
 Dissents 
 Justice Douglas's dissent 
Justice Douglas dissent that is joined by both justice Brennan and Marshall regards the majority opinion as a "radical departure from American traditions". Justice Douglas dissent acknowledges that the constitution does not specifically mention about the need for juries to be unanimous. However, he relied on past cases such as American Publishing Co. v. Fishers, in which the precedent for all jury verdicts to be unanimous for trial was set and in Andres v. United States where the court held that the bill of rights assured a jury trial.
Justice Douglas signified his disagreement towards the disparities towards civil and criminal juries, questioning:
Justice Douglas also dissented stating that the majority opinion "diminishes the reliability of a jury" as it prevents the minority of jurors to convince the majority to convict/acquit or to urge the majority to convict on a smaller offense, and it disproportionally allows prosecutors in jurisdictions with laws that allow the conviction under a less-than-unanimous charge to have a greater odds of convicting a defendant.
 Justice Brennan's dissent 
Justice Brennan dissent which is joined by Justice Marshall, highlighted his view that all members of the jury shall have their voice be heard and a unanimous jury assures such and does not disregard the viewpoints of any juror.
 Justice Steward's dissent 
Justice Steward dissent joined by both Justice Brennan and Marshall viewed that it is necessary for a unanimous jury trial as it ensures a fair trial and is the best way of having a jury trial due to its history.
He wrote:
 Justice Marshall's dissent 
Justice Marshall dissent that is joined by Justice Brennan, states that the very fact that a minority of 3 juror not agreeing with the others in regard to the case meant that they were unsuccessfully persuaded by the state, which showed a reasonable doubt. He argued that the state could very well hold a retrial in the case where there is an impasse and that would not violate the double jeopardy clause of the fifth amendment to the United States Constitution. He added his disagreement with the majority that a single juror could be "irrational" when making their decision by stating that the court would have already analyzed the jurors' rationality during voir dire.
 Subsequent cases 
This law remained on the books until 2018, where the citizens of Louisiana voted for and passed Louisiana Amendment 2 (the Unanimous Jury Verdict for Felony Trial Amendment). This amended Section 17(A) of Article I of the Constitution of Louisiana. This made Louisiana the second last state to have a unanimous jury for conviction in the United States of America.
+Louisiana Amendment 2 (2018)YES votesNO votes% of YES Votes% of NO votesOutcome938,182519,73164.35%35.65%PASSED
The United States Supreme Court eventually overturned this case in 2020. In the case, Ramos v. Louisiana, the court ruled that all criminal conviction needed a unanimous jury.
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:Legal history of Louisiana
Category:United States jury case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment sentencing case law
"""

From "Johnson v. M'Intosh" ==> """
Johnson v. McIntosh, 21 U.S. (7 Wheat.) 543 (1823), also written M‘Intosh, is a landmark decision of the U.S. Supreme Court that held that private citizens could not purchase lands from Native Americans. As the facts were recited by Chief Justice John Marshall, the successor in interest to a private purchase from the Piankeshaw attempted to maintain an action of ejectment against the holder of a federal land patent.
The case is one of the most influential and well-known decisions of the Marshall Court, a fixture of the first-year curriculum in nearly all U.S. law schools. Marshall's opinion lays down the foundations of the doctrine of aboriginal title in the United States, and the related doctrine of discovery. However, the vast majority of the opinion is dicta; as valid title is a basic element of the cause of action for ejectment, the holding does not extend to the validity of McIntosh's title, much less the property rights of the Piankeshaw. Thus, all that the opinion holds with respect to aboriginal title is that it is inalienable, a principle that remains well-established law in nearly all common law jurisdictions.
Citation to Johnson has been a staple of federal and state cases related to Native American land title for 200 years. Like Johnson, nearly all of those cases involve land disputes between two non-Native parties, typically one with a chain of title tracing to a federal or state government and the other with a chain of title predating U.S. sovereignty. A similar trend can be seen in the early case law of Australia, Canada, and New Zealand. The first land dispute involving an indigenous party to reach to the Supreme Court was Cherokee Nation v. Georgia (1831).
The ruling essentially enforces the Royal Proclamation of 1763 that was issued by King George III.
Background
Thomas Johnson, one of the first Supreme Court justices, bought land from Piankeshaw Native American tribes in 1773 and 1775. The plaintiffs were lessees of Thomas Johnson's descendants, who had inherited the land. The defendant, William McIntosh, subsequently obtained a land patent, according to the facts as Marshall accepted them, to this same land from the United States. In fact, the two parcels did not overlap at all.Kades, 148 U. Pa. L. Rev. at 1092 ("Mapping the United Companies' claims alongside M'Intosh's purchases, as enumerated in the district court records, shows that the litigants' land claims did not overlap. Hence, there was no real 'case or controversy,' and M'Intosh, like another leading early Supreme Court land case, Fletcher v. Peck, appears to have been a sham." (footnotes omitted)). Further, there is evidence that the parties were aware the tracts did not overlap and purposely misrepresented the facts to the court to obtain a ruling.Kades, 148 U. Pa. L. Rev. at 1093 ("M'Intosh did not contest a single fact alleged in the complaint, jurisdictional or otherwise. Perhaps he participated in framing the complaint, which became the stipulated facts of the case. Neither the district court nor the Supreme Court questioned any of these facts. Everyone involved, it seems, wanted a decision on the legal question of the validity of private purchases from the Native Americans." (footnote omitted)).
Prior history
The plaintiffs brought an action for ejectment against McIntosh in the United States District Court for the District of Illinois, contending that their chain of title was superior by virtue of Johnson's purchases. The District Court dismissed the claim on the grounds that the Piankeshaw were not able to convey the land.
Opinion
Marshall, writing for a unanimous court, affirmed the dismissal.
Marshall begins with a lengthy discussion of history of the European colonization of the Americas and the legal foundations of the American Colonies. In particular, Marshall focuses on the manner in which each European power took land from the indigenous occupants. Synthesizing the law of colonizing powers, Marshall traces the outlines of the "discovery doctrine"—namely, that a European power gains radical title (also known as sovereignty) to the land it discovers. As a corollary, the "discovering" power gains the exclusive right to extinguish the "right of occupancy" of the Indigenous occupants, which otherwise survived the assumption of sovereignty.
Marshall further opined that when it declared independence from the Crown, the United States government inherited the right of preemption over Native American lands. The legal result is that the only Native American conveyances of land that can create valid title are sales of land to the federal government.Banner, 2005, pp. 178-188.
Legacy
Law and economics
At least one commentator has noted that Johnson, by holding that only the federal government could purchase Native American lands, created a system of monopsony, which avoided bidding competition between settlers and thus enabled the acquisition of Native American lands at the lowest possible cost.Kades, 148 U. Pa. L. Rev. at 1189 ("With its customary rule against private purchases of Native American land, reaffirmed in M'Intosh, the state prevented competitive bidding for Native American lands. It drew on a special cadre of career Native American negotiators to buy land cheaply. . . . [T]he bottom line was the bottom line: acquiring Native American lands at least cost. . . . [M]inimizing cost were not simple. . . .  Threats . . . were often not credible, and so the United States pursued all the negotiating tricks . . . .").
Role in law school curriculum
Prof. Stuart Banner at UCLA School of Law, writes of the case:
Johnsons continuing prominence is reinforced every year in law schools, where it is the very first case most beginning students read in their required course in Property. The bestselling property casebook calls Johnson 'the genesis of our subject' because it lays 'the foundations of landownership in the United States.' Given current understandings surrounding Indigenous law, and the role of Native Americans in America, the outcome of the case has come to be viewed with disapproval in law school. Johnson has joined Dred Scott v. Sandford and a few others to form a small canon (or maybe an anti-canon) of famous cases law students are taught to criticize. The leading casebook describes the philosophy underlying Johnson as "discomforting" and quotes with approval the recent view of a law professor that Marshall's opinion "was rooted in a Eurocentric view of the inferiority of the Indian people." Johnson, though, might be the only member of this anti-canon that remains the law, and that is still cited as authority by lower courts several times a year.Banner, 2005, p. 11-12.
In 1998, Matthew Fletcher published a reflection on his experience studying Johnson v. McIntosh as part of the first-year law curriculum. Fletcher is a member of the Grand Traverse Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians and a graduate of the University of Michigan Law School. Blending autobiography, story-telling and poetry, and legal discourse, he portrays the case as fundamental to founding injustices in American society, showing that "you can kill people and destroy what they are and call it legal and fair play" (530).
Catholic Teaching on the Doctrine of Discovery
The Vatican on March 30, 2023 formally repudiated the "doctrine of discovery," officially declaring that that legal doctrine, used historically to justify colonial exploitation, is "not part of the teaching of the Catholic Church," and that the papal bulls used to justify it (such as Inter caetera) "have never been considered expressions of the Catholic faith."
In commenting on this public statement, Cardinal Michael Czerny referred to Johnson v. McIntosh as "an invention or creation of the U.S. Supreme Court in the 19th century" and stated it was "unfortunate" that "a very strongly church related word is used by the U.S. Supreme Court to name an idea or a historical process" (referring to the word "doctrine," which is used in both law and theology).
Notes
References
Further reading
 Robert Williams, Jr., The American Indian in Western Legal Thought: The Discourses of Conquest (1989).
 Walter Echo-Hawk, In the Courts of the Conqueror: The 10 Worst Indian Law Cases Ever Decided (2010).
 Stuart Banner, How the Indians Lost Their Land: Law and Power on the Frontier (2005).
 Lindsay G. Robertson, Conquest by Law: How the Discovery of America Dispossessed Indigenous Peoples of Their Lands (2005).
 Jean Edward Smith, John Marshall: Definer Of A Nation (1996).
 Michael C. Blumm, Retracing the Discovery Doctrine, Aboriginal Title, Tribal Sovereignty, and Their Significance to Treaty-Making in the United States, 28 Vt. L. Rev. 713 (2004).
 Eric Kades, The Dark Side of Efficiency: Johnson v. M'Intosh and the Expropriation of American Indian Lands, 148 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1065 (2000).
 Eric Kades,  History and Interpretation of the Great Case of Johnson v. M'Intosh, 19 L. & Hist. R. 67 (2001).
 Blake A. Watson Buying America From the Indians: "Johnson v. McIntosh" and the History of Native Land Rights (University of Oklahoma Press; 2012) 494 pages
External links
Category:1823 in United States case law
Category:Aboriginal title case law in the United States
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:Race-related case law in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:Miami tribe
Category:Indian Territory
"""

From "Johnson v. Robison" ==> """
Johnson v. Robison, 415 U.S. 361 (1974), was a case heard before the United States Supreme Court. The court held that the Veterans' Administrations' allocation of greater educational benefits to combat veterans than conscientious objectors was consistent with the United States Constitution. Robison, a conscientious objector, argued that such unequal benefits violated his 5th Amendment right to Equal Protection and his First Amendment right to free exercise of religion. The court rejected both arguments.
 Opinion of the Court 
The court reasoned that a rational basis existed to give combat veterans better benefits than those who objected for religious reasons: namely, encouraging people to participate in the armed forces as soldiers. The court reasoned that the increased disruption and longer commitment for soldiers justified disparate allocation of benefits. As to free exercise, the court held that the withholding of benefits had only an incidental burden, if any, on religious exercise, that that burden was not intended, and that it was justified by the substantial government interest in raising an army.
The Court also held that 38 USC section 211(a) does not preclude constitutional challenges to law administered by the Veteran's Administration.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:American conscientious objectors
Category:1974 in United States case law
"""

From "Johnson v. Southern Pacific Co." ==> """
Johnson v. Southern Pacific Co., 196 U.S. 1 (1904), was a case before the United States Supreme Court.  It interpreted the words "any car" in the Railroad Safety Appliance Act, prohibiting common carriers moving interstate commerce from using any car that was not equipped with automatic couplers. In doing so, it overturned the Eighth Circuit in Johnson v. Southern P. Co., 117 F. 462 (8th Cir. 1902)
Background
On August 5, 1900, Johnson was acting as head brakeman on a freight train of the Southern Pacific Company, which was making its regular trip between San Francisco; California; and Ogden, Utah. On reaching the town of Promontory, Utah, Johnson was directed to uncouple the engine from the train and couple it to a dining car belonging to the company that was standing on a side track for the purpose of turning the car around preparatory to its being picked up and put on the next westbound passenger train. The engine and the dining car were equipped, respectively, with the Janney coupler and the Miller hook, so called, which would not couple together automatically by impact, and it was, therefore, necessary for Johnson, and he was ordered to go between the engine and the dining car to accomplish the coupling. In so doing, Johnson's hand was caught between the engine bumper and the dining car bumper and crushed, which necessitated amputation of the hand above the wrist. 
Lower courts
The brakeman brought his action in a state district court (District Court of the First Judicial District of Utah). The case was subsequently removed to a federal trial court (Circuit Court of the United States for the District of Utah) on the ground of diversity of citizenship.
On trial, after plaintiff had rested its case, the Court granted defendant's motion to instruct the jury to find in its favor (directed verdict).
Plaintiff carried the case to the Circuit Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit and the judgment was affirmed. 117 Fed. Rep. 462. 
The case was brought to the Supreme Court on certiorari and also on writ of error.
Appellant claimed that he was relieved of an assumption of risk under common law rules. The case involved the application of a congressional act in respect of automatic couplers, the primary question being whether locomotives were required to be equipped with couplers. Another issue was that the dining car was empty and was not used in moving interstate traffic.
Opinion of the court
The Supreme Court reversed the judgment and held that whether cars were empty or loaded, the danger to employees was the same. Thus, the dining car was regularly used in the movement of interstate traffic and so was within the purview of the law. The car's locomotive should have been equipped with couplers because it was obligated by law. Since that particular car was regularly used in the movement of interstate traffic, it was irrelevant that the car was empty at the time of appellant's injuries.
1. Locomotives are embraced by the words "any car" in the act of March 2, 1893 (27 Stat. at L. 531, chap. 196, U. S. Comp. Stat. 1901, p. 3174), 2, prohibiting common carriers from using any car in moving interstate commerce not equipped with automatic couplers, although locomotives were, elsewhere in the statute, in terms required to be equipped with power driving-wheel brakes.
2. The doctrine that statutes in derogation of the common law are to be construed strictly does not demand that the act of March 2, 1893 (27 Stat. at L. 531, chap. 196, U. S. Comp. Stat. 1901, p. 3174), compelling interstate carriers to adopt automatic couplers, in which there is an undoubted intention to make some change in the existing law, should be so construed as to defeat the obvious object of Congress.
3. The rule that penal statutes are to be construed strictly does not permit such a construction as defeats the obvious intention of the legislature.
4. The equipment of a locomotive and a dining car with automatic couplers, but of such different types as not to couple with each other automatically, does not satisfy the provision of the act of March 2, 1893 (27 Stat. at L. 531, chap. 196, U. S. Comp. Stat. 1901, p. 3174), 2, prohibiting common carriers from using any car in moving interstate commerce not equipped with couplers coupling automatically by impact, and which can be uncoupled without the necessity of men going between the ends of the cars.
5. Automatic couplers which will both couple and can be uncoupled without the necessity of men going between the cars are meant by the provision of the act of March 2, 1893 (27 Stat. at L. 531, chap. 196, U. S. Comp. Stat. 1901, p. 3174), 2, prohibiting common carriers from using any car in moving interstate commerce not equipped with "couplers coupling automatically by impact, and which can be uncoupled without the necessity of men going between the ends of the cars."
6. A dining car in constant use is, while waiting for the train to be made up for its next interstate trip, "used in moving interstate traffic" within the meaning of the act of March 2, 1893 (27 Stat. at L. 531, chap. 196, U. S. Comp. Stat. 1901, p. 3174), 2, requiring common carriers to equip with automatic couplers any car so used.
 See also 
 Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific Railroad:  U.S. Supreme Court case involving Southern Pacific's successful challenge to local tax assessments.
 Southern Pacific Company v. Arizona:  U.S. Supreme Court case involving Southern Pacific's successful challenge to a state safety law
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 196
References
Further reading
The Interstate commerce act and federal anti-trust laws (1906): XII, Safety Appliance Law
Category:1904 in United States case law
Category:1904 in rail transport
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Southern Pacific Railroad
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Johnson v. Transportation Agency" ==> """
Johnson v. Transportation Agency, 480 U.S. 616 (1987), is the only United States Supreme Court case to address a sex-based affirmative action plan in the employment context. The case was brought by Paul Johnson, a male Santa Clara Transportation Agency employee, who was passed over for a promotion in favor of Diane Joyce, a female employee who Johnson argued was less qualified. The Court found that the plan did not violate the protection against discrimination on the basis of sex in Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.42 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.
 Context 
Sex-based affirmative action refers to policies adopted by employers and educational institutions that allow for the consideration of sex as one factor in employment actions or university admissions. Because Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits discrimination in employment actions on the basis of sex, affirmative action plans must meet the test laid out by the Supreme Court in United Steelworkers v. Weber (1979).443 U.S. 193 (1979) In the context of sex-based affirmative action, the Weber test requires that the plan must be aimed at "eliminat[ing] manifest . . . imbalances in traditionally segregated job categories."Steelworkers v. Weber, 443 U.S. 193, 197 (1979) Furthermore, the plan must not "unnecessarily trammel the interests of" male employees.Id. at 208 Finally, the plan must be temporary.Id.
 Arguments in favor of sex-based affirmative action 
Supporters of affirmative action for women justify the need for such plans on the basis of historical discrimination and lack of opportunity for women in many traditionally male-dominated fields. Under a substantive equality framework, affirmative action for women is a way of acknowledging that men and women are not always similarly situated with respect to employment because of women's historical exclusion from traditionally male occupations. By this way of thinking, affirmative action can help level the playing field for women trying to break into a male-dominated field. Some supporters argue that affirmative action is essential because studies show women are frequently perceived as being less qualified than their peers, even when they are equally qualified.
 Arguments against sex-based affirmative action 
Opponents of affirmative action for women argue that affirmative action plans legalize reverse discrimination by favoring less qualified women. Another argument is that affirmative action plans are not necessary because discrimination on the basis of sex is prohibited by federal law. Still others argue that affirmative action plans harm the intended beneficiaries by tagging them as less competent than their peers.
 Impact of sex-based affirmative action plans 
Studies show that the American public is more supportive of sex-based affirmative action than race-based affirmative action. However, studies also indicate that beneficiaries of affirmative action are viewed negatively by both men and women. Despite this negative perception of affirmative action beneficiaries, other studies indicate that while the beneficiaries of affirmative action, on average, have a lower educational attainment than their peers, those beneficiaries generally have job performance outcomes that are as good as their peers. In terms of benefits to women, a recently reported 30-year longitudinal study of the effect of affirmative action on hiring found that minority women benefited significantly over the entire 30 years of the study. However, while affirmative action plans had a negative effect on white women during the 1970s and 1980s, there was a positive effect for this group during the 1990s.Id.
 Background 
 Facts 
Johnson had worked for the county since 1967, starting as a road yard clerk but ultimately transferring to a position doing road maintenance work. In 1979, Johnson and eleven other county employees applied for an open position as a road dispatcher. One of the other employees was Diane Joyce, the only female applicant for the position. Joyce began working for the county as an account clerk in 1970. She became the first woman to hold a position as a road maintenance worker in 1975.
The Agency had adopted an affirmative-action plan in 1978 that authorized the Agency to consider sex as one factor in promotion decisions where the position was one in which women were significantly underrepresented. The plan did not include quotas, but did have a long term goal of having the proportion of women and minorities in each job classification reflect that of the labor pool.
Both Johnson and Joyce were deemed qualified for the position. Johnson, however, scored two points higher than Joyce on the first interview portion of the application process. After a second interview, Johnson was recommended for the promotion. Joyce was concerned that prior disagreements she had had with two members of the interview panel would negatively affect her evaluation, so she contacted the County's Affirmative Action Office. The Office recommended that Joyce be promoted, based in part on the fact that no women had ever held a position as a road dispatcher.
Johnson filed a complaint with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) alleging the County had violated Title VII by discriminating against him on the basis of sex. The EEOC issued a right to sue letter and Johnson brought suit in the Northern District of California.
 Lower Court Decisions 
The District Court for the Northern District of California held that the Agency's plan was invalid because it was not temporary.Johnson v. Transp. Agency, Santa Clara Cty., Cal., No. C-81-1218-WAI (SJ), 1982 WL 31006, at *3 (N.D. Cal. Aug. 10, 1982) The court also held that the Agency had discriminated against Johnson because Joyce's sex was determinative in the promotion decision.Id. at *1 The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed, holding that the plan was not invalid merely because it did not have a fixed end date.Johnson v. Transp. Agency, Santa Clara Cty., California, 770 F.2d 752, 757 (9th Cir. 1984)
 Decision 
The Supreme Court upheld the Agency's plan by a 6–3 vote. The majority (Brennan, Marshall, Blackmun, Powell, and Stevens) reviewed the Agency's plan under the test laid out in Weber. First, the voluntary affirmative action plan must be aimed at "eliminat[ing] manifest racial [or gender] imbalances in traditionally segregated job categories."United Steelworkers v. Weber, 443 U.S. 193, 197 (1979) Second, the plan must not "unnecessarily trammel the interests of" male employees. In addition, the plan must be temporary.
Under the first prong of the test, the Court found that, for unskilled labor positions, a manifest imbalance could be established by comparing the percentage of women occupying positions in the particular job classification at issue with the percentage of women in the area labor market. Since there were no women employed in the job classification that included road dispatchers, women were vastly underrepresented as compared to the area labor market. Furthermore, the plan did not call for blind hiring of women to match the percentage of women in the area labor pool. Rather, the Agency had authorized the consideration of sex as one factor to be considered in addition to an applicant's qualifications.
As to the second prong of the test, the Court found no infringement on the rights of male employees because the plan did not specify quotas, but only aspirational goals aimed at achieving a more balanced work force. In other words, no positions were set aside specifically for women—all qualified applicants were considered for all open positions. Furthermore, Johnson's rights were not infringed as he did not have a legitimate expectation that he, among all of the qualified applicants, would receive the promotion.
Finally, the Court rejected the District Court's argument that the plan was invalid because it was not temporary. Although the plan had no specific end date, it did specify that the goal was to "attain a balanced workforce, not to maintain one."Johnson v. Transportation Agency, 480 U.S. 616, 639 (1987) The Court found that this was sufficient indication of the temporary nature of the plan, stating that fixed end dates were only required if the plan sets aside a specific number or percentage of positions for women. Justice Stevens joined the majority opinion, but also wrote a concurring opinion to make clear that the majority opinion should not be construed as "establish[ing] the permissible outer limits of voluntary" affirmative action plans.Id. at 642
Justice O'Connor concurred in the judgment without joining the majority opinion. O'Connor argued that a public employer's voluntary affirmative action plan should be evaluated using the same test as that used for Equal Protection claims. O'Connor would have required that the employer have "a firm basis for believing that remedial action was required."Id. at 649 A firm basis could be found where the statistical representation of the minority group would support a prima facie case of discrimination under Title VII.
Justice Scalia dissented, joined by Justices Rehnquist and White. Scalia criticized the majority for essentially legalizing discrimination:
Scalia argued that there was no evidence of prior discrimination by the employer in this case, so the goal of the plan could not be achieving the kind of balanced work force that one would expect in the absence of discrimination. Rather, Scalia felt the plan reflected the Agency's determination that "the qualifications and desires of women may fail to match the Agency's Platonic ideal of a work force."Id. at 660 In Scalia's opinion, the plan was aimed not at remedying the effects of past discrimination, but rather at changing the broader societal attitudes that influence women's job choices and, in his opinion, affirmative action plans were not an appropriate mechanism for addressing these issues.
 Interpretation by lower courts 
About two years after Johnson was decided, the Supreme Court held in City of Richmond v. Croson Co. (1989) that race-based affirmative action plans whose constitutionality is challenged under the Equal Protection Clause are subject to strict scrutiny review.City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469 (1989) However, the Court has yet to hear an Equal Protection challenge to a sex-based affirmative action plan, at least in the employment context.
In the context of equal protection, sex-based classifications are subject to intermediate scrutiny, a lesser standard of review than strict scrutiny, which is applied to race-based classifications. Consequently, there is a circuit split on whether sex based affirmative action plans should be subject to strict scrutiny review or the lesser intermediate scrutiny review. The Sixth Circuit and the Federal Circuit apply strict scrutiny while the Third, Fifth, Ninth, and Eleventh Circuits apply intermediate scrutiny.Id.
 References 
 External links 
 Text of Supreme Court opinion at Legal Information Institute
 Case information and oral argument audio at Oyez
 United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
 Justice Powell's Supreme Court file on Johnson v. Transportation Agency
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States affirmative action case law
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Johnson v. United States (1948 Fourth Amendment case)" ==> """
Johnson v. United States, 333 U.S. 10 (1948), was a significant United States Supreme Court decision addressing search warrants and the Fourth Amendment. In this case, where federal agents had probable cause to search a hotel room but did not obtain a warrant, the Court declared the search was "unreasonable.".
Johnson is commonly cited for the proposition that the Fourth Amendment creates a "warrant requirement" for searches, and warrantless searches are "per se unreasonable."
 Background 
Federal narcotics agents received information that unknown persons were smoking opium in a Seattle hotel. The agents visited the hotel, where they smelled burning opium coming from a room. Without obtaining a warrant, they knocked on the door and were answered by Anne Johnson. The agents arrested Johnson and searched the room, where they found opium and drug paraphernalia. At trial, this evidence was admitted over Johnson's objection, and she was convicted.
Johnson appealed, claiming the warrantless search violated her Fourth Amendment rights. The Ninth Circuit affirmed Johnson's conviction.Johnson, 333 U.S. at 12.
 Opinion of the Court 
In a 5–4 decision, the Supreme Court reversed the Ninth Circuit, ruling that the agents should have obtained a search warrant. Justice Robert Jackson's majority opinion expounded on the importance of warrants, stating they were required by the Fourth Amendment.
Justice Jackson described warrants as a judicial check on the executive. Through warrants, he said, inferences are drawn by a "neutral and detached magistrate" rather than by "the officer engaged in the often competitive enterprise of ferreting out crime."Johnson, 333 U.S. at 14. If government agents could search dwellings based on their own determination of probable cause, the Fourth Amendment would become a "nullity," leaving the people's security in their homes to "the discretion of police officers."
In this case, the strong smell of opium was surely probable cause, meaning the agents would have had no trouble obtaining a warrant if they had applied for one. "No reason [was] offered for not obtaining a search warrant except the inconvenience to the officers," which is certainly "not enough to bypass the constitutional requirement."Johnson, 333 U.S. at 15.
Justice Jackson, who had recently served as Chief US Prosecutor of Nazi leaders at the Nuremberg trials, noted that the Fourth Amendment separated America, "where officers are under the law," from a police state, "where they are the law."Johnson, 333 U.S. at  17. Jackson would revisit this idea the next year in Brinegar v. United States, when he wrote, "Uncontrolled search and seizure is one of the first and most effective weapons in the arsenal of every arbitrary government."Brinegar v. United States, 338 U.S. 160, 180 (1949), Justice Jackson dissenting
Chief Justice Vinson, Justice Black, Justice Reed, and Justice Burton dissented without opinion.
 Analysis and subsequent developments 
Johnson has come to stand for the idea that warrants are presumptively required for Fourth Amendment searches. The government must point to "exceptional circumstances" to demonstrate why its officers should be "excused from the constitutional duty of presenting their evidence to a magistrate."Johnson, 333 U.S. at 14-15.
Later decisions have continued to cite Johnson for the existence of a "warrant requirement." For example, in 1958, the Court cited Johnson as authority that "a search must rest upon a search warrant," with only "jealously and carefully drawn" exceptions.. Pro-warrant rhetoric reached its crest in the landmark case Katz v. United States, when the Court wrote that "searches conducted outside the judicial process, without prior approval by judge or magistrate, are per se unreasonable.".
However, even at the time of Katz, there were many exceptions to the warrant requirement, such as exigent circumstances, consent searches, and the automobile exception. The quantity and scope of these exceptions increased under the more conservative Burger and Rehnquist Courts. By 1985, a legal scholar had compiled a list of up to twenty warrant exceptions. Justices across the ideological spectrum agreed that the so-called "warrant requirement" was no longer an accurate description of the law. Justice Stevens bemoaned that "the exceptions have all but swallowed the general rule,", (Stevens, J., dissenting). while Justice Scalia, who opposed the warrant requirement, agreed that it had "become so riddled with exceptions that it was basically unrecognizable." (Scalia, J., concurring).
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 333
 References 
External links
Category:1948 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
"""

From "Johnson v. United States (2000)" ==> """
Johnson v. United States, 529 U.S. 694 (2000), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the rights of those serving federal probation and supervised release were more clearly defined. The court ruled that "Although such violations often lead to reimprisonment, the violative conduct need not be criminal and need only be found by a judge under a preponderance of the evidence standard, not by a jury beyond a reasonable doubt."Johnson v. United States, .
An earlier case of the same name, 333 U.S. 10 (1948), held that a search warrant is always required unless there are exceptional circumstances.Johnson v. United States, .
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States criminal procedure case law
"""

From "Johnson v. United States (2015)" ==> """
Johnson v. United States, 576 U.S. 591 (2015), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled the Residual Clause of the Armed Career Criminal Act was unconstitutionally vague and in violation of due process.
Background
Armed Career Criminal Act
The Armed Career Criminal Act (ACCA) was a part of the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984 that was enacted to impose tougher sentences in illegal firearms cases on defendants who have previously been convicted three or more times for "violent" felonies.  defined a "violent felony" as an act that threatens "use of physical force against the person of another," "is burglary, arson, or extortion," "involves use of explosives," or "otherwise involves conduct that presents a serious potential risk of physical injury to another." The last part of this definition became known as the "residual clause".
Case History
Samuel James Johnson was a lifelong criminal and active white supremacist who, starting in 2010, was monitored by the FBI due to his involvement in suspected terrorist groups. Over the years, he revealed to undercover agents his plans to carry out terrorist attacks, as well as his illegal supply of weapons. In 2012, he was indicted on multiple counts of being a felon in possession of firearms and ammunition. Johnson pleaded guilty to the weapons charges and was sentenced under the ACCA's residual clause to a statutory minimum of 15 years for having three prior "violent felony" convictions, one of which was possession of a sawed-off shotgun.Johnson v. United States, .
Arguments
Johnson's lawyers argued that mere possession of a sawed-off shotgun does not qualify as a "violent felony" as described under the residual clause. In 2013, an appeal to the Eighth Circuit upheld the decision by the District Court to sentence Johnson to 15 years in accordance to the ACCA.United States v. Johnson,  The Supreme Court of the United States originally granted the case certiorari to decide if the state law banning possession of a sawed-off shot gun qualified as a "violent felony" under the residual clause. The case was initially argued on November 5, 2014, but the Court asked the parties to reconvene and directly address the question of whether or not the residual clause was unconstitutionally vague. The case was reargued on April 20, 2015.
Opinions
Majority
Justice Scalia wrote the opinion of the Court, which determined the residual clause to be in violation of the Fifth Amendment. Scalia described the statute as a "failed enterprise" that invited "arbitrary enforcement." He declared that individuals are unconstitutionally deprived of due process when they are convicted under "a criminal law so vague that it fails to give ordinary people fair notice of the conduct it punishes."
The Court had raised the specter of unconstitutional vagueness in two prior cases regarding the residual clause—James v. United States and Sykes v. United States—that "honed in on the imprecision of the phrase 'serious potential risk'". However, "neither opinion evaluated the uncertainty introduced by the need to evaluate the riskiness of an abstract ordinary case of a crime." 
Noting that "[d]ecisions under the residual clause have proved to be anything but evenhanded, predictable, or consistent", the Court decided that "[s]tanding by James and Sykes would undermine, rather than promote, the goals that stare decisis is meant to serve." The Court held that the residual clause was unconstitutionally vague, overruling the contrary holdings in James and Sykes.
Concurrences
Justices Kennedy and Thomas wrote separate opinions concurring in judgment, but disagreeing that the residual clause of ACCA is unconstitutionally vague.
Dissent
Justice Alito dissented, arguing that the court could and therefore should interpret the residual clause in a narrower way that meets constitutional standards. He also found the circumstances of Johnson's sawed-off shotgun conviction, it being in his possession during a drug deal in a public parking lot, could have met even a narrow interpretation of the clause.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 576
 Armed Career Criminal Act
 Sessions v. Dimaya (2018) - constitutionality of similar clause in civil context (specifically, deportation), in which a plurality found straightforward application of Johnson to be dispositive
 Stokeling v. United States (2019) - touches on the same section of the Armed Career Criminal Act and references this decision often
Previous Supreme Court decisions about the "residual clause" of the Armed Career Criminal Act:
 James v. United States (2007) - overruled in part by Johnson
 Begay v. United States (2008)
 Chambers v. United States (2009)
 Sykes v. United States (2011) - overruled in part by Johnson
References
External links
 Johnson v. United States,  overview (SCOTUSblog)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:Armed Career Criminal Act case law
"""

From "Johnson v. Zerbst" ==> """
Johnson v. Zerbst, 304 U.S. 458 (1938), was a United States Supreme Court case, in which the petitioner, Johnson, had been convicted in federal court of feloniously possessing, uttering, and passing counterfeit money in a trial where he had not been represented by an attorney but instead by himself..  Johnson filed for habeas corpus relief, claiming that his Sixth Amendment right to counsel had been violated, but he was denied by both a federal district court and the court of appeals.
Supreme Court involvement
The United States Supreme Court agreed to hear the case and overturned the decisions of the lower courts. In a six to two decision, the Court held that the federal court had infringed upon Johnson’s life and liberty by not giving him counsel to defend him during trial. In the majority opinion written by Justice Hugo Black, the Court held that,
Since the Sixth Amendment constitutionally entitles one charged with crime to the assistance of counsel, compliance with this constitutional mandate is an essential jurisdictional prerequisite to a federal court's authority to deprive an accused of his life or liberty. When this right is properly waived, the assistance of counsel is no longer a necessary element of the court's jurisdiction to proceed to conviction and sentence. If the accused, however, is not represented by counsel and has not competently and intelligently waived his constitutional right, the Sixth Amendment stands as a jurisdictional bar to a valid conviction and sentence depriving him of his life or his liberty.Johnson, 304 U.S. at 467-68.
This set the precedent that defendants have the right to be represented by an attorney unless they waive their right to counsel knowing full well the potential consequences. This precedent, however, only made this right applicable to federal defendants and did not extend to defendants in trials under state jurisdiction.  Assistance of counsel was held to be requisite to due process of law in state felony proceedings with the Gideon v. Wainwright decision in 1963..
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 304
References
External links
Category:United States Sixth Amendment appointment of counsel case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:1938 in United States case law
"""

From "Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee v. McGrath" ==> """
Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee v. McGrath, 341 U.S. 123 (1951), was a United States Supreme Court case that held that groups could sue to challenge their inclusion on the Attorney General's List of Subversive Organizations. The decision was fractured on its reasoning, with each of the Justices in the majority writing separate opinions.
Background
The Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee was formed by Lincoln Battalion veterans of the Spanish Civil War to provide aid to Spanish Loyalists refugees from Francoist Spain.  In 1942, it was licensed to do so in Vichy France by President Franklin D. Roosevelt's wartime administration and the anti-fascists were then granted tax-exempt status. Dorothy Parker took charge of the committee’s fundraising and the anti-fascists soon attracted the support of Leonard Bernstein, Albert Einstein, Lillian Hellman, Langston Hughes, and Orson Welles.
In 1946, Dr. Edward K. Barsky and the rest of the leadership of the committee were held in contempt of Congress after they on principle refused to comply with subpoenas from the House Un-American Activities Committee.  On March 21, 1947, President Harry S. Truman issued Executive Order 9835, which led Attorney General Tom C. Clark to publish the Attorney General's List of Subversive Organizations.  The list sought to publicly identify groups the Attorney General considered to be “totalitarian, Fascist, Communist, or subversive”.  The Anti-Fascists were included on the list.  Under section 9A of the Hatch Act of 1939, this information was disseminated among the agencies of the government.
In 1948, the Anti-Fascists sued in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, alleging that they were exclusively a relief organization, that the listing had deprived them of their rights under the Due Process Clause and the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, and that they had been injured through loss of tax exempt status and damage to their reputation.  The Justice Department responded in a two-sentence motion that said the lawsuit failed to state a claim.  In June 1948, the district court dismissed the Anti-Fascists’ lawsuit without an opinion.
In February and April 1949, U.S. District Judges Jennings Bailey and Matthew Francis McGuire both dismissed similar lawsuits by the National Council of American-Soviet Friendship, and the International Workers Order.
In August 1949, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit ruled against the Anti-Fascists.Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee v. Clark, 177 F. 2d 79 (D.C. Cir. 1949).  Circuit Judge James McPherson Proctor, joined by then-Judge Bennett Champ Clark, affirmed the district court, holding that the Anti-Fascists had not been injured by being included on the list of subversives.  In a lengthy dissent, Circuit Judge Henry White Edgerton wrote that the listing was “contrary to fact, unauthorized and unconstitutional”.  The D.C. Circuit likewise rejected appeals by the other two organizations.International Workers Order, Inc. v. Mcgrath, 182 F.2d 368 (D.C. Cir. 1950)
Supreme Court
Oral argument and consideration
In May 1950, a divided Supreme Court upheld the contempt convictions of the anti-fascists' leadership.United States v. Bryan, 339 U.S. 323 (1950); United States v. Fleischman, 339 U.S. 349 (1950).  The Supreme Court then granted the listed subversive organizations’ petitions for writs of certiorari.  Even after review had been granted, the Justices ignored arguments from their clerks to avoid hearing the case on the basis of the newly passed McCarran Internal Security Act.
Oral arguments were heard on October 11, 1950, where O. John Rogge appeared for the Anti-Fascists, David Rein appeared for the Soviet Friendship Council, Allan R. Rosenberg appeared for the IWO, and Solicitor General Philip Perlman appeared for the government.  Now-Justice Tom C. Clark, who had initiated the list of subversives while he was the Attorney General, recused himself from the case.
The Court unusually did not vote on the case at its next conference and at the following conference it deadlocked 4-4.  After Justice Robert H. Jackson was persuaded to switch his vote, Justice Harold Hitz Burton submitted a draft opinion in favor of the anti-fascists on November 20.  However, Justice Jackson’s intense personal dislike of Justice William O. Douglas made him uncomfortable joining the majority and led him to complete an uncirculated draft concurrence in which he attacked Douglas' criticism of the government because it “denounced as ‘totalitarians’—by one how never has been able to see totalitarianism in any Communist Case before this Court”.  Justice Stanley Forman Reed delayed completing his dissent while the majority were airing their differences, leaving Justice Felix Frankfurter to complain that his “holding up judgment” had been unparalleled for at least fifty years.  Reed ultimately circulated a revised version of his dissent on April 21, 1951.
Controlling opinion
On April 30, 1951, the Supreme Court delivered judgment in favor of the anti-fascists, reversing and remanding by a vote of 5-3.  The Court failed to produce a majority opinion, instead offering six different opinions totaling seventy pages.
Justice Harold Hitz Burton, joined only by Justice William O. Douglas, wrote the controlling plurality opinion.  Burton accepted as true all of the allegations made by the anti-fascists because they had never been contested by Justice Department.  According to Burton, there was standing to sue for a violation of “the right of a bona fide charitable origination to carrying on its work, free from defamatory statements”.  Burton then determined that the Attorney General’s behavior had been ”patently arbitrary”.  The Court remanded to the district court with instructions to determine if the groups were in fact communistic.
Justice Black's concurrence
Justice Hugo Black concurred, writing alone to clarify that he thought the Attorney General’s list was itself an unconstitutional violation of bill of attainder clause.  He appended a passage from the footnotes of the historian Thomas Babington Macaulay's History of England from the Accession of James the Second, describing the evils of the Great Act of Attainder enacted at the behest of James II of England.
Justice Frankfurter's concurrence
Justice Frankfurter concurred, writing alone for over twenty-five pages.  Frankfurter first reasoned that the plaintiffs had standing to sue because their injuries “would be clearly actionable at common law.”  He then went on to argue that the Attorney General’s listing was an unconstitutional violation of the Due Process Clause because those listed had not been given notice and a hearing.
Justice Jackson's concurrence
Justice Jackson concurred, alone.  Jackson focused much of his criticism on a separate case decided that day in which the equally divided Supreme Court had affirmed a lower court ruling permitting the government to fire Dorothy Bailey for suspected disloyalty.  Jackson wrote it was “justice turned bottom-side up” to grant relief to the groups while denying it to an individual, and that the Court “may create the impression that the decision of the case does not raise above the political controversy that engendered it.”
Justice Douglas's concurrence
Justice Douglas also added a concurrence, alone.  Writing that he felt the need to combat a “Fifth column worming its way into government”, Douglas still feared that denying procedural due process to subversives was “to start down the totalitarian path.”  He then contrasted “our constitutional scheme” to the “technique” of the Nuremberg trials prosecutor, who had been Justice Jackson.  Douglas also spent several pages criticizing the equally divided Court’s decision to deny relief in Bailey’s case.
Justice Reed's dissent
Justice Reed, joined by Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson and Justice Sherman Minton, dissented.  Reed felt that the plaintiffs had no standing to sue because they had suffered no injury.  Regardless, Reed opined that constitutional due process requires neither notice nor a hearing.
Subsequent developments
In 1952, the United States Treasury sued the anti-fascists for back taxes now owed, and three years later the committee disbanded.  In 1954, a divided Supreme Court upheld New York state's revocation of Dr. Barsky’s medical license.Barsky v. Board of Regents of Univ. of NY, 347 U.S. 442 (1954). After a heavily publicized trial, the New York State Insurance Department ordered the IWO liquidated in 1954, citing “political hazard”.Elena Marcheschi, Book Review: Red Scare in Court: New York Versus the International Workers Order, 27 J. Marshall L. Rev. 139 (1993).In re International Workers Order, N.Y.S.2d 953 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. 1951), affd, 113 N.Y.S.2d 755 (N.Y. App. Div. 1952), affd, 112 N.E.2d 280 (N.Y. 1953).
In April 1954, U.S. District Judge James Ward Morris dismissed the anti-fascists lawsuit again, now finding that the new Executive Order 10450 had made the controversy moot.  In August 1954, the D.C. Circuit reversed that judgment and gave the groups the opportunity to pursue administrative review.Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee v. Brownell, 215 F. 2d 870 (D.C. Cir 1954).  In November 1955, then-District Judge Luther Youngdahl dismissed the group’s lawsuit again.National Council of American-Soviet Friendship v. Brownell, 148 F. Supp. 94 (D.D.C. 1955).  In February 1957, the D.C. Circuit affirmed, reasoning the group had failed to adequately seek administrative review.National Council of American-Soviet Friendship v. Brownell, 243 F. 2d 222 (D.C. Cir. 1957).
After the Court's second decision in Communist Party v. Subversive Activities Control Board (1961), the Soviet Friendship Council continued pursuing its challenge to the Attorney General’s listing.  In May 1963, it ultimately succeeded, when the D.C. Circuit concluded that the evidence proffered against the Council had been “negligible.”Nat. Coun. of American-Soviet Friendship v. Subversive Activities Cont. Bd., 322 F.2d 375 (D.C. Cir. 1963).
See also
 Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee
Australian Communist Party v Commonwealth (1951)
McCarthyism
North American Committee to Aid Spanish Democracy
Smith Act trials of Communist Party leaders
Suppression of Communism Act, 1950
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 341
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Vinson Court
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States freedom of association case law
Category:1951 in United States case law
Category:Anti-communism in the United States
"""

From "Jones v. Alfred H. Mayer Co." ==> """
Jones v. Alfred H. Mayer Co., 392 U.S. 409 (1968), is a landmark United States Supreme Court case, which held that Congress could regulate the sale of private property to prevent racial discrimination: "[] bars all racial discrimination, private as well as public, in the sale or rental of property, and that the statute, thus construed, is a valid exercise of the power of Congress to enforce the Thirteenth Amendment."
The Civil Rights Act of 1866 (passed by Congress over the veto of Andrew Johnson) provided the basis for this decision as embodied by .
Reversing many precedents, the Supreme Court held that the Civil Rights Act of 1866 prohibited both private and state-backed discrimination and that the 13th Amendment authorized Congress to prohibit private acts of discrimination as among "the badges and incidents of slavery." Congress possessed the power to "determine what are the badges and incidents of slavery, and the authority to translate that determination into effective legislation."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 392
Shelley v. Kraemer (1948), private landowners racial discrimination case
References
 Further reading 
  Pdf.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Thirteenth Amendment case law
Category:1968 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Implied statutory cause of action case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:African-American history of Missouri
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Jones v. Bock" ==> """
Jones v. Bock, 549 U.S. 199 (2007), was a case before the United States Supreme Court. The issues concerned obligations of inmate litigants before one could file a civil rights action. The majority opinion was by Chief Justice Roberts and the court decided the case unanimously.
 Background 
Congress passed the Prison Litigation Reform Act (PLRA) in 1996 to help reduce the strain on the federal judicial system of extensive inmate litigation. The act mandated exhaustion of federal and state administrative remedies before an inmate could file a civil rights action.
The Sixth Circuit along with some other lower courts adopted several procedural rules designed to implement this exhaustion requirement and facilitate early judicial screening.
The Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve the conflict in Jones v. Bock, and two other consolidated cases, namely Walton v. Bouchard, and Williams v. Overton, which it unanimously decided that failure to exhaust prison grievance procedures is an affirmative defense, thereby rejecting the Court of Appeals' procedural rules as exceeding the proper limits of the judicial role.
The issues in these cases were:
 whether the PLRA prescribes "total exhaustion" that requires a federal court to dismiss a prisoner's federal civil rights complaint for failure to exhaust his administrative remedies whenever there is a single unexhausted claim, despite the presence of other exhausted claims;
 whether the PLRA requires a prisoner to name a particular defendant in his or her administrative grievance in order to exhaust his or her administrative remedies as to that defendant and to preserve his or her right to sue them; and
 whether satisfaction of the PLRA's exhaustion requirement is a prerequisite to a prisoner's federal civil rights suit such that the prisoner must allege and document in his complaint how he exhausted his administrative remedies, or instead, whether non-exhaustion is an affirmative defense that must be pleaded and proved by the defense.
 Decision 
The Supreme Court decided the three issues on January 22, 2007, in favor of inmate litigants. It rejected various exhaustion screening mechanisms adopted by some of the circuits and thus made it less difficult for inmates/plaintiffs to pursue lawsuits involving complaints about their treatment in prison.
See also
Prison Litigation Reform Act
 References 
This article incorporates text from Open CRS, a publication reproducing public domain reports from the United States Congress. 
External links
CRS report
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Jones v. City of Opelika (1942)" ==> """
Jones v. City of Opelika, 316 U.S. 584 (1942), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a statute prohibiting the sale of books without a license was constitutional because it covered not a religious ritual but only individuals who engaged in a commercial activity.. 
 Background 
The city of Opelika, Alabama, charged Jones with violating a statute by selling books without a license. All licenses were subject to immediate revocation by the city without requiring advance notice. Jones, a Jehovah's Witness, alleged that his rights to both freedom of the press and freedom of religion were violated.
Decision
Majority opinion
Writing for the majority, Justice Reed wrote that individual rights must be balanced against competing rights of the state. He asserted that the fact that a person is engaged in disseminating religious materials does not place his action above regulation by the state. When people choose to use the vending of their religious books and tracts as a source of funds, the financial aspects of their transactions need not be wholly disregarded. To subject any religious or didactic group to a reasonable fee for their money-making activities does not require a finding that the licensed acts are purely commercial. It is enough that money is earned by the sale of articles.
When traditional means of distribution are used by religious groups, they can be held to the same standards as non-religious groups. The court held that Jones had no standing to challenge that part of the statute because he did not have a license that was revoked arbitrarily by the state.
Dissenting opinions
The two dissenting opinions, by Chief Justice Harlan Stone and Justice Frank Murphy, examined both the unlimited discretion of the authorities in Opelika to withdraw a license as well as the amount of fees charged in order to get a license. The majority had considered that the amount of fees ($25.00 annually in some cases or $2.50 per day in others) was irrelevant because the issue had not been argued earlier, but the dissenters thought the amount to be relevant.
 Effects 
The decision forced religious groups to meet the same requirements as nonreligious groups engaged in a similar activity. The fact that they were selling religious materials did not exempt them from statutes regulating commercial acts.
 Subsequent history 
In the one paragraph per curiam decision Jones v. City of Opelika (II), 319 U.S. 103 (1943),.  the Court vacated Jones v. City of Opelika (1942) on the basis of the principles articulated in Murdock v. Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; a state may not prohibit distribution of religious handbills where handbills seek to raise funds in a lawful fashion.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 316
References
External links
Category:1942 in United States case law
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:Lee County, Alabama
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
Category:1942 in religion
"""

From "Jones v. Cunningham" ==> """
Jones v. Cunningham, 371 U.S. 236 (1963), was a Supreme Court case in which the court first ruled that state inmates had the right to file  a writ of habeas corpus challenging both the legality and the conditions of their imprisonment.. Prior to this, starting with Pervear v. Massachusetts, 72 U.S. 475 (1866),. the court had maintained a "hands off" policy regarding federal interference with state incarceration policies and practices, maintaining that the Bill of Rights did not apply to the states. Subsequently, in Cooper v. Pate (1964),. an inmate successfully obtained standing to challenge the denial of his right to practice his religion through a habeas corpus writ.
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:1963 in United States case law
"""

From "Jones v. Flowers" ==> """
Jones v. Flowers, 547 U.S. 220 (2006), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States involving the due process requirement that a state give notice to an owner before selling his property to satisfy his unpaid taxes. The Court ruled, 5-3,The ninth justice on the Court, Samuel Alito, did not participate, because he was confirmed fourteen days after the case was heard for argument. that after a mailed notice was returned unclaimed, a state was required by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to take additional reasonable steps to notify the owner before the sale could proceed.Though this case was decided under the Fourteenth Amendment, which only applies to the states, the Court interprets its due process protections the same as those under the Fifth Amendment, which applies to the federal government. The Court's ruling will accordingly be extended to actions taken by the federal government as well.  The Court's opinion was delivered by Chief Justice John G. Roberts, his fourth majority opinion after his confirmation to the Court in 2005 and his first to provoke any dissenting opinions.
The Court had last addressed the issue of notice in Dusenbery v. United States,. The majority opinion in Dusenbery was written by the previous chief justice, William Rehnquist. which held that the government need only take steps reasonably calculated to provide notice even if actual notice is not achieved. The four justices who dissented in Dusenbery formed the majority with Roberts in Jones v. Flowers, distinguishing the prior case on the basis that the government in Dusenbery did not know that its method of notice had failed before the taking occurred. Justice Clarence Thomas, in dissent, believed the Court was instead undermining Dusenbery, which he argued implicitly dictated a result contrary to the majority's decision.
Background
Tax delinquency and sale
In 1967, Gary Jones purchased a house in Little Rock, Arkansas, in which he lived with his wife until they separated in 1993. Jones then moved into an apartment in Little Rock, and his wife continued to live in the house.  Jones paid his mortgage each month for 30 years, and the mortgage company paid Jones' property taxes. However, after Jones paid off his mortgage in 1997, his wife failed to pay the property taxes, and the property was certified as delinquent.
In April 2000, Mark Wilcox, the Arkansas Commissioner of State Lands, attempted to notify Jones of his tax delinquency, and his right to redeem the property, by mailing a certified letter to Jones at the house.See Ark. Code § 26-37-301 (1997).  The packet of information stated that unless Jones redeemed the property, it would be subject to public sale two years later on April 17, 2002. Nobody was home to sign for the letter, and nobody appeared at the post office to retrieve the letter within the next 15 days. The post office returned the unopened packet to the Commissioner marked "unclaimed."
Two years later, and just a few weeks before the public sale, the Commissioner published a notice of public sale in the Arkansas Democrat-Gazette. No bids were submitted, which permitted the State to negotiate a private sale of the property.See Ark. Code § 26-37-202(b).  Several months later, Linda Flowers submitted a purchase offer. The Commissioner mailed another certified letter to Jones at the house, attempting to notify him that his house would be sold to Flowers if he did not pay his taxes. Like the first letter, the second was also returned to the Commissioner marked "unclaimed."  Flowers subsequently purchased the house at approximately a quarter of its fair market value.  Immediately after the 30-day period for postsale redemption passed,See Ark. Code § 26-37-202(e).  Flowers had an unlawful detainer notice delivered to the property.  The notice was served on Jones' daughter, who contacted Jones and notified him of the unpaid taxes and the tax sale.
State court proceedings
Jones filed a lawsuit in Pulaski County Circuit Court against the Commissioner and Flowers, alleging that the Commissioner's failure to provide notice of the tax sale and of Jones' right to redeem resulted in the taking of his property without due process.Jones v. Flowers, No. CIV2003-8565.  Judge Timothy Davis Fox presided. The Commissioner and Flowers moved for summary judgment on the ground that the two unclaimed letters sent by the Commissioner were a constitutionally adequate attempt at notice, and Jones filed a cross-motion for summary judgment. The trial court granted summary judgment in favor of the Commissioner and Flowers, concluding that the Arkansas tax sale statute, which set forth the notice procedure followed by the Commissioner, complied with constitutional due process requirements.
Jones appealed, and the Arkansas Supreme Court affirmed the trial court's judgment.Jones v. Flowers, No. 04-449, 2004 Ark. LEXIS 722 (Ark Nov. 18, 2004).  The court noted Supreme Court precedent stating that due process does not require actual notice, and that attempting to provide notice by certified mail satisfied due process in the circumstances presented.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court granted certiorariCert. granted, Jones v. Flowers, 545 U.S. ___, 126 S. Ct. 35, 162 L. Ed. 2d 933 (2005). to resolve a conflict among the Circuits and state supreme courts concerning whether the Due Process Clause requires the government to take additional reasonable steps to notify a property owner when notice of a tax sale is returned undelivered.Compare, e.g., Akey v. Clinton County, 375 F.3d 231, 236 (2d Cir. 2004) ("In light of the notice's return, the County was required to use 'reasonably diligent efforts' to ascertain Akey's correct address"), and Kennedy v. Mossafa, 789 N.E.2d 607, 611 (N.Y. 2003) ("We reject the view that the enforcing officer's obligation is always satisfied by sending the notice to the address listed in the tax roll, even where the notice is returned as undeliverable"), with Smith v. Cliffs on the Bay Condo. Ass'n., 617 N.W.2d 536, 541 (Mich. 2000) (per curiam) ("The fact that one of the mailings was returned by the post office as undeliverable does not impose on the state the obligation to undertake an investigation to see if a new address . . . could be located"). The United States Solicitor General was granted leave to participate as amicus curiae,Motion granted, Jones v. Flowers, 126 S. Ct. 979 (2006). and argued in support of the Commissioner's position.
In a five-justice opinion delivered by Chief Justice John G. Roberts, the Court reversed the Arkansas Supreme Court and ruled that, under the circumstances, the State's sale of Jones' property violated due process.The Supreme Court, 2005 Term — Leading Cases, 120 Harv. L. Rev. 233 (2006).  It held that "when mailed notice of a tax sale is returned unclaimed, the State must take additional reasonable steps to attempt to provide notice to the property owner before selling his property, if it is practicable to do so."  Justice Clarence Thomas filed a dissent, arguing that the State's attempts went beyond any requirements the Court's prior precedents had established.
 Roberts' majority opinion 
Chief Justice Roberts wrote that considering the "extraordinary power" the State is exerting against a property owner, "[i]t is not too much to insist that the State do a bit more to attempt to let him know about it when the notice letter addressed to him is returned unclaimed." Though the method of using certified mail was in itself reasonably calculated to give notice, the knowledge that the State gained when the mail was returned unclaimed obligated it to take additional reasonable steps. However, "[i]n response to the returned form suggesting that Jones had not received notice that he was about to lose his property, the State did—nothing."  The Court believed that "someone who actually wanted to alert Jones that he was in danger of losing his house would do more when the attempted notice letter was returned unclaimed, and there was more that reasonably could be done."
 Reasonably calculated to give notice 
The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution requires a State to provide an owner with notice and an opportunity to be heard before it may take his property and sell it for unpaid taxes. The Court had recently ruled in Dusenbery v. United States,  that the government did not violate due process by sending notice to the jail where the property owner was imprisoned and allowing a prison official to sign for it, even though the prisoner never actually received the notice. Dusenbery established that due process did not require actual notice prior to a governmental taking of property, but instead only that the government attempt to give notice by a method "reasonably calculated, under all the circumstances," to inform all interested parties.
Based on Dusenbery as well as earlier cases, the State argued that once it provided notice reasonably calculated to apprise Jones of the impending tax sale by mailing him a certified letter, due process was satisfied. However, the Court pointed out that in each of those prior cases, the government had subsequently heard nothing back indicating that its attempts had failed. In Dusenbery, for example, the government knew that someone at the prison had signed for the letter. The knowledge that notice had failed was instead "a new wrinkle," and the question before the Court was therefore whether that knowledge constituted a circumstance that alters what notice is required. The Court believed that most federal courts of appeals and state supreme courts to have addressed this issue have decided that the government must do something more when it learns its attempt at notice has failed before it can sell real property in a tax sale. Many states also require by statute more than a simple notice by mail to the delinquent owner.
The means by which service of notice is attempted "must be such as one desirous of actually informing the absentee might reasonably adopt to accomplish it,"Mullane v. Central Hanover Bank & Trust Co., 339 U.S. 306, 315 (1950). Whether a particular method is adequate is determined by balancing the "interest of the State" against "the individual interest sought to be protected by the Fourteenth Amendment." In this case, the Court, emphasized, "we evaluate the adequacy of notice prior to the State extinguishing a property owner's interest in a home," which the Court considered "an important and irreversible prospect."
The Court did not believe that someone who actually desired to inform the owner would do nothing further when a certified letter is returned unclaimed, and satirized the State's position by analogy. "If the Commissioner prepared a stack of letters to mail to delinquent taxpayers, handed them to the postman, and then watched as the departing postman accidentally dropped the letters down a storm drain, one would certainly expect the Commissioner's office to prepare a new stack of letters and send them again. No one ‘desirous of actually informing’ the owners would simply shrug his shoulders as the letters disappeared and say ‘I tried.’ Failure to follow up would be unreasonable, despite the fact that the letters were reasonably calculated to reach their intended recipients when delivered to the postman."
The Court noted prior cases in which the government had been required to take notice of "unique information about an intended recipient" that it had known prior to its attempt at notice. In Robinson v. Hanrahan, , the Court had ruled that notice of forfeiture proceedings sent to a vehicle owner's home address was inadequate when the State knew that the property owner was in prison. Similarly, in Covey v. Town of Somers, , the Court held that notice of foreclosure by mailing, posting, and publication was inadequate when town officials knew that the property owner was incompetent and without a guardian's protection. The Court did not see a distinction between having such knowledge prior to attempting notice and having such knowledge after notice was sent but prior to the actual taking.  Just as the government's knowledge in Robinson and Covey that notice pursuant to the normal procedure was ineffective triggered an obligation on the government's part to take additional steps to effect notice, the government's knowledge should similarly be taken into account in assessing the adequacy of notice in this case. Though Justice Thomas’ dissent characterized the State's knowledge that its notice was ineffective as "learned long after the fact," the Court pointed out that it had actually received the returned notice within three weeks; under Arkansas law, it had two years before it could proceed with the sale.see Ark. Code Ann. § 26-37-301 (Supp. 2005).
Additional reasonable steps
The Court proceeded to analyze whether there were additional reasonable steps that the State could have practicably taken to notify Jones of the tax sale. If there were such options for the State, the newspaper advertisement announcing the sale could not render notice adequate, because notice by publication was only permissible when it was not possible or practicable to give more adequate notice. If there were no such options for the State, "it cannot be faulted for doing nothing."
The Court believed that resending the notice by regular mail would have been a reasonable step, given that the return of the certified letter meant either that Jones was not home when the postman called, or that he no longer lived at that home. Regular mail would allow the letter to be left without a signature, and it would have made it possible for the letter to be forwarded to him. The State also could have simply posted a notice on the front door of the home or addressed the mail to "occupant," which are steps that most states require in their tax sale statutes.After the Supreme Court handed down its decision, the Commissioner's chief of staff asserted that a non-certified letter and a notice to "occupant" had in fact been delivered to Jones' house. See Tax sale invalid, justices conclude – Supreme Court reverses state, 5-3, Michael R. Wickline. Arkansas Democrat-Gazette, April 27, 2006.  However, because of the posture of the case when it reached the Supreme Court after decision by summary judgment, those assertions were not part of the record the Supreme Court could consider. To avoid confusion, this article has accordingly limited the background to the facts the case was decided upon. The Court believed that in either case, the current occupant of the home would be likely to read the notice and attempt to alert the owner, because a change in ownership would directly affect them.  The Court observed that Jones had actually first learned of the tax sale after he was alerted by one of the occupants.
Though the Commissioner argued that even those additional steps were burdensome, the Court countered that it had instead undertaken "the burden and expense of purchasing a newspaper advertisement, conducting an auction, and then negotiating a private sale of the property." The Court considered the assertion of burden further undermined by the requirement in Arkansas that notice to homestead owners be accomplished by personal service if certified mail is returned,Ark. Code § 26-37-301(e) (Supp. 2005). and the fact that Arkansas transfers the cost of notice to the taxpayer or the tax sale purchaser,Ark. Code § 26-37-104(a). The Commissioner offered no estimate of how many notice letters are returned, and the Court believed that nothing supported the dissent's assertion that the Commissioner must physically locate "tens of thousands of properties every year."
The Court also disagreed with the U.S. Solicitor General's argument that requiring further effort when the government learns that notice was unsuccessful would cause the government to favor methods "that do not generate additional information," such as relying entirely on regular mail instead of certified mail. The Court considered this unlikely because the government is always being asked to prove that notice is sent and received, and the documentation that certified mail provides gives the State protection against false claims that notice was never received.  The Court noted that this protection "comes at a price—the State also learns when notice has not been received," information that under the circumstances of this case, the State cannot simply ignore.
The Commissioner also argued that further measures were not required because Jones had a legal obligation to keep his address updated, that he was on inquiry notice after failing to receive a tax bill and pay his property taxes, and that he was obliged to ensure that the occupants of his property would alert him if it were in jeopardy. Though acknowledging that Jones should have been more diligent regarding his property, the Court rejected that any of those conditions could amount to a forfeiture of his due process right to receive adequate notice.  The method of certified mail furthermore made it impossible for the occupant to notify Jones, because only Jones could have signed for the letter.
The Court clarified that it was not its responsibility to dictate what form of service that the government should adopt, or to attempt to redraft a State's notice statute. Instead, "[t]he State can determine how to proceed in response to our conclusion that notice was inadequate here." The Court considered it sufficient for it to determine "that additional reasonable steps were available for Arkansas to employ before taking Jones' property."
Thomas' dissent
Justice Thomas dissented, arguing that under Court precedent, the State's notice attempts clearly satisfied due process requirements. He wrote that the title to property should not turn on "wrinkles" (as the Court had characterized the issue in this case) that Thomas believed were caused by Jones' own failure to protect his property. He further added that "[t]he meaning of the Constitution should not turn on the antics of tax evaders and scofflaws."A "scofflaw" is "one who habitually violates the law or fails to answer court summonses." See Wiktionary entry.
According to Thomas, the Court's inquiry should have ended with the conclusion that the State's chosen method of notice by certified mail was reasonably calculated to inform Jones of proceedings affecting his property interest. He argued that this finding was "reinforced by the well-established presumption that individuals, especially those owning property, act in their own interest." The State was accordingly free to assume that the address it had on record was correct and up-to-date, or that he had left a caretaker at the house who would inform him of the notice.  Whether a method is reasonably calculated to give notice is furthermore determined at the time the notice is sent, a principle Thomas believed followed from Court precedent. He argued that the Court had abandoned this by basing its decision on information that was unavailable when notice was sent, and that all of its suggested reasonable methods were "entirely the product of post hoc considerations."
Thomas believed the Court's holding in Dusenbery that actual notice is not required implied that the government is not required to take additional steps when it becomes aware that its attempt at notice has failed. He accordingly characterized the Court's ruling as "little more than a thinly veiled attack on Dusenbery." Thomas stated that the majority's logic would require a State to consider additional means every time a doubt is raised as to whether notice has been achieved, imposing a requirement with "no natural end point" that Thomas thought effectively required "something close to actual notice."
Regarding the Court's "storm drain" hypothetical, Thomas thought it actually raised a more difficult question of "when notice is sent—at the precise moment the Commissioner places the mail in the postal carrier's hand or the split second later when he observes the departing carrier drop the mail down the storm drain. That more difficult question is not before us in this case because Arkansas learned long after the fact that its attempts had been unsuccessful."
Thomas wrote of the Court's proposed alternatives that, "aside from being constitutionally unnecessary, [they] are also burdensome, impractical, and no more likely to effect notice than the methods actually employed by the State." Regular mail lacks the paper trail of certified mail, and Thomas thought it was just as likely that mail addressed to "occupant" would be thrown out as junk mail as opened and read as the Court had speculated. He also stated that the Court had previously concluded that posting notices was "an inherently unreliable method."Thomas cited for support to Greene v. Lindsey, , which ruled that the posting of unlawful detainer notices on the doors of tenants in a public housing project was constitutionally insufficient. Contrary to Thomas' assertion, however, that case did not find posting notices to be "inherently unreliable;" the Court's decision actually stated instead that "in most cases, the secure posting of a notice on the property of a person is likely to offer that property owner sufficient warning of the pendency of proceedings possibly affecting his interests."  Id. at 452.  The Court instead found in Greene that posting notices was insufficient because the government was aware that in that particular housing project, the notices were frequently removed by children or other tenants before the intended recipients ever saw them.
Thomas observed that 18,000 parcels of delinquent real estate are certified each year in Arkansas, and that the Court's ruling would accordingly impose a burden on the State of locating thousands of delinquent property owners because of the "inefficiencies caused by delinquent taxpayers." Thomas instead believed that the Arkansas system requiring the property owner to maintain a current address with the state taxing authority was reasonable and sufficient.
 Subsequent developments 
Jones v. Flowers was characterized as "an almost paradigmatic case pitting an individual against the state."Court Puts Teeth in 'Notice' Needed to Seize Property, Linda Greenhouse. New York Times, April 27, 2006. It was also said to be the second decision that yearSee also Roberts' majority decision in Gonzales v. O Centro Espirita Beneficente Uniao do Vegetal, , in which the Court ruled that under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, the government had failed to establish a compelling interest in prosecuting a church for its ritual use of a hallucinogenic tea. in which Roberts had "expressed frustration with a bureaucratic response to a serious concern."High Court Rules Against State's Seizure of House, David G. Savage.  Los Angeles Times, April 27, 2006.
The case was perceived as an interesting look into the new Roberts Court, as the new Chief Justice chose a decision for his fourth opinion that was contrary to the position of Bush administration lawyers, Justices Scalia and Thomas, "the court's two best-known conservatives,"Greenhouse, supra. and Justice Anthony Kennedy, who was expected to be the Court's swing vote following the retirement of Justice Sandra Day O'Connor.  This was the first majority opinion by Roberts to provoke any dissents.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 547
 Footnotes 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States civil forfeiture case law
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:History of Little Rock, Arkansas
Category:Foreclosure
"""

From "Jones v. Harris Associates" ==> """
Jones v. Harris Associates L.P., 559 U.S. 335 (2010), is a case decided by the United States Supreme Court in which investors claimed that the fees they paid to an investment advisor were too steep, violating the Investment Company Act of 1940..Justices Scrutinize Adviser Pay (NYT)Mutual Assured Destruction: A big financial compensation case hits the Supreme Court. (WSJ)
The case held that the court has the jurisdiction to regulate fees of investment advisers in the mutual fund industry under the Investment Company Act of 1940, when those fees are excessive, and in breach of fiduciary duty. It is notable from a law and economics perspective for the vigorous opinion in the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeal of Judge Frank Easterbrook and the powerful dissent of Richard Posner, regarding the necessity and market failure in respect of adviser fee regulation.
 Background 
Harris Associates LP was the adviser to a set of $47bn Chicago funds including the Oakmark brands and is owned by French fund Natixis. The mutual funds are ‘open ended’ meaning they buy back shares at current asset value. Harris Associates was sued by Jones and other investors in Harris’ mutual funds. They argued that under the Investment Company Act 1940 s 36(b) and Gartenberg v. Merrill Lynch Asset Management, Inc., 694 F.2d 923 (2d Cir. 1982) the company's fees were unreasonably high.
After an adverse finding in the Illinois District Court, Jones appealed to the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals.
Seventh Circuit
The majority of the Court of Appeals ruled against the plaintiffs citing a lack of judicial authority to regulate investment company fees. Easterbrook, reading for the majority, argued that the free market was the best regulator of the fees. Easterbrook rejected the argument, saying the government was in no place to make such an assessment. ‘Like the plaintiffs, the second circuit in Gartenberg expressed some skepticism of competition’s power to constrain investment advisers’ fees.
Posner, reading a dissenting judgment, argued that the majority's decision ran counter to well established principle in Gartenberg, that the market was ineffective to solve the problem and that procedurally the decision was flawed since it was not circulated prior to publication, as is required in the case of a circuit split. He would have held that the case should be heard en banc (i.e. all the judges of the bench give a full hearing).
Jones then appealed to the Supreme Court which granted certiorari on March 9, 2009.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court unanimously agreed with the plaintiffs and held the Seventh Circuit erred in holding that claims alleging mutual fund management's fees were too high is not cognizable under Section 36(b) of the Investment Company Act. Justice Alito wrote the majority opinion arguing the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals erred in not applying the established standard from Gartenberg v. Merrill Lynch Asset Management, Inc.. The Court established that the ICA requires for a claim to be valid there must be a determination that the fee is "so disproportionately large it bears no reasonable relationship to the services rendered."
Notes
External links
 Case Profile at ScotusWiki
 Taxi firm legal issues like Rideshare, Transport Licensing Division (PTLD) 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Jones v. Hendrix" ==> """
Jones v. Hendrix (Docket 21–857) is a pending United States Supreme Court case related to habeas corpus.
 Background 
Marcus Jones was convicted in 2000 of being a felon in possession of a firearm, a federal crime.(g)(1) His first habeas petition was resolved in 2006. In 2019, in Rehaif v. United States, the Supreme Court held that people convicted of prohibited possession crimes under § 922(g) must be aware of their unlawful status, in addition to knowingly possessing firearms. Under the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996, prisoners are barred from filing "second or successive" petitions for habeas corpus unless they meet certain exceptions, including if the Supreme Court has set forth a "new rule of constitutional law." However, there is no analogous exception for changes in the interpretation of criminal statutes. Jones tried to seek relief under , but was unsuccessful. The United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit held that no provision of federal habeas law allowed for review of his revised Rehaif claim, as he had already filed his first habeas petition a decade earlier.
Jones filed a petition for a writ of certiorari.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case on May 16, 2022. On June 17, 2022, the Solicitor General of the United States announced she would not defend the Eighth Circuit's judgment. On June 28, 2022, the Supreme Court appointed Morgan L. Ratner to argue as amicus curiae in support of the judgment below.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2023 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
"""

From "Jones v. Mississippi" ==> """
Jones v. Mississippi, 593 U.S. ___ (2021), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding the imposition of life sentences for juveniles. The Supreme Court had previously ruled in  Miller v. Alabama in 2012 that mandatory life sentences without parole for juvenile offenders was considered cruel and unusual punishment outside of extreme cases of permanent incorrigibility, and made this decision retroactive in Montgomery v. Louisiana in 2016. In Jones, a juvenile offender who was 15 at the time of his offense, challenged his life sentence following Montgomery but was denied by the state. In a 6–3 decision with all six conservative justices upholding the life sentence without parole for Jones, the Court ruled that the states have discretionary ability to hold juvenile offenders to life sentences without parole without having to make a separate assessment of their incorrigibility.
 Background 
On August 9, 2004, 15-year-old Mississippi resident Brett Jones (born July 17, 1989)Supreme Court of the United States, Jones v. Mississippi, Petition for a Writ of Certiorari, page 11aU.S. Supreme Court Heard MacArthur Justice Center Case fatally stabbed his grandfather Bertis after a confrontation over Brett's girlfriend. Jones claimed in court his action was in self-defense. In 2005, he was convicted in Lee County Circuit Court and sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole, the mandatory sentence under state law.
In 2012, the Supreme Court ruled in Miller v. Alabama that mandatory life sentences without the possibility of parole for juveniles was considered a cruel and unusual punishment under the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution, and that judges in such cases should be able to consider other factors that may influence such acts.. The ruling of Miller v. Alabama was made retroactive to all previous cases in the Supreme Court's decision Montgomery v. Louisiana.. The decision of Montgomery barred the use of life sentences without parole "for all but the rarest of juvenile offenders, those whose crimes reflect permanent incorrigibility". Following Miller and Montgomery, several states adjusted their laws to reflect the Court's rulings but Mississippi remained a state where life sentences could still be handed to juveniles determined to be incorrigible.
The state of Mississippi granted Jones a rehearing as a result of Montgomery, but still resentenced him to a life sentence without parole. According to Jones' lawyer, the state court failed to consider any aspect related to the "permanent incorrigibility" or potential for rehabilitation, thus violating the ruling from Montgomery, and thus sought appeals through the Supreme Court.
 Supreme Court 
Prior to certifying Jones' case, the Supreme Court had been considering the case of Mathena v. Malvo (Docket 18-217), a similar case from Virginia involving Lee Boyd Malvo that raised the question if courts must determine if a juvenile is deemed incorrigible before passing a life sentence. Oral arguments had been held in October 2019, during which the Justices referred back to Montgomery; Justice Kavanaugh recognized that a ruling had to differentiate "someone who's merely immature as opposed to incorrigible". Due to a change in Virginia's state law, the case was rendered moot before the Court could deliver the opinion.
Jones' case was granted by the Supreme Court in March 2020. Oral arguments were held on November 3, 2020.
The Court issued its decision on April 22, 2021. The Court affirmed the Mississippi Court of Appeals decision to maintain Jones' life sentence in a 6–3 vote. Justice Brett Kavanaugh wrote the majority opinion, which was joined by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justices Samuel Alito, Neil Gorsuch, and Amy Coney Barrett. Justice Kavanaugh wrote in his opinion that "Determining the proper sentence in such a case raises profound questions of morality and social policy. The States, not the federal courts, make those broad moral and policy judgments in the first instance when enacting their sentencing laws. And state sentencing judges and juries then determine the proper sentence in individual cases in light of the facts and circumstances of the offense, and the background of the offender." As such, Kavanaugh concluded that "a discretionary sentencing system is both constitutionally necessary and constitutionally sufficient". Justice Clarence Thomas concurred in the judgment.
Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote the dissenting opinion joined by Justices Stephen Breyer and Elena Kagan. Sotomayor wrote that the majority opinion was "an abrupt break from precedent". She continued that "The question is whether the state, at some point, must consider whether a juvenile offender has demonstrated maturity and rehabilitation sufficient to merit a chance at life beyond the prison in which he has grown up. For most, the answer is yes."
 See also 
 Graham v. Florida (2010)
 Roper v. Simmons (2005)
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Eighth Amendment case law
Category:Juvenile justice system
Category:Life imprisonment
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Jones v. North Carolina Prisoners' Labor Union" ==> """
Jones v. North Carolina Prisoners' Labor Union, 433 U.S. 119 (1977), was a United States Supreme Court case where the court held that prison inmates do not have a right under the First Amendment to join labor unions.. 
See also
 First Amendment
 Prison labor
 Prisoners' rights
 Turner v. Safley
References
External links
Category:Labor relations in the United States
Category:Penal labor in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States freedom of association case law
Category:United States public employment case law
Category:Penal system in North Carolina
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:Labor relations in North Carolina
"""

From "Jones v. United States (1890)" ==> """
Jones v. United States 137 U.S. 202 (1890) is a United States Supreme Court case in which the court held that the Guano Islands Act, which states that any island that fell under the act was under the jurisdiction of any existing statues or laws pertaining to high seas, was constitutional. The case originated from claims the United States government could not prosecute Henry Jones for a murder committed on Navassa Island during a worker riot.Jones v. United States, .
Background
The Guano Islands Act, passed in 1856, allowed any American to claim as property of the United States any unclaimed island that contained deposits of guano. These lands would be proclaimed territory of the United States and, according to Section 6 of the act, any crimes or offenses committed on or adjacent to these islands "shall be deemed committed on the high seas, on board a merchant ship or vessel belonging to the United States; and shall be punished according to the laws of the United States relating to such ships or vessels and offenses on the high seas ..."Guano Islands Act ()
As of 1857 Navassa Island, claimed under the Guano Islands Act, was under the ownership of the Navassa Phosphate Company of Baltimore."Guano Islands Sales",  By 1889 the company had a reported 148 workers on the island for the purpose of mining. Under reports of hazardous work conditions, a riot among the miners broke out. During the riot five supervisors died and 18 workers returned to Baltimore on a U.S. warship to await three separate trials on the charges of murder. The Order of Galilean Fishermen, a Black fraternal society, decided to fund the defense of the miners.Navassa Island Incident 1889–1891 https://www.globalsecurity.org/military/ops/navassa-island.htm
Facts of the case
In the specific case of worker Henry Jones, he was charged with the murder of Thomas N. Foster. The defense claimed the accused were justified in their action under the contention that Jones acted in self defense, and that the United States did not have jurisdiction over the island.
The Maryland court dismissed these claims and, under the charges of murder, sentenced the defendant with the death penalty.
Appeals
The case was appealed from the Maryland District Court to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, which was appealed up to the Supreme Court.
Decision
The court examined the issue as to whether the Guano Islands Act, specifically on the point of whether jurisdiction of US Law, applied to Navassa Island and thus the accused murders. The court claimed it did. Justice Horace Gray, wrote the decision of the court. He stated that due to acts and amendments from Congress, any crime committed on the high seas would be directed and subject to trial within the state that the territorial waters belong to or the state in which the accused originates from. On this, Gray claims Jones was able to be tried despite not being within an incorporated state when the crime was committed. Because of this reasoning, it was concluded that Section 6 of the Guano Islands Act was in line with settled law.
It was then stated that Navassa Island fell within the act as it had confirmed supplies of guano and thus fell within all the rules and conditions stated within the act. Thus the court affirmed the decisions of the lower courts to charge Jones with murder and he was subsequently sentenced to death.
Aftermath
Jones v. United States (1890) was a contentious case publicly at the time. Many saw it as a case of worker and Blacks rights against White overseers as all the supervisors killed on Navassa Island were White, and all those charged with murder were people of color.
While the court upheld Henry Jones' death sentence, efforts by Black-run organizations and communities, as well as White jurors from the trials, to have the sentence commuted eventually reached President Benjamin Harrison. Harrison subsequently commuted the sentences to prison time and the case was brought up in the 1891 State of the Union Address.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 137
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Guano Islands Act
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Jones v. United States (1983)" ==> """
Jones v. United States, 463 U.S. 354 (1983), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the court, for the first time, addressed whether the due process requirement of the Fourteenth Amendment allows defendants, who were found not guilty by reason of insanity (NGRI) of a misdemeanor crime, to be involuntarily confined to a mental institution until such times as they are no longer a danger to themselves or others with few other criteria or procedures limiting the actions of the state.Jones v. United States, .
Background
Historically, those persons acquitted of a crime by reason of insanity (insanity acquittees) were subjected to commitment procedures to institutions for the "criminally insane" with little attention or oversight provided as to what these procedures were. In the early 1970s, the procedures began to be examined legally on constitutional as well as therapeutic grounds.
At that time, U.S. state jurisdictions had varying criteria and procedures governing this situation. In some states, insanity acquittees were governed by the same rules and procedures as an individual facing civil commitment. Another group of states, although treating insanity acquittees in a generally similar fashion as the civilly committed, had more stringent criteria governing insanity acquittees; for example, in emergency commitment proceedings in which a civilly committed person may be committed for a maximum of one week, an insanity acquittee may be committed on an emergency basis for 90 days—and then the discharge would take place only after judicial approval. A third group subjected an insanity acquittee to automatic, indefinite commitment, usually with periodic reviews to determine if commitment continued to be necessary.
Facts of the case
On September 19, 1975, Michael Jones was charged with petit larceny, a misdemeanor, for attempting to steal a jacket from a Washington, D.C. department store. Upon arraignment in the District of Columbia Superior Court, the judge ordered a competency evaluation at St. Elizabeth's Hospital. The competency report to the court was that Jones suffered from paranoid schizophrenia, but that he was competent to proceed to trial. Eventually, Jones plead not guilty by reason of insanity to the  misdemeanor offense, which carried a one year maximum sentence; the prosecution did not contest the plea and Jones was automatically committed to St. Elizabeth's for a minimum of 50 days.
Upon his first release hearing in May 1976, his request for release was denied. In his second release hearing held in February 1977, his request for either release or civil commitment was also denied, despite the contention of Jones' counsel that his cumulative hospitalization exceeded the maximum penalty of a one year incarceration for the crime. For the government's case, a psychologist from St. Elizabeth's Hospital testified that, in the opinion of the hospital's staff, Jones continued to actively suffer from paranoid schizophrenia and therefore remained a danger to himself and others.
Appeals
The case was appealed to the District of Columbia Court of Appeals, which affirmed the lower court's decision, although three judges dissented. The case was then appealed to the Supreme Court.
Decision
The Supreme Court examined two issues. The first was whether there was a constitutional basis for the practice in most states, and the District of Columbia, of automatically committing insanity acquitees. The court found that there was. Justice Powell, writing for the court, said that Jones' verdict established that he committed the crime and that he did so because he was mentally ill by a preponderance of evidence. "Congress has determined that a criminal defendant found not guilty by reason of insanity in the District of Columbia should be committed indefinitely to a mental institution for treatment and the protection of society."
The second issue was the proportionality of the commitment compared to Jones' hypothetical maximum sentence had he been imprisoned; that is, does the maximum sentence provide a constitutional limit for Jones' commitment? Although three judges at the District Court level had agreed that the constitution does provide such a  limit, the Supreme Court rejected this line of thinking. Writing for the majority, Powell argued that different considerations go into the choosing of a sentence than those underlying a commitment of an insanity acquittee. He argued against the idea that indefinite commitment amounted to punishment.
Indefinite commitment of an insanity acquittee, based on proof of insanity by only a preponderance of the evidence, comports with due process. Addington v. Texas (1979) held that the government, in a civil commitment proceeding, must demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that the individual is mentally ill and dangerous. However, the concerns critical to that decision—based on the risk of error that a person might be committed for mere "idiosyncratic behavior"—are diminished or absent in the case of insanity acquitees, and do not require the same standard of proof in both cases. Proof that the acquittee committed a criminal act as a result of mental illness eliminates the risk that he is being committed for mere idiosyncratic behavior.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 463
 Jackson v. Indiana (1972)
 O'Connor v. Donaldson (1975)
 Addington v. Texas (1979)
 Foucha v. Louisiana (1992)
Footnotes
External links
Category:United States civil commitment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1983 in United States case law
"""

From "Jones v. United States (1999)" ==> """
Jones v. United States, 526 U.S. 227 (1999), is a United States Supreme Court case interpreting the federal carjacking statute, , to set forth three distinct crimes, each with distinct elements.  The Court drew this conclusion from the structure of the statute, under which two subsections provided for additional punishment if the defendant inflicts more serious harm.  The Court also distinguished Almendarez-Torres v. United States, , because that case allowed for sentencing enhancement based on a prior conviction.
Facts
Jones and two accomplices, Oliver and McMillan, held up two men. Jones and McMillan took the victims' money. Oliver beat one of the men with a gun.  Oliver and McMillan left the scene in Jones's car, while Jones forced the other man into a car and drove off in it. Jones stopped to put the man out, then sped off again, chased this time by the police. Jones then crashed into a telephone pole, ending the chase.
Jones was indicted in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of California for violating the federal carjacking statute, . The indictment did not name the particular subsection Jones was accused of violating. The magistrate judge informed Jones he faced a maximum sentence of 15 years, the smallest maximum sentence under the statute's three subsections. The trial judge instructed the jury under that subsection, which did not require proof of the fact or the extent of the victim's injuries. Jones was convicted of the carjacking count. 
A presentence investigation report recommended that Jones receive a 25-year sentence because one of the victims had suffered "serious bodily injury". Jones objected that this sentence was not authorized because the serious bodily injury component was not charged in the indictment. The district court overruled this objection, found that there had been serious bodily injury by a preponderance of the evidence, and imposed a 25-year sentence.  On appeal, the Ninth Circuit took the view that the enhanced provisions were merely sentencing factors that did not need to be set forth in the indictment or submitted to the jury. It therefore affirmed this aspect of Jones's conviction. The U.S. Supreme Court then agreed to review the case.
Majority opinion
The federal carjacking statute, , reads:
Whoever, possessing a firearm as defined in section 921 of [Title 18], takes a motor vehicle that has been transported, shipped, or received in interstate or foreign commerce from the person or presence of another by force and violence or by intimidation, or attempts to do so, shall—
 be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 15 years, or both,
 if serious bodily injury (as defined in section 1365 of [Title 18]) results, be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 25 years, or both, and
if death results, be fined under this title or be imprisoned for any number of years up to life, or both.
The Court ultimately held that the additional elements specified in subsections (2) and (3)—serious bodily injury and death—were elements of greater crimes that had to be charged in the indictment, submitted to the jury, and proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
The Court has never defined what makes a certain fact an "element" subject to the Sixth Amendment jury-trial requirement, as opposed to a mere "sentencing factor" not subject to the requirement.  And the Court began by conceding that "at first glance" the three subsections were mere sentencing factors. Yet "countervailing structural considerations" led the Court to conclude that the additional facts in subsections (2) and (3) were in fact elements of two greater crimes.
Reading the text closely, the Court observed that, since none of the numbered subsections can stand by itself as defining a crime, neither can the first paragraph.  "In isolation, it would merely describe some very obnoxious behavior, leaving any reader assuming that it must be a crime, but never being actually told that it is.  Only the numbered subsidiary provisions complete the thought."  Even so, such a close reading of the statutory text only helps to infer congressional intent.  "If a given statute is unclear about treating... a fact as element or penalty aggravator, it makes sense to look at what other statutes have done, on the fair assumption that Congress is unlikely to intend any radical departures from past practice without making a point of saying so."
In Almendarez-Torres v. United States, , Congress's nearly uniform history of treating recidivism as a sentencing factor led the Court to conclude that the aggravating fact there—a prior conviction for certain crimes—was merely a sentencing factor exempt from the jury-trial requirement of the Sixth Amendment.  By contrast, Congress has made "serious bodily injury" an element of many crimes, such as assault by a member of the armed forces, ; violence at international airports, ; and genocide, .  Furthermore, carjacking is a species of robbery, and hence both Congress and state legislatures have traditionally treated serious bodily injury as an element of a more serious robbery crime.
Both the Government and the Ninth Circuit had identified statements of members of Congress that suggested, in their opinion, Congress's intent to make "serious bodily injury" a sentencing factor.  The Court was not persuaded, for some members had used the phrase "penalty enhancement", which the Court did not take to mean precisely the same thing as "sentencing factor".  The fact that other members had referred to the crime of carjacking, as opposed to the crimes of carjacking, also had little significance for the Court.  Ultimately, there was no reason to believe that in this case Congress had abandoned any of the models it had previously employed.  
Although there were arguments to be made in favor of treating "serious bodily injury" as a sentencing factor, the rule that statutes should be construed to avoid constitutional difficulties counseled in favor of treating it as an element of the crime.  In Mullaney v. Wilbur, , the Court had held that a state could not define murder so as to require the defendant to affirmatively prove that he had acted in the heat of passion, so as to reduce the crime to manslaughter.  In light of the "centuries-old common law recognition of malice as the fact distinguishing murder from manslaughter" and of the "widely held modern view that heat of passion, once raised by the evidence, was a subject of the State's burden," due process required the state to bear the burden of proving absence of heat of passion.  Otherwise, the state could "manipulate its way out" of the requirement that it prove every element of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt. 
In Patterson v. New York, , however, the Court had held that New York's definition of homicide, which had no malice element, did not improperly force the defendant to disprove that he had acted with malice.  New York was free to define homicide without reference to a malice element without violating the traditional rule that the burden of proof in criminal cases rests on the state.  And in McMillan v. Pennsylvania, , the Court held that a mandatory minimum five-year sentence for possessing a firearm was not subject to the jury-trial and proof-beyond-a-reasonable-doubt requirement, because it did not increase the maximum punishment to which the defendant was exposed.
The distinguishing factor between Mullaney on the one hand and Patterson and McMillan on the other was that the fact in question exposed the defendant to a greater punishment.  So too in this case, the facts of "serious bodily injury" or death exposed the defendant charged with federal carjacking to greater punishment than if those facts were not proved.  Furthermore, removing these determinations from the jury's purview was not consistent with the role of the jury in the 18th century, which had tremendous control over the punishment a defendant would suffer.  Thus, to avoid any unnecessary tension with Mullaney, Patterson, and McMillan, the Court held that these facts were elements of separate federal carjacking crimes.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Kennedy faulted the Court for skewing a simple question of statutory interpretation by invoking the "specter of grave and doubtful constitutional interpretations".  He believed that the Court's textual analysis was incorrect, and that the constitutional rule the Court formulated would "upset the proper federal balance" of power between the judiciary and the legislature.  As far as the textual analysis was concerned, the fact that the opening paragraph was complete in itself, and that the first subsection added no new facts, led Kennedy to conclude that the other two were mere sentencing enhancements.  "Serious bodily harm", like recidivism, was "as typical a sentencing factor as one might imagine"; indeed, Kennedy pointed to the laws of several states that made the magnitude of harm to the victim or victims the basis for increased criminal punishment.  Significant differences between the structure of the federal carjacking statute and both the other federal robbery statutes and the state statutes on which the majority relied also suggested to Kennedy that the text of the federal carjacking statute made "serious bodily injury" a sentencing factor.  
Because, for Kennedy, the text of the statute was not clearly susceptible to two different interpretations, there was no need to invoke the principle of constitutional avoidance as the majority did.  In any event, the constitutional rule the Court articulated could too easily be circumvented, simply by rewriting the statute using slightly different words.  The requirements imposed by the Sixth Amendment should not depend on the vagaries of Congress's choice of words when it drafts a statute.  And if that should be so, the Court should more clearly spell out what words and phrases Congress should use in order to trigger certain constitutional protections.  Furthermore, Kennedy saw no difference of constitutional significance between recidivism, which the Court had already held was excluded from the set of facts to which the jury-trial requirement applies, and "serious bodily injury"; the mere "tradition" of doing so might justify this difference, if it were more clear that the carjacking statute were consistent with that tradition.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 526
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Sixth Amendment sentencing case law
Category:Motor vehicle theft
Category:1999 in United States case law
"""

From "Jones v. Van Zandt" ==> """
Jones v. Van Zandt, 46 U.S. (5 How.) 215 (1847), was a landmark US Supreme Court decision involving the constitutionality of slavery that was a predecessor of Dred Scott v. Sandford. The Supreme Court was then led by Chief Justice Roger Taney, who owned slaves and wrote the Dred Scott decision but not Jones. The Court unanimously reached the decision that the Fugitive Slave Act was constitutional and that the institution of slavery remained a matter for individual states to decide.
Background
John Van Zandt was an abolitionist who aided the Underground Railroad resistance movement in Ohio after having been a slaveholder in Kentucky. At about three on Sunday morning, two white men on horseback stopped a wagon with a closed cover being driven by a black man. The wagon belonged to Van Zandt, who got out and tried to free the reins. Inside were several black people. The driver and a 30-year-old black man named Andrew escaped, but the slavecatchers took the wagon with the rest to a jail in Covington, Kentucky, across the Ohio River and about 10 miles from the stop.
Wharton Jones owned Andrew and eight other slaves in Boone County, Kentucky, about 12 or 14 miles from the stop. He sued Zandt in federal court in Ohio for aiding the escaping slaves by relying upon the Fugitive Slave Act of 1793. Justice McLean, riding circuit, conducted the jury trial. Salmon P. Chase and Bell unsuccessfully defended Van Zandt; the jury decided in Jones' favor.
Van Zandt appealed, through his attorneys, including William H. Seward. Abolitionists used Van Zandt's Supreme Court appeal as a vehicle to reach the underlying constitutional question since Ohio had been free since the Northwest Ordinance, even before statehood. Van Zandt argued unsuccessfully that the he was only giving a ride to black people walking on an Ohio road and that law of Ohio presumed all people were free. During the trial, witnesses stated that Van Zandt said that he knew they were escaped slaves but ought to be free.
Decision
Justice Levi Woodbury, who did not own slaves, announced the unanimous decision of the court. No formal notice of fugitive status was required before apprehension since the circumstances showed both notice and concealment. The constitutionality of the fugitive slave law had been established by Justice Joseph Story in Prigg v. Pennsylvania.
The historian Paul Finkelman believes that the decision laid the groundwork for Dred Scott because it put whites on notice that any black might be a slave and found that no black had any rights under the Constitution.Paul Finkelman, Slavery in the United States: Persons or Property? (duke.edu 1982) p. 129, available at https://scholarship.law.duke.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=5386&context=faculty_scholarship
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
Category:United States slavery case law
"""

From "Joseph Burstyn, Inc. v. Wilson" ==> """
Joseph Burstyn, Inc. v. Wilson, 343 U.S. 495 (1952), also referred to as the Miracle Decision, was a landmark decision by the United States Supreme Court that largely marked the decline of motion picture censorship in the United States.Jowett, G. (1996). "A significant medium for the communication of ideas": The Miracle decision and the decline of motion picture censorship, 1952–1968. Movie censorship and American culture, 258–276. Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press. It determined that provisions of the New York Education Law that had allowed a censor to forbid the commercial showing of a motion picture film that the censor deemed "sacrilegious" were a "restraint on freedom of speech" and thereby a violation of the First Amendment..
In recognizing that a film was an artistic medium entitled to protection under the First Amendment, the Court overturned its previous decision in Mutual Film Corporation v. Industrial Commission of Ohio, which found that movies were not a form of speech worthy of First Amendment protection, but merely a business..
Background
The case was an appeal to the Supreme Court by film distributor Joseph Burstyn after the state of New York rescinded the license to exhibit the short film "The Miracle", originally made as a segment of the Italian film L'Amore. Burstyn was the distributor of the subtitled English versions of the film in the U.S.
The film was directed by Italian neorealist Roberto Rossellini. Its plot centered on a man, "Saint Joseph" (played by director Federico Fellini), who villainously impregnates "Nanni" (Anna Magnani), a disturbed peasant who believes herself to be the Virgin Mary. Fellini and Rossellini also co-wrote the script for "The Miracle".
"The Miracle" originally premiered in Europe in 1948 as the anthology film L'Amore with two segments, "Il Miracolo" and "La voce umana", the latter based on Jean Cocteau's play The Human Voice and also starring Magnani. The film was first shown in New York in November 1950, presented under the title Ways of Love, with English subtitles. In December, Ways of Love was voted the best foreign language film of 1950 by the New York Film Critics Circle.
"The Miracle" in particular sparked widespread moral outrage, and was criticized as "vile, harmful, and blasphemous."Kozlovic, Anton Karl (2003). Religious Film Fears 1: Satanic Infusion, Graven Images and Iconographic Perversion, 5 (2-3). Protesters at the Paris theater where the film was screened picketed the film with vitriolic signs carrying messages like "This Picture Is an Insult to Every Decent Woman and Her Mother," "Don't Be a Communist," and "Don't Enter the Cesspool."Black, G. D. (1998). The Catholic crusade against the movies, 1940-1975. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
After its American release, the New York State Board of Regents reportedly received "hundreds of letters, telegrams, postcards, affidavits and other communications" both protesting and defending the exhibition of the film. Three members of the board were subsequently ordered to examine it, and they concluded that "The Miracle" was "sacrilegious" and directed the appellants to show otherwise at a hearing. The hearing determined that the film indeed constituted religious bigotry and on February 16, 1951, the Commissioner of Education was ordered to rescind the picture's license. "Rossellini's Religious Films"
The appellant brought the Board of Regents' decision to the New York courts for review, on the grounds that the statute "violates the First Amendment as a prior restraint upon freedom of speech and of the press," "that it is invalid under the same Amendment as a violation of the guaranty of separate church and state and as a prohibition of the free exercise of religion" and "that the term 'sacrilegious' is so vague and indefinite as to offend due process." The decision was upheld by the state courts, including the New York Court of Appeals. The decision was then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court decision in 1952 brought films under the free speech and free press provisions of the First Amendment, overturning the Mutual case that had stood as precedent to censor films since 1915. It is true that, because the decision said that films could still be censored under a narrowly drawn statute for obscenity, states and municipalities continued censoring, many until the mid-1960s and Maryland until 1981. However, the Burstyn case was the turning point, as it became the precedent used in many other challenge cases.Wittern-Keller, Laura. Freedom of the Screen. University Press of Kentucky, 2008.
Relevant statute provisions
The part of the statute (N. Y. Education Law, §122) in question that forbade the exhibition of unlicensed films read:
[It is unlawful] to exhibit, or to sell, lease or lend for exhibition at any place of amusement for pay or in connection with any business in the state of New York, any motion picture film or reel [with specified exceptions not relevant here], unless there is at the time in full force and effect a valid license or permit therefor of the education department ...
The paragraph allowing the repeal of "sacrilegious" films' license read:
The director of the [motion picture] division [of the education department] or, when authorized by the regents, the officers of a local office or bureau shall cause to be promptly examined every motion picture film submitted to them as herein required, and unless such film or a part thereof is obscene, indecent, immoral, inhuman, sacrilegious, or is of such a character that its exhibition would tend to corrupt morals or incite to crime, shall issue a license therefor. If such director or, when so authorized, such officer shall not license any film submitted, he shall furnish to the applicant therefor a written report of the reasons for his refusal and a description of each rejected part of a film not rejected in toto.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 343
Freedman v. Maryland (1965 U. S. Supreme Court case)
Whirlpool of Desire (1935) French film also distributed by Burstyn and Arthur Mayer
References
External links
L'Amore (1948) at Internet Movie Database
Category:1952 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Film censorship in the United States
Category:Film controversies in the United States
"""

From "JPMorgan Chase Bank v. Traffic Stream (BVI) Infrastructure Ltd." ==> """
JPMorgan Chase Bank v. Traffic Stream (BVI) Infrastructure Ltd., 536 U.S. 88 (2002), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a corporation organized under the laws of a British overseas territory is considered a "citizen or subject of a foreign state" for purposes of federal court jurisdiction.
 Background 
Chase Manhattan Bank (which later became JP Morgan Chase) sued Traffic Stream (BVI) Infrastructure Ltd., a company incorporated in the British Virgin Islands, in a dispute over a financing. Chase filed the suit in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York. Federal jurisdiction was based on alienage under 28 U.S.C. § 1332(a)(3), in that the suit was between a United States company and a "citizen or subject of a foreign state." The District Court ruled for Chase, and Traffic Stream appealed.
Although no jurisdictional issue had been raised in the District Court, on appeal the Second Circuit inquired sua sponte whether federal subject-matter jurisdiction existed over the action. The Second Circuit concluded that jurisdiction was lacking. The court reasoned that since the British Virgin Islands are a dependent territory rather than a "foreign state," a British Virgin Islands corporation was not a "citizen or subject of a foreign state." The Second Circuit panel relied on the Circuit's prior Matimak decision, which had reached the same conclusion concerning a citizen of Hong Kong prior to the transfer of Hong Kong from British to Chinese sovereignty.
Traffic Stream petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court for certiorari, with the support of an amicus curiae brief from the government of the United Kingdom. The Court agreed to hear the case.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice David H. Souter wrote the opinion for a unanimous Court, reversing the Second Circuit's decision and holding that a British Virgin Islands company like Traffic Stream was properly considered a "citizen or subject of a foreign state" for jurisdictional purposes.
The Court observed that Congress has authorized the federal courts to hear civil actions involving more than $75,000 between "citizens of a State and citizens or subjects of a foreign state." A corporation incorporated under the laws of a foreign state is deemed a citizen of that foreign state. The Second Circuit's view was that because the British Virgin Islands are a British dependent territory rather than a sovereign state under British and international law, a British Virgin Islands company was not a citizen or subject of a foreign state for purposes of alienage jurisdiction.
The Supreme Court disagreed, finding the distinction drawn by the Second Circuit to be "entirely beside the point of the statute providing alienage jurisdiction." After surveying the political status of British territories such as the British Virgin Islands, as well as the constitutional and statutory history of alienage jurisdiction, the Court held that a British Virgin Islands corporation could be considered a citizen or subject of a sovereign state, the United Kingdom. The fact that British Virgin Islands residents are not citizens or subjects of the United Kingdom under British nationality law, the Court held, did not negate that they are citizens or subjects of a foreign state for purposes of the alienage jurisdiction statute. The Court also observed that its decision was consistent with the views of the governments of the United Kingdom, the British Virgin Islands, and the United States.
 See also 
 HIH Casualty and General Insurance Ltd v Chase Manhattan Bank
 References 
External links
Category:2002 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:JPMorgan Chase
Category:United Kingdom–United States relations
Category:British Virgin Islands company law
Category:United States federal question jurisdiction case law
"""

From "Judulang v. Holder" ==> """
Judulang v. Holder, 565 U.S. 42 (2011), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States involving deportation law and procedure.  The case involved a rule adopted by the Board of Immigration Appeals for determining the eligibility of certain long-term resident aliens, when they are facing deportation because of a prior criminal conviction, to apply to the Attorney General for relief.  In a unanimous opinion delivered by Justice Elena Kagan, the Court invalidated the BIA's "comparable-grounds rule" as arbitrary and capricious, holding that it had no rational relation to the merits of an alien's claim for remaining in the United States, nor to the policy and purposes of the immigration laws.
The rule the Court invalidated only applied to long-term resident aliens who were facing deportation because of a guilty plea entered prior to 1996.
Prior to statutory amendment in 1996, the ability of the Attorney General to extend relief only applied to exclusion proceedings in section 212c, which sought to prevent aliens from entering the country.  Despite the lack of a statutory basis, the Attorney General and the BIA had long provided for similar relief to resident aliens in deportation proceedings, to avoid inconsistent and unfair results.  The entire system was overhauled by Congress in 1996 and section 212c was repealed.  In INS v. St. Cyr, however, the Supreme Court ruled that for those aliens who had entered guilty pleas prior to the statutory change, the same 212c opportunity to apply for relief must be available as was at the time their plea was entered.
By 2005, the BIA adopted the comparative-grounds rule, which compared the statutory ground into which the alien's conviction had been classified for deportation with the statutory grounds from which aliens seeking entry into the U.S. could seek relief from exclusion.  If there was not an exclusion ground that was comparable in type and scope, the alien could not apply for relief, even if the particular crime for which deportation was sought would have been covered by one of the exclusion grounds.  The Court invalidated the rule, finding its statutory comparison irrelevant and the arbitrary equivalent of a coin toss.
In an editorial, The New York Times characterized the Court's "stinging opinion" as reinforcing the "message that lower courts have been sending for many years: the law applied in immigration cases too often fails to meet the standards of justice.".
Background of the case
Development of the waiver in deportation hearings and the comparable-grounds rule
Prior to 1996, the immigration statutes permitted the Attorney General to waive the inadmissibility of [long-term resident] aliens seeking to enter the country, if their exclusion was being sought for prior criminal convictions, except for certain grounds deemed nonwaivable.  The statute did not provide for a similar waiver for aliens facing deportation, however, which led to inconsistent results based on irrelevant differences, such as that an alien who briefly left the country but then sought to reenter was eligible for a waiver, but not an alien who never left the country, even if both had the same prior conviction.  In a series of decisions beginning with Attorney General Robert H. Jackson in 1940, and built upon by the BIA and the federal courts, the Attorney General's discretionary waiver power was thus extended to aliens facing deportation notwithstanding its lack of a statutory basis.
In 1996, Congress repealed section 212(c), instituted new proceedings for both deportations and exclusions (now a unified removal proceeding), and expanded the grounds for which waiver was not available.  The Supreme Court in INS v. St. Cyr, however, ruled that the waiver must be made available on the same terms as before for those aliens who had pleaded guilty prior to 1996, as this guilty plea may have been entered in reliance on the availability of the possibility of waiver.  The pre-1996 waiver, for both exclusion and deportation, thus had an "afterlife" for those aliens with pre-1996 guilty pleas.
The issue remained that the pre-1996 statutory grounds for exclusion differed from the pre-1996 statutory grounds for deportation.  By 2005, the BIA had adopted the comparative-grounds rule to determine when aliens facing deportation were eligible for a waiver.
Lower administrative and court proceedings
Joel Judulang, a citizen of the Philippines, had been a continuous lawful permanent resident of the U.S. since 1974, when he entered the country at the age of eight.All facts are from Judulang, slip op. at 8; more concise summary also in . After participating in a fight in which another person shot and killed someone, Judulang pleaded guilty to voluntary manslaughter in 1989 and received a suspended sentence and probation. In 2005, he pleaded guilty to another crime involving theft. DHS subsequently commenced a removal action to deport him, charging him with having committed an "aggravated felony" involving "a crime of violence," based on his old manslaughter conviction. 8 U.S.C. §§1101(a)(43)(F), 1227(a)(2)(A)(iii).
In 2005, an immigration judge ruled that Judulang was removable, and the BIA dismissed Judulang's claim that he received derivative U.S. citizenship through his parents, who became naturalized citizens. The 9th Circuit affirmed in 2007 and denied to grant a rehearing en banc.
The Immigration Judge ordered Judulang's deportation, and the BIA affirmed. As part of its decision, the BIA considered whether Judulang could apply for §212(c) relief. It held that he could not do so because the "crime of violence" deportation ground is not comparable to any exclusion ground, including the one for crimes involving moral turpitude. App. to Pet. for Cert. 8a. The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit denied Judulang's petition for review in reliance on circuit precedent upholding the BIA's comparable-grounds approach. Judulang v. Gonzales, 249 Fed. Appx. 499, 502 (2007).
The Supreme Court's decision
Justice Elena Kagan delivered the Court's unanimous opinion, reversing the Ninth Circuit's decision. Noting that although the arbitrary and capricious test is not a high hurdle to pass, the Court wrote that "[t]he BIA has flunked that test here. By hinging a deportable alien’s eligibility for discretionary relief on the chance correspondence between statutory categories—a matter irrelevant to the alien’s fitness to reside in this country—the BIA has failed to exercise its discretion in a reasoned manner."Judulang, slip op. at 10.
"Rather than considering factors that might be thought germane to the deportation decision, that policy hinges §212(c) eligibility on an irrelevant comparison between statutory provisions. Recall that the BIA asks whether the set of offenses in a particular deportation ground lines up with the set in an exclusion ground. But so what if it does? Does an alien charged with a particular deportation ground become more worthy of relief because that ground happens to match up with another? Or less worthy of relief because the ground does not? The comparison in no way changes the alien's prior offense or his other attributes and circumstances. So it is difficult to see why that comparison should matter. Each of these statutory grounds contains a slew of offenses. Whether each contains the same slew has nothing to do with whether a deportable alien whose prior conviction falls within both grounds merits the ability to seek a waiver."Judulang, slip op. at 12.
Re: that Judulang's deportation ground does not sufficiently overlap with the most similar exclusion ground, "That fact is as extraneous to the merits of the case as a coin flip would be."Judulang, slip op. at 13.
"And underneath this layer of arbitrariness lies yet another, because the outcome of the Board's comparable-grounds analysis itself may rest on the happenstance of an immigration official's charging decision."Judulang, slip op. at 14.  "So at base everything hangs on the fortuity of an individual official's decision. An alien appearing before one official may suffer deportation; an identically situated alien appearing before another may gain the right to stay in this country."Judulang, slip op. at 15.
The Government offered three main arguments in support of the comparable-grounds rule, all of which the Court found them all unpersuasive.  First, the Government argued that the text of the pre-1996 statute supported its rule, because it set forth excludable grounds that the AG could waive; the comparable-grounds rule thus matched the deportation waiver to those statutory grounds.  The Court considered this a misinterpretation of §212(c), which instead says that the Attorney General may admit any excludable alien except if the alien is charged with two specified grounds; "that means that once the Attorney General determines that the alien is not being excluded for those two reasons, the ground of exclusion no longer matters. At that point, the alien is eligible for relief, and the thing the Attorney General waives is not a particular exclusion ground, but the simple denial of entry."Judulang, slip op. at 16-17.  The Court further pointed out that the statute only covered exclusion and so its language can provide no support for a choice of deportation procedures.
Second, the Government claimed that it had been using the rule for a long time.  This was a "slender reed" to base its rule upon, the Court wrote, and cannot change the arbitrariness of the rule; a coin toss for the thousandth time is just as arbitrary as the first time.  The Court also did not believe the rule had the history the Government asserted, finding that there was confusion such that its application prior to 2005 was inconsistent.
Third, the Government claimed that the rule was a cost saver.  This alone could not justify it; flipping a coin would also be cheap.
Though Judulang argued that relief for aliens facing deportation should be available on the same terms as those facing exclusion, the Court found it unnecessary to resolve that issue.
References
External links
 full text Google Scholar
Legal Action Center file
analysis by SCOTUSblog
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Juilliard v. Greenman" ==> """
Juilliard v. Greenman, 110 U.S. 421 (1884), was a Supreme Court of the United States case in which issuance of greenbacks as legal tender in peacetime was challenged.
The Legal Tender Acts of 1862 and 1863 were upheld.
Augustus D. Juilliard sold and delivered 100 bales of cotton to Thomas S. Greenman for $5,122.90. Greenman tendered $5,100 in United States legal tender notes and the rest in coin, but Juilliard would not accept the U.S. notes. The tendered notes were originally issued under an act of Congress passed on February 25, 1862, and March 3, 1863, during the Civil War. An act of May 31, 1878 provided to "forbid the further retirement of United States legal tender notes."
Decision
In an 8–1 decision resting largely on prior court cases, particularly the jointly-decided cases Knox v. Lee and Parker v. Davis, the power "of making the notes of the United States a legal tender in payment of private debts" was interpreted as "included in the power to borrow money and to provide a national currency."
Dissenting opinion
Justice Field dissented, challenging the court's interpretation of the terms to "borrow" and to "coin" money.
He explained that the term to borrow money was well settled in other instruments, such as municipal and corporate bonds and private contracts. He contended that allowing the government to make their notes legal tender would interfere with third-party contractual obligations, as third parties would be compelled by law to accept notes instead of coin. He argued that a private corporate bond could not require an amusement park to accept the bond in exchange for entry. To find that the term to borrow money as written in the Constitution, according to him, would allow interference in third-party contracts and improve the value of the note, but it would deviate from the meaning of the term "to borrow money."
He asserted that the meaning of the terms "to coin money" was certain: "It is to mould metallic substances into forms convenient for circulation and to stamp them with the impress of the government." He argued that in the clause authorizing Congress "to provide for the punishment of counterfeiting the securities and current coin of the United States," a distinction was clearly made between debt and coin.
He also cited many quotes by the founders against paper money, including the following by James Madison: "The pretext for paper currency, and particularly for making the bills a tender either for public or private debts, was cut off."
Finally, Justice Field wrote "For nearly three-quarters of a century after the adoption of the Constitution, and until the legislation during the recent civil war, no jurist and no statesman of any position in the country ever pretended that a power to impart the quality of legal tender to its notes was vested in the general government. There is no recorded word of even one in favor of its possessing the power. All conceded, as an axiom of constitutional law, that the power did not exist."
 See also 
 Legal Tender Cases
 References 
 External links 
Category:1874 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Banknotes of the United States
"""

From "June Medical Services, LLC v. Russo" ==> """
June Medical Services, LLC v. Russo, 591 U.S. 1101 (2020), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that a Louisiana state law placing hospital-admission requirements on abortion clinics doctors was unconstitutional. The law mirrored a Texas state law that the Court found unconstitutional in 2016 in Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt (WWH).
The Louisiana state law, as the Texas law, would have required doctors performing abortions to have admission privileges at a state-authorized hospital within  of the abortion clinic. This law would have limited abortions to one single doctor in the state, as other doctors had not yet gained admission privileges or were outside the given range. The Texas law was declared unconstitutional in WWH in 2016,. on the basis that limiting clinic availability was an undue burden on women seeking legal abortions, a constitutional right as determined by the landmark ruling Roe v. Wade (1973).. The Louisiana law, however, had survived its challenge on appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, which ruled the law had fundamental differences from the Texas law based on the WWH ruling. 
On June 29, 2020, the Supreme Court ruled in a 5–4 decision that the Louisiana law was unconstitutional, reversing the Fifth Circuit's decision.. The Court's plurality opinion was written by Justice Stephen Breyer and joined by the three more liberal members of the Court, asserting that Louisiana's law was unconstitutional following from the same arguments that Texas's law had been in WWH and overruling the Fifth Circuit's reasoning. Chief Justice John Roberts joined them in the judgement but not in the opinion, upholding his position of dissent from WWH but deferring to a matter of precedent to support the judgement. The remaining four Justices submitted their own dissents upholding the law's constitutionality.
June Medical Services had been considered a potentially important case on abortion rights in the United States, as it was the first abortion-related case to be heard by both Justices Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh, two justices that are considered conservative, giving the Court a conservative majority, and potentially threatening the Roe v. Wade precedent.
Background
 Before Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt 
Around 2013, several states including Texas had passed laws that, among other clauses, would require abortion doctors to have admission privileges at a hospital within  of their abortion clinic, on the basis that if something went wrong with the abortion procedure, the patient can be rushed and treated at a nearby hospital. These safety standards, known as TRAP laws, formed the basis of the law, though at least one individual who helped craft it claimed his ultimate goal was to shut down abortion clinics. To have admission privileges, the doctor must effectively be an approved practitioner at that hospital. This can be a difficult process for a doctor, since hospitals expect admitting doctors to provide them with patients to be fiscally viable, and abortion doctors do not regularly provide such patients. In the case of Texas, its law Texas House Bill 2 (HB2), passed in mid-2013. By the time this part of the law came into effect in November 2013, only 19 of 42 abortion clinics remained open, leaving some women with their closest center more than  away. Legal challenges from affected clinics were launched just prior to the November date. A first challenge ended in the Fifth Circuit which vacated a District Court's stay of enforcement with the Supreme Court declining to overrule, allowing the rule to come into effect. A second lawsuit on more focused terms and focusing on two specific clinics affected by the law was started in April 2014. This suit, finding similar resistance in the Fifth Circuit, eventually reached the Supreme Court as Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt; the Court agreed to hear the case in November 2015, oral arguments in March 2016 (some weeks after the death of Justice Antonin Scalia), and decided in June 2016. The 5-3 decision found that, on the basis that the right to have an abortion is a constitutional right from Roe v. Wade, the Texas law requirement on admitting privileges at a nearby hospital created an undue burden for women who were seeking to have abortions.
While the cases related to Texas HB2 had started and after the Fifth Circuit had issued its first vacating towards the stay, Louisiana's state legislation introduced and passed Act 620 by June 2014 modeled off the Texas law. The law had been introduced by state senator Katrina Jackson, a Democrat with an anti-abortion stance who said her intent for the law was "to make sure that when a woman elects to have an abortion, while Roe vs. Wade is still the law, that they have safe choices." At that point, the state had six abortion clinics, and only one that would make the admitting privileges requirement by the September 2014 enforcement date. The five affected doctors attempted to secure admitting privileges before September but were denied, leading the clinics to seek a preliminary injunction to prevent the law from coming into effect. The challenge was heard in the Middle District Court of Louisiana by Judge John W. deGravelles, which granted the injunction. The state appealed this to the Fifth Circuit. The three-judge panel unanimously agreed to vacate the District Court's injunction,June Med. Servs. LLC v. Russo,  allowing Act 620 to in effect on February 15, 2016, which forced at least two clinics to immediately close. The clinics sought an emergency stay on the Fifth Circuit's decision from the Supreme Court, which granted the stay on March 5, 2016,136 S. Ct. 1354 (2016). halting enforcement and allowing the clinics to continue. The Supreme Court, which had just heard the oral arguments in WWH, stated that the courts should wait on its decision in WWH and rehear the case based on its outcome.
 Aftermath 
With the Supreme Court's stay on enforcement of Act 620 in place, the full case was heard before Judge deGravelles at the District Court. deGravelles found in favor of the plaintiffs in April 2017 and deeming Act 620 unconstitutional, applying the Supreme Court's "undue burden" tests from WWH similarly to Louisiana's laws in his 117-page opinion. deGravelles granted a permanent injunction on the state from enforcing Act 620. The state again appealed to the Fifth Circuit. In a 2-1 decision issued in September 2018, Judges Jerry Edwin Smith and Edith Brown Clement reversed the District Court's decision.June Med. Servs. LLC v. Russo,  In the majority opinion, the Fifth Circuit found that in applying the undue burden test, only about 30% of the women in the state would be affected by the law, and only due to longer waiting times to have the abortion procedure should one affected clinic close. The majority also found that in contrast to the Texas's admission privilege's requirements, Louisiana's were less strict, making it easier for those doctors to obtain it. Judge Patrick E. Higginbotham wrote in his dissent that in applying the undue burden test, the state shows no compelling medical benefit to override the right to an abortion.
The plaintiffs sought an en banc hearing from the full Fifth Circuit, but this request was denied, with Act 620 set to come into effect on February 4, 2019. The 5th circuit denied a rehearing by a vote of 9–6. Chief Judge Carl E. Stewart, and Judges James L. Dennis, Leslie H. Southwick, James E. Graves, Jr., Stephen A. Higginson, and Gregg Costa voted to rehear. Dennis wrote a 19-page dissent, which Higginbotham, Graves, and Higginson joined. Higginson wrote a 1-page dissent. Judges Jones, Smith, Owen, Elrod, Haynes, Willett, Ho, Engelhardt, and Oldham voted not to rehear.June Med. Servs. LLC v. Russo,  The plaintiffs issued a request to Supreme Court Justice Samuel Alito to issue an emergency stay on the law by January 29, 2019. The Supreme Court issued an order based on a 5–4 split to stay the enforcement of the act pending a full review of the plaintiff's petition and a full hearing in the Supreme Court, should they grant writ of certiorari.139 S. Ct. 663 (2019).  The majority included Chief Justice John Roberts (who had previously joined the dissent in WWH) along with the four liberal justices, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor, and Elena Kagan. The dissenting justices were Alito, Clarence Thomas, Neil Gorsuch, and Brett Kavanaugh. Only Kavanaugh wrote an opinion alongside the order, stating that he believed that three of the doctors affected by the admitting privileges could still obtain these, and had not yet demonstrated it was impossible for them to get it, eliminating the undue burden on women. In addition to requesting an emergency stay on the Fifth Circuit's decision, the clinics also petitioned the Supreme Court to hear the case.
 Supreme Court 
The Supreme Court of the United States granted certiorari in the case in October 2019, agreeing to review the ruling below.140 S. Ct. 35 (2019). With the resignation of Rebekah Gee in January 2020, the case was renamed from June Medical Services, LLC v. Gee upon the appointment of the interim health secretary, Stephen Russo.
Oral arguments took place on March 4, 2020. Court observers said the court was split along the five conservative Justices that would uphold the Fifth Circuit's ruling and the four liberal ones, with Chief Justice John Roberts, typically conservative, likely to be the key vote with his intent unclear from the questions he had asked. Roberts had sided for the Texas law in WWH, but voted with the liberals to block the Louisiana law from going into effect. Court observers have stated that Roberts tends to side with conservative issues, but has also voted in cases to uphold the reputation of the Supreme Court.
The Court released its opinions on June 29, 2020. 
Plurality opinion
In a 5–4 judgment, the Court ruled that the Louisiana law was unconstitutional, reversing the decision of the Fifth Circuit. The plurality opinion was written by Justice Stephen Breyer, and joined by Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan. In addition to their review of the commonality of the Louisiana law to the Texas law, Breyer wrote "The evidence also shows that opposition to abortion played a significant role in some hospitals' decisions to deny admitting privileges."
Roberts opinion concurring in the judgment
Chief Justice John Roberts joined with the judgment of the four, but not on their opinion. Roberts wrote that while he maintained his dissent against the majority opinion from WWH, he joined the majority judgement in this case out of respect for court precedent set by WWH. Roberts wrote "The Louisiana law imposes a burden on access to abortion just as severe as that imposed by the Texas law, for the same reasons. Therefore Louisiana's law cannot stand under our precedents."
 Dissents 
Separate dissents were written by Justices Clarence Thomas, Samuel Alito, Neil Gorsuch, and Brett Kavanaugh, with Thomas, Gorsuch, and Kavanaugh also joining parts on Alito's dissent. Thomas maintained in his dissent that Roe v. Wade "is grievously wrong for many reasons, but the most fundamental is that its core holding—that the Constitution protects a woman’s right to abort her unborn child—finds no support in the text of the Fourteenth Amendment." Alito wrote in his dissent that "the abortion right is used like a bulldozer to flatten legal rules that stand in the way." Gorsuch wrote that the Court should have given more deference to the state's rationale for passing the law, while Kavanaugh identified the need for more evidence to determine the potential impacts on abortion access should the law have been enforced.
Impact
June Medical Services was the first abortion-related case to reach the court following the death of Justice Antonin Scalia and the retirement of Justice Anthony Kennedy, who have since been replaced by Justices Gorsuch and Kavanaugh, respectively. While Scalia had generally been against abortion rights, Kennedy had generally been favorable towards abortion rights, and was considered to have been the swing vote in WWH. Gorsuch and Kavanaugh, both nominated by President Donald Trump and considered to be conservative justices, gave the court a 5–4 conservative majority. Kavanaugh's judicial opinions before joining the Supreme Court and his comments during his nomination process indicated that he views abortion rights with disfavor. Kavanaugh's dissent from the Court's emergency order on February 7 raised concerns among Democrats and supporters of abortion rights. Chief Justice John Roberts had voted to uphold abortion regulations in previous cases.
While the Supreme Court's ruling overturned the Louisiana law and was considered a win for abortion advocates, concerns remained that abortion rights could still be changed by the Court in a future case considering the opinions given by Roberts, Gorsuch and Kavanaugh. In the case of Roberts, his decision to side with the liberal segment of the court was based on his commitment to staying with precedent, and abortion advocates stated concern that Roberts would have ruled against abortion rights in a case where stare decisis would not apply. In a footnote, Roberts expressed agreement with Justice Alito's view on dissent that "the validity of admitting privileges laws 'depend[s] on numerous factors that may differ from state to state,'" which could signal that he would uphold laws requiring admitting privileges in another state where some unspecified "factors" were different. On June 24, 2022, the Court overturned Roe and Casey in Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization, meaning that state restrictions on abortion providers are no longer subject to the undue burden standard.
 See also 
 Roe v. Wade (1973)
 Planned Parenthood v. Casey (1992)
 Stenberg v. Carhart (2000)
 Gonzales v. Carhart (2007)
 Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt (2016)
 Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization (2022)
 Hyde Amendment
 Abortion in the United States
References
 External links 
 Biskupic, Joan (July 29, 2020): "EXCLUSIVE: How Brett Kavanaugh tried to sidestep abortion and Trump financial docs cases". A background article written by CNN's legal analyst & Supreme Court biographer Joan Biskupic who details the decision-making process leading to the court decision in June Medical Services, LLC v. Russo. Archived from the original on November 15, 2020. Retrieved on February 19, 2020.
Category:2019 in Louisiana
Category:2020 in Louisiana
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:Healthcare in Louisiana
Category:Legal history of Louisiana
Category:Right to abortion under the United States Constitution
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Jurney v. MacCracken" ==> """
Jurney v. MacCracken, 294 U.S. 125 (1935), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that Congress has an implicit power to find one in contempt of Congress.. During a Senate investigation of airlines and of the U.S. Postmaster General, the attorney William P. MacCracken, Jr. allowed his clients to destroy subpoenaed documents. After a one-week trial on the Senate floor (presided over by the Vice-President of the United States, acting as Senate President), MacCracken, a lawyer and former Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Aeronautics, was found guilty and sentenced to 10 days imprisonment.William P. Mac Cracken, Jr. Papers  MacCracken filed a petition of habeas corpus with the federal courts to overturn his arrest, but, after litigation, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that Congress had acted constitutionally, and denied the petition.
The respondent, Chesley W. Jurney, was the Sergeant at Arms of the Senate, and hence the person with custody of MacCracken.
 See also 
 Contempt of Congress
 Air Mail scandal
References
External links
Category:1935 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
"""

From "Kahler v. Kansas" ==> """
Kahler v. Kansas, 589 U.S. ___ (2020), is a case of the United States Supreme Court in which the justices ruled that the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution do not require that states adopt the insanity defense in criminal cases that are based on the defendant's ability to recognize right from wrong. It was argued on October 7, 2019 and decided on March 23, 2020..
 Background 
 Insanity defense 
The insanity defense is a traditional affirmative defense that dates at least back to English common law. The codification of the M'Naghten rules, which have been referenced in one form or another in US law as well as UK law, indicates that someone may be found not guilty of a crime because of a mental condition which prevents them from either controlling their actions or from knowing whether their actions were right or wrong.
 Legislative activity 
In 1995, the state of Kansas passed a law (Kan. Stat. Ann. § 22-3220) which revoked the traditional insanity defense. Defendants could no longer argue that, because of their mental illness, they were incapable of deciding right from wrong. Instead, defendants with mental illness were only permitted to argue that their mental illness prevented them from forming the specific intent (or mens rea) needed to commit the crime. Supreme Court Justice Stephen Breyer described the distinction between the two systems in his dissent in Delling v. Idaho, a case covering the same topic that the Supreme Court declined to hear in 2012:
Case One: The defendant, due to insanity, believes that the victim is a wolf. He shoots and kills the victim.
Case Two: The defendant, due to insanity, believes that a wolf, a supernatural figure, has ordered him to kill the victim.
In Case One, the defendant does not know he has killed a human being, and his insanity negates a mental element necessary to commit the crime. In Case Two, the defendant has intentionally killed a victim whom he knows is a human being; he possesses the necessary mens rea.
In both cases the defendant is unable, due to insanity, to appreciate the true quality of his act, and therefore unable to perceive that it is wrong. But … the defendant in Case One could defend the charge by arguing that he lacked the mens rea, whereas the defendant in Case Two would not be able to raise a defense based on his mental illness.
As of 2020, at least four other states have passed laws which are conceptually similar to Kansas's: Idaho, Alaska, Utah, and Montana
 Kahler murder case 
In late 2009, James Kahler was arrested and charged with four counts of first-degree murder with the murder of four members of his family: his wife, his mother-in-law, and his two teenage daughters.
During his trial, his defense argued that he had mentally 'snapped' following his divorce and job loss. At the time of the murder, they asserted that he suffered from depression and had an obsessive-compulsive, narcissistic, and histrionic personality. The prosecution rebutted the defense's psychiatric testimony with an expert psychiatrist of its own. The prosecution's psychiatrist conceded that Kahler indeed suffered from clinical depression but argued that he was still capable of planning the murders.
Despite this testimony, he was found guilty of each murder and sentenced to death at the end of August 2011. An Osage County judge issued a death warrant for Kahler on October 11, 2011.
 In lower courts 
Under state law, capital murder cases can be appealed directly to the state supreme court. Accordingly, Kahler appealed his case to the Kansas Supreme Court, raising ten issues related to the conduct of the trial and actions taken by the judge and prosecutor. Two of these issues were the constitutionality of KSA 22–3220, the 1995 state law which abolished the traditional insanity plea and allowed defendants only the option of arguing that their mental illness prevented him from forming criminal intent, as well as the constitutionality of executing someone who currently suffers from a severe mental illness
In a ruling, the Kansas Supreme Court rejected Kahler's appeals, noting its prior precedent in State v. Bethel (2003):
The same arguments made by Kahler were considered and rejected by this court in State v. Bethel, 275 Kan. 456, 66 P.3d 840 (2003). The Bethel court conducted a thorough review of the pertinent decisions of the United States Supreme Court and other states that had considered the issue. Ultimately, the Bethel court concluded that "K.S.A. 22-3220 does not violate the defendant's right to due process under the United States or Kansas Constitutions." 275 Kan. at 473; see State v. Searcy, 118 Idaho 632, 798 P.2d 914 (1990) (finding mens rea approach of state statute did not violate due process); State v. Korell, 213 Mont. 316, 690 P.2d 992 (1984) (same); State v. Herrera, 895 P.2d 359 (Utah 1995) (same). Kahler relies on Finger v. State, 117 Nev. 548, 569, 27 P.3d 66 (2001), in which the Nevada Supreme Court held legal insanity is a fundamental principle of the criminal law of this country. But the Bethel court considered and rejected the reasoning of the Nevada Supreme Court in Finger, and we adhere to our Bethel decision. 
The Kansas Supreme Court acknowledged that the judge had made errors in handling the case but did not deem these errors significant enough to warrant a new trial or to vacate Kahler's convictions or sentences.
He then appealed his case to United States Supreme Court, which granted a writ of certiorari on March 28, 2019.
At issue in the case is whether the lack of an insanity defense violates the due process clause of the 14th Amendment and 8th Amendment.
 At the Supreme Court 
Sarah Schrup, the head of the Northwestern University School of Law Supreme Court practicum, argued the case before the Court on behalf of Kahler. Toby Crouse, the Kansas Solicitor General, argued the case on behalf of the state of Kansas. Oral arguments were held in October 2019. Kahler v. Kansas was the first case that was heard during the October 2019 term.
Kahler's argument is that the M'Naghten rule represents the codification of a legal concept that goes back all the way to Medieval common law and should be considered part of the due process of law. His argument asserts that, for centuries, defendants were held culpable only when they were able to distinguish between right and wrong and that people who were legally insane did not have the capacity to do so. The state's argument emphasized the importance of federalism, allowing states the autonomy to make their own laws within the framework of the state and federal constitutions. The state also noted that the definition of insanity has varied in different ways throughout history and that one version (the M'Naghten rule) should not be viewed as an inherent aspect of due process.
 Majority opinion 
Justice Elena Kagan wrote the majority opinion which upheld Kansas's state law.  Kagan noted the need to refer back to eminent common-law authorities such as Blackstone, Coke, Hale, and others.  In the opinion, Kagan wrote that the Kansas law did not violate Kahler's fundamental right to due process, noting that definitions of legal culpability and mental illness have been traditionally reserved for the states. Kagan noted that, contrary to Kahler's argument before the court, Kansas had not in fact abolished the insanity defense but had instead simply modified it, which the Constitution has generally permitted. The opinion points out that Kahler could have still presented a mental illness defense at trial and could also have presented evidence during his sentencing hearing.
 Dissent 
Justice Stephen Breyer dissented from the majority opinion, joined by Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Sonia Sotomayor. Breyer conceded that states do have broad leeway to define state crimes and criminal procedures, including the definitions and standards of the insanity defense. However, he argued that Kansas's law did not simply modify the insanity defense but had removed the core requirement of whether or not the defendant could distinguish from right and wrong. Breyer's dissent was rooted in the centuries of tradition behind the original M'naghten Rule and noted that only a handful of states had modified it in the way that Kansas had.
 References 
External links
 SCOTUSblog coverage
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:Adjudicative competence case law
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Kalem Co. v. Harper Bros." ==> """
Kalem Co. v. Harper Bros., 222 U.S. 55 (1911), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held producing a motion picture based on a dramatic work can be copyright infringement. The producer of the motion picture is liable even they are not the exhibitor. This does not extend to a restriction of the dramatic work's ideas; it is a recognition of the author's monopoly powers granted by Congress.
The case involved a 1907 film adaptation of the 1880 novel Ben-Hur: A Tale of the Christ by Lew Wallace.
Background
Lew Wallace, a former Union army general, wrote Ben-Hur: A Tale of the Christ in 1880, which became one of the best-selling works at its time surpassing Uncle Tom's Cabin. According to contemporary author Amy Lifson in Ben-Hur: The Book that Shook the World, Ben-Hur was "the most influential Christian book written in the nineteenth century". The popularity of the novel led to many attempts to profit off the book, which Wallace fought in court until his death in 1905. Wallace did relent on requests for a stage adaption, which was first run in 1899.
At that time, America's film industry was beginning to develop. Kalem Company, one of the first film production companies in silent black-and-white films, took the opportunity to make a film adaptation of Ben-Hur without seeking permission from the rights holder, held by the publisher Harper & Brothers. The film, only fifteen minutes long and on a single reel, was first presented to audiences in December 1907 and shown about 500 times before shut down by legal complaints from Harper, Wallace's son Henry Lane Wallace, and the play producers Marc Klaw and Abraham Lincoln Erlanger.
In court, Kalem's lawyers argued that the scriptwriter had been working from a first edition of Ben-Hur before it had been granted copyright, and further argued that film, which they claimed as only a series of photographs, was a different type of expression different from the written word. Judge Emile Henry Lacombe did not accept this argument, ruling against Kalem in May 1908 in that their "moving picture" that had used ideas from the book violated copyright. The studio appealed to the Second Circuit, claiming that only Congress had the right to deem what works qualified for copyright. Second Circuit Judge Henry Galbraith Ward denied the appeal in March 1909 and stated that even a series of moving pictures would qualify as a form of expression and thus covered under copyright law.
Supreme Court
thumb|150px|right|Advertisement for the film referencing the Wallace novel
Kalem petitioned to the Supreme Court to challenge the lower courts' rulings. Because of the potential impact of the decision on the film industry, Kalem brought in the support of the Motion Picture Patents Company (MPPC) to help finance the legal challenge to the Supreme Court. The Court certified the case, and heard oral arguments on October 21, 1911, and November 1, 1911.
MPPC's lawyers argued again that moving pictures were a new form of medium not yet covered by copyright law. They further argued to the Supreme Court that because Kalem only produced the work but did not exhibit the work, they were not the ones at fault for presenting the work to audiences and thus not liable for copyright.
The Court issued its unanimous decision on November 13, 1911, upholding the prior rulings against Kalem. The court's opinion was written by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr., which stated that  Kalem created "an unlawful dramatization of the novel", and further "the defendant not only expected but invoked by advertisement the use of its films for dramatic reproduction of the story", rejecting the idea that the exhibitors were at fault. Kalem and MPPC were forced to pay a  fine, which made Ben-Hur the most expensive film at its time. Kalem was forced to destroy all copies of the film as well, though at least one copy had survived, later found and kept at the Library of Congress.
Impact
The result of Kalem led to the fledging film industry to seek out adaptions of works through legal, authorized agreements with their copyright owners. According to Jon Solomon in The Ancient World in Silent Cinema, the focus on adaptions created the need for competent scriptwriters that could readily convert novels into moving pictures.
 References 
External links
Category:1911 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "Kansas Pacific Railway Co. v. Dunmeyer" ==> """
Kansas Pacific R. Co. v. Dunmeyer, 113 U.S. 629 (1885),  was a writ of error to the Supreme Court of Kansas. The action was brought in that court on a covenant of warranty of title to two pieces of land in a deed of conveyance made by the Kansas Pacific Railroad Company to Dunmeyer.Kansas Pacific R. Co. v. Dunmeyer, . The Pacific Railroad Acts generally allowed railroads to sell public land adjacent to their routes as part of a land grant to raise funds but made an exception for land that already had a homestead filed. G. B. Dunmeyer claimed he purchased land that already had an existing claim.
Background
The suit was brought for breach of covenant of warranty of title to a tract of land in Kansas. Plaintiff in error was defendant below. Its title was derived from grants of public land to aid in the construction of a railway to the Pacific. The tract was within the location of the railroad grants, but was excepted from those grants by reason of a homestead entry and possession. Subsequent to this entry and possession, the party so in possession took title from the railroad company, and the homestead entry was cancelled. The alleged paramount adverse title was derived from a patent from the United States issued on a homestead entry made subsequent to these proceedings. The Supreme Court of Kansas found that there was a breach of the warranty, and rendered judgment accordingly. This writ of error was brought to review that judgment.
The land was sold by the company to George W. Miller, to whom a certificate of sale was given, which afterwards was assigned to Lewis Dunmeyer, to whom the company made a deed purporting to convey a good title. On this covenant for good title Dunmeyer brought the present action, alleging that the railroad company never had any title, and that the covenant was therefore broken. On this issue the case was tried. Several other defenses were set up, among them that the covenant was not broken, because Dunmeyer was in possession when he bought the certificate issued to Miller and when he took his deed, and has never been disturbed or ousted; that Miller was in possession when he bought of the company and transferred possession to Dunmeyer, and that this has been held ever since, and that Miller's purchase was a compromise of disputed rights, and he and Dunmeyer are therefore estopped to maintain this action. But these and perhaps other points, decided against plaintiff in error, do not present questions of federal law which this Court can review in a judgment of a state court.
The record shows that on July 25, 1866, Miller made a homestead entry on this land which was in every respect valid if the land was then public land subject to such entry. It also shows that the line of definite location of the company's road was first filed with the Commissioner of the General Land Office at Washington, September 21, 1866. This entry of Miller's therefore brought the land within the language of the exception in the grant as land to which a homestead claim had attached at the time the line of said road was definitely fixed. For we are of opinion that under this grant, as under many other grants containing the same words or words to the same purport, the act which fixes the time of definite location is the act of filing the map or plat of this line in the office of the commissioner of the General Land Office.
Decision
Of two arguments made, the stronger is in regards that while the company did not file its line of definite location until about two months after Miller made his homestead entry, it did designate the general route of said road, and file a map thereof in the General Land Office July 11 of the same year, 1866, which was fifteen days before Miller's homestead entry. This latter map was filed in the office of the register and receiver on 26 July, one day after Miller made his entry.
It is argued that until this was done, Miller's right of entry remained unaffected. But the court was of opinion that the duty of filing this map, as required by the act, like that of the line of definite location, is performed by filing it in the General Land Office, which is filing it with the Secretary of the Interior, and that whatever rights accrue to the company from the act of filing it accrue from filing it there.
In this case before the high court, a claim was made and filed in the land office, and there recognized, before the line of the company's road was located. That claim was an existing one of public record in favor of Miller when the map of plaintiff in error was filed. In the language of the act of Congress, this homestead claim had attached to the land, and it therefore did not pass by the grant.
Of all the words in the English language, this word "attached' was probably the best that could have been used. It did not mean mere settlement, residence, or cultivation of the land, but it meant a proceeding in the proper land office, by which the inchoate right to the land was initiated. It meant that by such a proceeding, a right of homestead had fastened to that land which could ripen into a perfect title by future residence and cultivation. With the performance of these conditions the company had nothing to do. The right of the homestead having attached to the land, it was excepted out of the grant as much as if, in a deed, it had been excluded from the conveyance by metes and bounds.
The difference in the two cases is obvious. The judgment of the Supreme Court of the State of Kansas was affirmed.
See also
Union Pacific R. Co. v. Cheyenne (1885)
Union Pacific Railway Company v. Botsford (1891)
Brushaber v. Union Pacific Railroad (1916)
Union Pacific Railroad v. Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers (2009)
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Union Pacific Railroad
Category:Railway litigation in 1885
Category:Predecessors of the Union Pacific Railroad
Category:United States property case law
Category:Rail transportation in Kansas
Category:Land grants
Category:Rail lines receiving land grants
"""

From "Kansas v. Carr" ==> """
Kansas v. Carr, 577 U.S. ___ (2016), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States clarified several procedures for sentencing defendants in capital cases. Specifically, the Court held that judges are not required to affirmatively instruct juries about the burden of proof for establishing mitigating evidence, and that joint trials of capital defendants "are often preferable when the joined defendants’ criminal conduct arises out of a single chain of events"., slip op. at 11, 13, 16 (2016). This case included the last majority opinion written by Justice Antonin Scalia before his death in February 2016.
 Background 
This case involved two separate murder cases that were consolidated on appeal.Carr, slip op. at 1. Sidney Gleason was initially sentenced to death for the alleged murder of a co-conspirator and that co-conspirator's boyfriend to conceal evidence of a robbery.Carr, slip op. at 1–2. In a separate case, Reginald and Jonathan Carr were jointly sentenced to death for the rape, kidnapping, and murder of five individuals after a crime spree in Wichita, Kansas, that ultimately became known as the Wichita Massacre.Carr, slip op. at 1, 2–6. In both cases, the Kansas Supreme Court reversed the death sentences; the court ruled that the juries should have been affirmatively instructed that mitigating circumstances need not be proved beyond a reasonable doubt.Carr, slip op. at 6–7. Additionally, the Kansas Supreme Court ruled that the Carrs should have been tried separately.Carr, slip op. at 7–8. The Kansas attorney general filed an appeal to the United States Supreme Court, which granted certiorari to review the Kansas Supreme Court's rulings.Carr, slip op. at 3.
 Opinion of the Court 
thumb|left|Antonin Scalia, who authored his final majority opinion
Writing for a majority of the Court, Justice Antonin Scalia held that the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution does not require courts in capital cases to instruct juries about the burden of proof for establishing mitigating evidence; therefore, the trial courts in this case were under no obligation to inform jurors that "mitigating circumstances need not be proved beyond a reasonable doubt".Carr, slip op. at 11, 13 (internal quotations omitted) (emphasis added). Because the jury instructions in this case told jurors to "consider any mitigating factor", Justice Scalia concluded that "[j]urors would not have misunderstood these instructions to prevent their consideration of constitutionally relevant evidence".Carr, slip op. at 13 (emphasis in original). Justice Scalia also concluded that in light of the evidence presented at trial, the joint trial of defendants "did not render the sentencing proceedings fundamentally unfair".Carr, slip op. at 17. Justice Scalia then ordered the case remanded back to the Kansas state court for reconsideration.Carr, slip op. at 18.
 Justice Sotomayor's dissenting opinion 
Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote a dissenting opinion in which she argued that the Supreme Court should not have reviewed these cases because Kansas did not violate any party's constitutional rights.Carr, slip op. at 1 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting). She also expressed concern that the majority's opinion would discourage states from developing techniques for ensuring fair procedures during capital trials.Carr, slip op. at 2–3, 7–9 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting). She wrote, "I worry that cases like these prevent States from serving as necessary laboratories for experimenting with how best to guarantee defendants a fair trial".Carr, slip op. at 2–3 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting). Although Justice Sotomayor admitted that the Supreme Court may want to grant review in "rare cases" in which "a state prosecutor alleges that a State’s highest court has overprotected a criminal defendant", the Court should not have granted certiorari in this case.Carr, slip op. at 9–10 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting).
 Commentary and analysis 
Because the majority's analysis focused primarily on procedural issues rather than the "heart of the death penalty", commentators observed that the case "lacked the fireworks that we have come to expect" of death penalty cases.Amy Howe, Opinion analysis: Few sparks, eight votes for the state in Kansas capital cases, , January 20, 2016. Mark Joseph Stern wrote the 8–1 vote was unexpected in light of Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Justice Stephen Breyer's previous disapproval of capital punishment, and he suggested that "the court’s judgment calls into question optimistic speculation that the end of the death penalty is nigh".Mark Joseph Stern, SCOTUS Relaxes Capital Sentencing Rules, Clears the Way for Three Executions, SLATE, January 20, 2016. Mark Walsh noted that this case was the last majority opinion written by Justice Scalia before his death in February 2016, though his last dissenting opinion was in FERC v. Electric Power Supply Association.
 Affirmation of sentence by Kansas Supreme Court 
The Kansas Supreme Court affirmed the death penalty for the brothers on January 21, 2022.High court ruling in Carr brothers case brings Kansas closer to seeing its first execution since 1965, Topeka Capital-Journal, Tim Hrenchir, January 21, 2022. Retrieved January 21, 2022.
 See also 
 Harmelin v. Michigan (1991)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:History of Wichita, Kansas
"""

From "Kansas v. Cheever" ==> """
Kansas v. Cheever, 571 U.S. 87 (2013), was a United States Supreme Court case in which a unanimous Court held that the Fifth Amendment does not prevent the prosecution from introducing psychiatric evidence to rebut psychiatric evidence presented by the defense..The Oyez Project: Kansas v. Cheever
Background
In January 2005, Scott Cheever shot and killed Greenwood County Sheriff Matthew Samuels at the residence of Darrell and Belinda Coopers in Hilltop, Kansas. When he arrived, the Coopers, Cheever, and two others were using methamphetamines. At the time, Cheever had an outstanding warrant for which Samuels would arrest him.
At trial, Cheever asserted a voluntary intoxication defense and argued that the methamphetamine use rendered him mentally incapable of the premeditation required for murder. During the trial, the judge ordered Cheever to undergo a psychiatric examination conducted by a psychiatrist hired by the government. The prosecution sought to bring the interview transcript into evidence to impeach Cheever's testimony regarding the order of events at the Coopers' residence, which the court allowed. After the defense rested their case, the prosecution called the psychiatrist to the stand as a rebuttal witness to respond to the defense's claims regarding Cheever's mental capacity at the time of the crime. The trial court allowed the psychiatrist's testimony as a rebuttal witness. The jury found Cheever guilty and, at a separate sentencing hearing, sentenced him to death. The Kansas Supreme Court held that the admission of the government psychiatrist's testimony into evidence violated Cheever's Fifth Amendment rights.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Sotomayor delivered the opinion of the Court.
Reaffirming its prior ruling in Buchanan v. Kentucky, , the Court held that when "a defense expert who has examined the defendant testifies that the defendant lacked the requisite mental state to commit an offense, the prosecution may present psychiatric evidence in rebuttal." Not allowing this would "undermine the adversarial process" and permit a defendant to provide "a one-sided and potentially inaccurate view of his mental state" at the time of the crime, through an expert. The Fifth Amendment does not permit a defendant who chooses to testify to refuse to submit to cross-examination.
The Court also drew a distinction between "mental status," at issue in Buchanan, and "mental disease or defect," a provision of Kansas law which does not include voluntary intoxication, calling the former a broader term than the latter. Kansas' usage of the court-ordered exam to rebut the voluntary-intoxication defense is not prohibited by the Fifth Amendment.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:United States Fifth Amendment case law
"""

From "Kansas v. Colorado" ==> """
Kansas v. Colorado is a longstanding litigation before the Supreme Court of the United States between US states: Kansas and Colorado. The Court has rendered numerous opinions on the case:
 Kansas v. Colorado,  
 Kansas v. Colorado, 
 Colorado v. Kansas,  
 Kansas v. Colorado, 
 Kansas v. Colorado, 
 Kansas v. Colorado, 
 Kansas v. Colorado, 
When two states have a controversy between each other, the case is filed for original jurisdiction with the US Supreme Court.  It is one of the very limited circumstances in which the court acts with original jurisdiction, as a trial court. In all other cases the court acts as the highest appellate court of the United States.
1902
The issue in the case in 1902 (185 U.S. 125) was whether Colorado, as is claimed by Kansas, is taking too much of the water of the Arkansas River, making the land along the river in Kansas much less valuable due to reduced water flow.  The court chose to delay making a decision until all of the facts were in evidence..
1907
In the 1907 case (206 U.S. 46), the Supreme Court affirmed its authority to settle the dispute between the states, but at the same time dismissed Kansas's petition on other grounds. After examining over 8,000 pages of transcripts that had been produced as a result of the litigation, it found that the "perceptible injury to portions of the Arkansas valley in Kansas" was justified by "the reclamation of large areas in Colorado, transforming thousands of acres into fertile fields.". The court explicitly invited Kansas to institute new proceedings if the situation worsened significantly.
1943
In the 1943 decision (320 U.S. 383), the court found:
 Colorado is entitled to an injunction against further prosecution of suits by Kansas against Colorado users [of the Arkansas River].
 Kansas V
. Colorado, 206 U.S. 46, made no allocation between the States of the waters of the river.
 Kansas is not entitled on the record to an apportionment in second feet or acre feet.
 In controversies involving the relative rights of States, the burden on the complaining State is much heavier than that generally required to be borne by private parties, and this Court will intervene only where a case is fully and clearly proved.
 Kansas' allegations that Colorado's use has materially increased since the [1907] decision in Kansas v. Colorado, and that the increase has worked a serious detriment to the substantial interests of Kansas, are not sustained by the evidence.
 Relief other than the restraint of further prosecution of suits by Kansas against Colorado users [of Arkansas River water] is denied to both States..
1985
In 1985, Kansas filed suit against Colorado alleging they had overused their share of water outlined in the Arkansas River Compact. For the next 24 years, Kansas spent over $20 million and 250 days in trial to convince the US Supreme Court that Colorado violated the Arkansas River Compact. The courts found that Colorado had indeed depleted flows to Kansas through their development of groundwater pumping installed after 1949. In April 2005, Kansas was awarded $34 million in damages and $1 million in legal costs. Then in March 2009, the final document was issued, requiring the use of a hydrologic-institutional model to bring Colorado to compliance.
1995
In the 1995 case (514 U.S. 673), the court stated
A special master decided that
 certain extra pumping of water in Colorado violates Article IV-D of the compact
 Kansas has failed to prove that the operation of Colorado's Winter Water Storage Program violates the Compact; and
 dismiss Kansas' claim that Colorado's failure to abide by the Trinidad Reservoir Operating Principles violates the Compact.
Kansas and Colorado both filed exceptions to the Special Master's report.  The court overruled the objections and found the special master's rulings correct on these points..
2001
In the 2001 decision (533 U.S. 1), a special master ordered Colorado to pay damages for its use of water in excess of what it was entitled to have from 1969 on.  Colorado objected to the decision because in addition to monetary damages, it had to pay prejudgment interest from 1969, and Kansas objected to the settlement because it was granted an award in money rather than in water.  The court sided with the special master on both points: Colorado has to pay interest on the judgment from 1969, and all Kansas gets is cash..
2009
Kansas has filed an exception to the Special Master's Fifth and Final Report in this action concerning the Arkansas River, contending that the Special Master erred in concluding that 28 U. S. C. §1821(b), which sets the witness attendance fee for a proceeding in "any court of the United States" at $40 per day, applies to cases within this Court's original jurisdiction. This determination led to an award considerably lower than the amount that Kansas, as the prevailing party, would have received under its alternative calculation.
Held: Expert witness attendance fees that are available in cases brought under this Court's original jurisdiction shall be the same as the expert witness attendance fees that would be available in a district court under §1821(b). Kansas contends that Congress has never attempted to regulate a prevailing party's recovery of expert witness fees in a case brought under this Court's original jurisdiction, that Article III of the Constitution would not permit Congress to impose such a restriction, and thus, that the holding in Crawford Fitting Co. v. J. T. Gibbons, Inc., 482 U. S. 437 – that district courts must adhere to §1821(b)'s witness attendance fee limitations—is not relevant here. Assuming that Kansas' interpretation is correct and that this Court has discretion to determine the fees that are recoverable in original actions, it is nevertheless appropriate to follow §1821(b). Congress' decision not to permit a prevailing party in the lower courts to recover its actual witness fee expenses departs only slightly from the "American Rule," under which parties generally bear their own expenses. There is no good reason why the rule for recovering expert witness fees should differ markedly depending on whether a case is originally brought in district court or this Court. District-court cases may be no less complex than those brought originally in this Court. And while the parties in original cases may incur substantial expert costs, as happened here, the same is frequently true in lower court litigation. Thus, assuming that the matter is left entirely to this Court's discretion, the best approach is to have a uniform rule that applies in all federal cases. Pp. 3–5..
 See also 
 New Jersey v. Delaware, another ongoing interstate dispute often heard before the Supreme Court.
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volumes 185,  206,  320,  514,  533
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
 External links 
Colorado-Kansas Arkansas River Compact 
Kansas v. Colorado
https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/08pdf/105Orig.pdf
Kansas v. Colorado, 543 U.S. --- -- US Supreme Court Cases from Justia & Oyez
Arkansas River Compact - Colorado Water Conservation Board
FindLaw | Cases and Codes Kansas v. Colorado
Category:1902 in the environment
Category:1907 in the environment
Category:1943 in the environment
Category:1995 in the environment
Category:2001 in the environment
Category:2009 in the environment
Category:United States water case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court original jurisdiction cases
Category:Environment of Colorado
Category:Environment of Kansas
Category:Legal history of Colorado
Category:Legal history of Kansas
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Kansas v. Crane" ==> """
Kansas v. Crane, 534 U.S. 407 (2002), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld the Kansas Sexually Violent Predator Act (SVPA) as consistent with substantive due process. The Court clarified that its earlier holding in Kansas v. Hendricks (1997) did not set forth a requirement of total or complete lack of control, but noted that the Constitution does not permit commitment of a sex offender without some lack-of-control determination..
Circumstances
Michael Crane pleaded guilty to aggravated sexual battery for two incidents on the same day in 1993. In the first, Crane exposed himself to a tanning salon attendant. One half hour later, Crane exposed himself to the clerk in a video store and demanded she perform oral sex on him, threatening to rape her before leaving. After Crane's guilty plea, the State petitioned to have Crane evaluated and adjudicated a sexual predator under Kansas' SVPA which permits the civil detention of a person convicted of any of several listed sexual offenses, if it can be proven beyond a reasonable doubt that he suffers from a "mental abnormality"—a disorder affecting his "emotional or volitional capacity which predisposes the person to commit sexually violent offenses"—or a "personality disorder," either of "which makes the person likely to engage in repeat acts of sexual violence." Kan. Stat. Ann. §§59-29a02(a), (b) (2000 Cum. Supp.).
Several psychologists examined Crane and diagnosed him with exhibitionism and antisocial personality disorder. One psychologist concluded that the two diagnoses in combination placed Crane within the listed sexual disorders covered by the SVPA, "cit[ing] the increasing frequency of incidents involving [respondent], increasing intensity of the incidents, [respondent's] increasing disregard for the rights of others, and his increasing daring and aggressiveness." Another psychologist testified that Crane's behavior was marked by "impulsivity or failure to plan ahead," indicating his unlawfulness "was a combination of willful and uncontrollable behavior," id., at 584-585, 7 P. 3d, at 290. The State's experts agreed, however, that "[r]espondent's mental disorder does not impair his volitional control to the degree he cannot control his dangerous behavior." Id., at 581, 7 P. 3d, at 288.
Crane moved for a summary judgment which was denied by the trial court and gave jury instructions to the terms of the statute. Id., at 581, 7 P. 3d, at 287-288. The jury found that Crane was a sexual predator as defined by the SVPA. The Kansas Supreme Court reversed, holding the SVPA unconstitutional as Crane had only a personality disorder rather than a volitional impairment. For such a person, it held, the State must show not merely a likelihood that the defendant would engage in repeat acts of sexual violence, but also an inability to control violent behavior, based on Kansas v. Hendricks (1997).
Decision
The court decided, in a split 7–2 opinion  that the Constitution does not permit commitment of the type of dangerous sexual offender considered in Hendricks without any lack-of-control evaluation. They concluded that the Kansas Supreme Court interpreted Kansas v. Hendricks too restrictively when they ruled that a sexual offender who has only an emotional or personality disorder, not a volitional impairment, must be found not to have the ability to control dangerous behavior.
The required standard of proof had to be sufficient to make the distinction between a dangerous sexual offender whose serious mental illness or abnormality, made him eligible for civil commitment from the "dangerous but typical recidivist" offender convicted in an ordinary criminal case. However, the Court concluded that an absolute finding of lack of control was not necessary, since otherwise there would be a risk of barring the civil commitment of some highly dangerous persons suffering severe mental abnormalities.
Significance
This ruling made it substantially more difficult for States to place sex offenders in civil confinement after they've served their sentence.
See also
United States v. Comstock (2010)
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 534
List of United States Supreme Court cases
Footnotes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:2002 in United States case law
"""

From "Kansas v. Garcia" ==> """
Kansas v. Garcia, 589 U.S. ___ (2020), was a case of the United States Supreme Court that was decided, by a 5–4 majority, in 2020. The case concerned whether it was lawful for a State to enforce laws criminalizing the making of fraudulent representations by aliens who were not authorized to work in connection with obtaining a job; the Court held that it was.
Background
In the United States, federal law makes it unlawful to employ an immigrant who lacks authorization to work. In order to ensure compliance with this law, employers must verify that their employees are authorized to work by having them complete Form I-9, which contains certain personal information. The form requires the prospective employee to attest under penalty of perjury to their authorization to work. Federal law prohibits the use of the I-9 for law enforcement purposes, with limited exceptions for certain federal crimes (for example, making a fraudulent representation on an I-9); for this reason, the States are preempted from using the I-9 in their own prosecutions or from independently criminalizing fraud upon the employment verification system.
Ramiro Garcia was stopped for speeding in Overland Park, Kansas. After questioning, the officers discovered that Garcia was already the target of an active investigation. Police requested a records check from his employer; among the documents provided was his I-9, which listed the Social Security number (SSN) of another person. Garcia had used this false number for other documentation, namely documents related to tax withholding, Form W-4 and the similar Form K-4 (used for Kansas's state income tax), and so was arrested for identity fraud, a State crime in Kansas. At trial, Garcia argued that his prosecution was barred by the Immigration Reform and Control Act (IRCA), which prohibits the use of the I-9 or any information contained therein for State prosecutions. Kansas did not rely upon his I-9 at trial, but on the other forms, which included much of the same information (such as a SSN); nonetheless, he argued that such usage was barred.https://www.oyez.org/cases/2019/17-834 Oyez Before the Supreme Court, the case was bundled with two other similar instances of purported identity fraud, involving Donaldo Morales and Guadalupe Ochoa-Lara, each involving both the Form I-9 and other documents.
Issue
Does the IRCA expressly or impliedly preempt states from using information provided on a federal Form I-9 in a prosecution of any person when the same information also appears in non-IRCA documents?
Supreme Court opinion
The Court concluded unanimously that the IRCA had not expressly preempted Kansas's actions in these cases. The Court reached this conclusion by observing that the express preemption provision of the IRCA only prohibits a State from making it a crime for employers to hire an unauthorized alien; the majority opinion points out that "laws that impose criminal or civil sanctions on employees" are not mentioned in the preemption provision. The Court split, 5–4, on the question of implied preemption.
Opinion of the court
The five-justice majority opinion, authored by Justice Alito and joined by Chief Justice Roberts and Justices Thomas, Gorsuch, and Kavanaugh, determined that the IRCA does not preempt the States, either expressly or impliedly, from applying identity theft or fraud statutes to non-citizens that had provided fraudulent information on both their I-9 and other forms, provided that the other forms, and not the I-9, formed the basis of the conviction. The majority addressed the two avenues for implied preemption presented by the Petitioners, field preemption and conflict preemption, but rejected both. 
Dissent
Justice Breyer dissented from the majority on the question of implied preemption, joined by Justices Ginsburg, Sotomayor, and Kagan. In their view, the IRCA did implicitly preempt the State prosecutions at issue, because the IRCA sets out a comprehensive scheme for policing fraud in the field of an alien demonstrating their authorization to work. Given that these cases fall into this field, the dissent would hold that only the federal government, and not the States, would be able to prosecute any unlawful conduct that took place.
References
Notes
External links
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Kansas v. Glover" ==> """
Kansas v. Glover, 589 U.S. ___ (2020), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held when a police officer lacks information negating an inference that the owner is driving a vehicle, an investigative traffic stop made after running a vehicle's license plate and learning that the registered owner's driver's license has been revoked is reasonable under the Fourth Amendment..
Background
In April 2016, Deputy Mark Mehrer of the Douglas County sheriff's department observed a truck on the road and made a routine check of its license plate. The check affirmed the truck was assigned to the license, but that the vehicle's owner, Charles Glover, had a revoked license. Mehrer proceeded to make a traffic stop on the assumption that Glover was driving the truck and with no additional information. The stop confirmed that the driver in fact was Glover. Mehrer cited him for driving with a revoked license and let Glover on his way.
Glover challenged the citation at the state's district court, asserting that the deputy lacked reasonable suspicion under the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution to assume he was driving the truck and sought to suppress that evidence. The district court agreed with Glover and suppressed the traffic stop. The state appealed, and the court of appeals had reversed, asserting there was a "common-sense inference" that Glover would likely be the driver of the vehicle he owned and thus making the traffic stop allowable. Glover appealed to the Kansas Supreme Court, which reversed again. While the Kansas Supreme Court recognized that the U.S. Supreme Court had established case law, such as in Terry v. Ohio that law officers may initiate warrant-less traffic stops when they have reasonable suspicion of a crime being committed, in the case of Glover's traffic stop, "The problem is not that the state necessarily needs significantly more evidence; it needs some more evidence". The Court stated the deputy made two incorrect assumptions, that Glover was likely the primary driver of the vehicle, and that those with suspended or revoked licenses would continue to drive regardless of the state of their license.
Supreme Court
The state of Kansas petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari, asking the Court to review the case. The Court accepted the case for review in April 2019.Kansas v. Glover, 18-556, SCOTUSblog.
Oral argument was held on November 4, 2019. The Justices considered the matters of common sense about ownership of vehicles as well as current and future driving habits that their decision may impact. They also were limited by the lack of details from Deputy Mehrer who at no point during the court proceedings had testified to his actions during the stop. 
The Court's decision was issued on April 6, 2020. The 8–1 majority reversed the decision of the Kansas Supreme Court and remanded the case back to the state, ruling that the traffic stop against Glover was reasonable. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote the majority opinion which was joined by all except for Justice Sonia Sotomayor. Thomas wrote that Mehrer used common sense and made "an entirely reasonable inference that Glover was driving while his license was revoked". However, Thomas wrote that the Court's holding was narrow and further application should "takes into account the totality of the circumstances" as per Navarette v. California. Thomas wrote that it would have been inappropriate, for example, for a stop to be made if Mehrer had identified Glover from his license records as an older man, but from viewing the truck, saw a younger woman driving it. A concurrence by Justice Elena Kagan and joined by Ruth Bader Ginsburg agreed with this rationale and identified additional cases that would limit the applicability of the majority holding.
Sotomayor dissented, writing that "The majority today has paved the road to finding reasonable suspicion based on nothing more than a demographic profile."
 References 
External links
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Kansas v. Hendricks" ==> """
Kansas v. Hendricks, 521 U.S. 346 (1997), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court set forth procedures for the indefinite civil commitment of prisoners convicted of a sex offense whom the state deems dangerous due to a mental abnormality.
 Background 
Under Kansas's Sexually Violent Predator Act (Act), any person who, due to "mental abnormality" or "personality disorder", is likely to engage in "predatory acts of sexual violence" can be indefinitely confined.. Leroy Hendricks and Tim Quinn had extensive histories of sexually molesting children. When they were due to be released from prison, Kansas filed a petition under the Act in state court to involuntarily commit Hendricks and Quinn. Hendricks and Quinn challenged the constitutionality of the Act and requested a trial by jury which the court granted. Hendricks and Quinn testified during the trial that they agreed with the diagnosis by the state psychiatrist that Hendricks and Quinn suffer from pedophilia and admitted that they continued to experience uncontrollable sexual desires for children  when under extreme stress. The jury decided that they qualified as sexually violent predators. Since pedophilia is defined as a mental abnormality under the Act, the court ordered that Hendricks be civilly committed.
Hendricks appealed the validity of his commitment as well as claiming that the state was unconstitutionally using ex post facto and double jeopardy law, to the State Supreme Court. The court ruled that the Act was invalid on the grounds that the condition of "mental abnormality" did not satisfy the "substantive" due process requirement that involuntary civil commitment must be based on the finding of the presence of a "mental illness". It did not address the claims of ex post-facto and double jeopardy.
The Supreme Court granted Kansas' certiorari.
Decision
The Supreme Court ruled against Hendricks in a 5–4 decision. It agreed with the Act's procedures and the definition of a  "mental abnormality" as a "congenital or acquired condition affecting the emotional or volitional capacity which predisposes the person to commit sexually violent offenses to the degree that such person is a menace to the health and safety of others." It agreed with Kansas that the Act limits persons eligible for confinement to persons who are not able to control their dangerousness.
Further, the court decided the Act does not violate the Constitution's double jeopardy prohibition nor the ban on ex post facto law because the Act does not establish criminal proceedings and therefore involuntary confinement under it is not punishment. Because the Act is civil, Hendricks' confinement under the Act is not a second prosecution nor is it double jeopardy. And finally, the court said the Act is not considered punitive if it fails to offer treatment for an untreatable condition.
Significance
The court's finding that preventive long-term confinement of  mentally disordered persons has previously been justified on the grounds that some people's behavior cannot be prevented, and it does not violate their rights to confine them to deter antisocial behavior. However, it has also been argued that upholding the Act expands involuntary civil commitment to people with personality disorders, possibly allowing for the commitment of large numbers of criminals if the proof of the likelihood of re-offending required is sufficiently inclusive, which could happen if the requirement of  dangerousness is not limited to those with a mental illness, and that if mental abnormality (rather than mental illness) can be the basis for sex offender commitment, there is a danger that it  may expand the basis for traditional civil commitment to personality disorders as well.
In the subsequent Kansas v. Crane (2002), this decision was upheld for an individual that suffered from exhibitionism and antisocial personality disorder.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 521
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 Smith v. Doe (2003)
 United States v. Comstock (2010)
Footnotes
External links
Kansas v. Crane, Michael
Kansas v. Hendricks
United States of America v. Jason M. Weed, appeal decision
Category:Mental health case law in the United States
Category:Civil commitment of sex offenders
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States ex post facto case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1997 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Kansas
"""

From "Kansas v. Marsh" ==> """
Kansas v. Marsh, 548 U.S. 163 (2006), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a Kansas death penalty statute was consistent with the United States Constitution. The statute in question provided for a death sentence when the aggravating factors and mitigating factors were of equal weight.The Supreme Court, 2005 Term — Leading Cases, 120 Harv. L. Rev. 144 (2006).
 Background 
Michael Lee Marsh II was convicted of murder. The Kansas capital punishment statute allowed for the imposition of the death penalty if the mitigating and aggravating factors were of equal weight, so Marsh was sentenced to death.
After Marsh's sentencing, the Kansas Supreme Court in State v Kleypas, declared the law unconstitutional under the Eighth Amendment and overturned it. Ruling that "fundamental fairness requires that a 'tie goes to the defendant' when life or death is at issue".
 Judgement 
By a 5–4 vote, the United States Supreme Court reversed the Kansas Supreme Court's decision and upheld the Kansas death penalty statute. Justice Souter as well as Justices Stevens, Ginsburg and Breyer dissented from the majority, with Justice Souter calling the Kansas death penalty statute "morally absurd", "a moral irrationality" and "obtuse by any moral or social measure".
Justice Scalia criticised the dissenting opinion, claiming that the dissenting justices failed to cite a case in which it is clear that an individual was executed for a crime they did not commit: 
 Criticism 
Justice Scalia's concurrence has been criticised for describing a criminal justice system "unfamiliar to anyone who has ever covered a murder case, read a book about one, or watched television news".
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court decisions on capital punishment
References	
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:Capital punishment in Kansas
Category:2006 in United States case law
"""

From "Kappos v. Hyatt" ==> """
Kappos v. Hyatt, 566 U.S. 431 (2012), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States that held that there are no limitations on a plaintiff's ability to introduce new evidence in a §145 proceeding other than those in the Federal Rules of Evidence and the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.Kappos v. Hyatt, No. 10-1219 (2012), Slip. Op. at 14 The petitioner in the case was David Kappos, who was then serving as Director of the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO).
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 566
References
External links
 Coverage of the case on SCOTUSblog
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States patent case law
Category:2012 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Karcher v. Daggett" ==> """
Karcher v. Daggett, 462 U.S. 725 (1983), was a United States Supreme Court case involving the legality of redistricting, and possibly gerrymandering, in the state of New Jersey..
 Background 
The New Jersey Legislature adopted a redistricting plan which resulted in a one percent population difference between the largest and smallest districts.  Several citizens came forward and challenged the legislation, claiming it violated Article I, Section 2 of the Constitution.  The district court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs and determined the law to be unconstitutional.  The defendants appealed to the Supreme Court.
The "equal representation" standard of Article I, Section 2 requires districts to be apportioned to population equality to the closest possible degree.  The population differences here could have been avoided with a good faith effort to achieve population equality.  The Court found that the defendants did not meet their burden of proving that the deviations in their plan were necessary to achieve a consistent, nondiscriminatory redistricting.  The State had to prove specifically how and why the specific deviations of its plan were for an objective to benefit the system. The defendant tried to prove that the justification for the high deviations was to preserve voting strength of minority groups.  However, the court believed that the state could not prove that the population disparities preserved the voting strength of these minority groups.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court upheld the district courts decision based on the plaintiffs' evidence of districts not drawn in "good faith," and the state's failure to offer a legitimate reason for the population deviations exceeding minimum possible as required by Article I, section 2 of the Constitution. The dissenters thought that the population deviations—which were less than the margin of error for the census itself—was not the appropriate grounds for the holding and asserted that the districts should be ruled unconstitutional as a blatant political gerrymander. Justice Stevens's concurring 5th vote held both grounds were valid. The State was compelled to enact a new redistricting plan that followed smaller population deviations of district size. Of note, precisely the same Court ruled political gerrymanders were justiciable three years later in Davis v. Bandemer.
 Analysis 
The case is usually cited for its holding that there is no de minimis deviation for population inequality between districts, and that all deviations must be justified by a legitimate governmental interest (such as geographic features or preserving communities-of-interest). However, the case is the earliest Court rejection of a political gerrymander—though Justice Brennan's approach does not require holding on those grounds. In addition, the case is a prime example of the tie between the McDonnell-Douglas burden-shifting framework and redistricting law.
 References 
 Further reading 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:Congressional districts of New Jersey
Category:United States case law
Category:Gerrymandering in the United States
"""

From "Karcher v. May" ==> """
Karcher v. May, 484 U.S. 72 (1987), was a school prayer case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the former presiding officers of the New Jersey legislature did not have Article III standing to appeal a case, that standing had passed on to their legislative successors..
Background
In 1982, the New Jersey Legislature passed a statute over the governor's veto providing for a moment of silence in public schools, which failed to specifically mention prayer. May filed a lawsuit in the federal United States District Court for the District of New Jersey challenging the constitutionality of the statute; the executive-branch officials normally tasked with defending such suits (the Governor and the Attorney General) admitted the unconstitutionality of the statute and refused to defend it in court. Consequently, Alan Karcher, Speaker of the New Jersey General Assembly, and Carmen Orechio, President of the New Jersey Senate, moved to intervene (under Rule 24 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure) as defendants on behalf of the Legislature; the court granted the motion. In 1983, the District Court found that the purpose of the statute was religious, and deemed the law unconstitutional on First Amendment grounds.
Karcher and Orechio appealed, although by the time of filing their terms as Speaker and President had expired; their successors, Chuck Hardwick and John F. Russo, joined the executive officers in refusing to defend the constitutionality of the statute. Karcher and Orechio's lawyer, Rex E. Lee, nevertheless contended that their standing to continue to defend suit on the state's behalf remained, and also argued the purpose of the law was secular.
Opinion of the Court
The court found that the former legislative leaders lacked standing, but that that authority had passed by design to the current leaders of the New Jersey legislature. Justice Sandra Day O'Connor's majority decision was joined by six other justices, with Justice Byron White writing a concurring opinion. There was no ninth vote, as Justice Lewis F. Powell, Jr. had resigned earlier in the year, and no replacement had yet been confirmed.
As a result of this opinion, the district court ruling that the law was unconstitutional was left intact.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 484
References
External links
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States case law
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:New Jersey Legislature
Category:Legal history of New Jersey
Category:Religion and education
"""

From "Kassel v. Consolidated Freightways Corp." ==> """
Kassel v. Consolidated Freightways Corp., 450 U.S. 662 (1981), was a United States Supreme Court case involving the application of the Dormant Commerce Clause to an Iowa state statute restricting the length of tractor-trailers.. 
Facts
An Iowa statute restricted most truck combinations to  in length. It did provide for some exceptions: doubles, mobile homes, and trucks that carried livestock or certain types of farm equipment were permitted to be , and cities which abutted the state line were permitted to adopt the length limitations of the adjacent State. Deliverers of trucks or oversized mobile homes were required by law to obtain a permit before shipping the items into or out of the state.
Plaintiff Consolidated Freightways Corporation sued Raymond Kassel, director of the Iowa Department of Transportation, Iowa governor Robert Ray, and number of other state transportation officials in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Iowa, alleging that Iowa's statutory scheme unconstitutionally burdens interstate commerce. Iowa defended the statute as a reasonable safety measure enacted pursuant to its police power, asserting that  double tractor-trailers are more dangerous than 55-foot singles, and that the law would improve safety and reduce the number of highway accidents by diverting truck traffic outside the state.
The District Court made the factual finding that 65-foot doubles were just as safe as 60-foot doubles and 55-foot semi-trailers. It then determined that the state law impermissibly burdened interstate commerce, holding that the relatively slight benefit of the law in improving safety and reducing casualties was outweighed by the federal interest in promoting commerce between the States.  The United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit affirmed, noting that the only apparent safety benefit to Iowa was that resulting from forcing large trucks to detour around the State, thereby reducing overall truck traffic on Iowa's highways. The Court of Appeals noted that this was not a constitutionally permissible interest. It also commented that the several statutory exemptions identified above, such as those applicable to border cities and the shipment of livestock, suggested that the law in effect benefited Iowa residents at the expense of interstate traffic.
Plurality opinion
Justice Powell wrote the plurality opinion, in which Justices White, Blackmun, and Stevens joined.  He analogized the case to Raymond Motor Transportation, Inc. v. Rice, which concerned a similar law in the State of Wisconsin..  In Rice, the Court used a balancing test which compares the nature of the State’s regulatory concern with the extent of the burden to interstate commerce.  Powell found this law to be a great burden on interstate commerce with only an “illusory” safety interest.
Powell reexamined the evidence on the record and determined that the State failed to meet its burden of proof to show that there was any statistically significant difference in safety between the 55-foot and 65-foot trucks.  Moreover, the statute could potentially create more accidents, by forcing shippers to use more small trucks to carry the same quantity of goods, or force truck traffic to bypass the State of Iowa, shifting traffic (and a higher incidence of accidents) to adjacent states.  Powell further rejected the State’s contention that deference to the state legislature was in order, because the statute created such a burden to out-of-state residents, and the legislative history of the “border-cities” exemption suggested that Iowa’s real purpose in enacting this law was to discriminate against out-of-state businesses.
Concurrence
Justice Brennan concurred in the judgment, joined by Justice Thurgood Marshall.  He suggested a new, three-factor test for the Dormant Commerce Clause:
The courts are not empowered to second-guess the empirical judgments of lawmakers concerning the utility of legislation.
The burdens imposed on commerce must be balanced against the local benefits actually sought to be achieved by the State's lawmakers, and not against those suggested after the fact by counsel.
Protectionist legislation is unconstitutional under the Commerce Clause, even if the burdens and benefits are related to safety rather than economics.
450 U.S. at 679-680.
In this analysis, Brennan suggested greater deference to the state legislature and better examination of the legislative history of the statute in dispute, rather than giving credence to the factual record created at trial by the State’s attorneys.  However, protectionist legislation such as this, which shifts burdens and expenses to other states, does not require such deference.  Brennan would create a per se invalidity rule for such laws.
Dissent
Justice Rehnquist wrote the dissenting opinion, in which Chief Justice Burger and Justice Stewart joined.  Rehnquist noted that every state has truck-length regulations, and that this law is not the oddity that the majority claims it to be.  He would have utilized rational basis review, instead of making new factual findings at trial and then using those findings to determine the validity of the legislation.  He worried that the Court’s ruling basically forced Iowa to bow to the policy choices of neighboring states, when the power to make such interstate regulations is vested in Congress by the Constitution.  He further argued that the court was reading too much into the motives of the legislature in enacting the statute.
Rehnquist further argues that it was error to portray Iowa's statute as protectionist because it is nearly impossible to separate the safety and protectionist motives of the law.
See also
 Bibb v. Navajo Freight Lines, Inc.: 1959 U.S. Supreme Court case applying the Dormant Commerce Clause to interstate trucking safety regulations
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 450
References
External links
Summary of case
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
Category:1981 in United States case law
Category:Vehicle law
Category:Trucking industry in the United States
Category:Legal history of Iowa
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Road transportation in Iowa
Category:Road safety in the United States
"""

From "Kastigar v. United States" ==> """
Kastigar v. United States, 406 U.S. 441 (1972), was a United States Supreme Court decision that ruled on the issue of whether the government's grant of immunity from prosecution can compel a witness to testify over an assertion of the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination.
In a 5-2 decision (Justices Brennan and Rehnquist took no part in the consideration of the case), the Court held that the government can overcome a claim of Fifth Amendment privilege by granting a witness "use and derivative use" immunity in exchange for his testimony.
Background
Petitioners were subpoenaed to appear before a federal grand jury in the United States District Court for the Central District of California on February 4, 1971. The Government believed that petitioners were likely to assert their Fifth Amendment privilege. Prior to the scheduled appearances, the government applied to the District Court for an order directing petitioners to answer questions and produce evidence before the grand jury under a grant of immunity conferred pursuant to . Petitioners opposed issuance of the order, contending primarily that the scope of the immunity provided by the statute was not coextensive with the scope of the privilege against self-incrimination and so was not sufficient to supplant the privilege and compel their testimony. The District Court rejected their brief and ordered petitioners to appear before the grand jury and answer its questions, under the grant of immunity.
Petitioners appeared but refused to answer questions, asserting their privilege against compulsory self-incrimination. They were brought before the District Court, and all persisted in refusing to answer the grand jury's questions, notwithstanding the grant of immunity. The court found both in contempt and committed them to the custody of the Attorney General until either they answered the grand jury's questions or the term of the grand jury expired. The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed.406 U.S. at 443. The Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve the question of whether testimony may be compelled by granting immunity from the use of compelled testimony and evidence derived therefrom ("use and derivative use" immunity) or if it is necessary to grant immunity from prosecution for offenses to which compelled testimony relates ("transactional" immunity).
Decision
The United States can compel testimony from an unwilling witness who invokes the Fifth Amendment privilege against compulsory self-incrimination by conferring immunity, as provided by , from use of the compelled testimony and evidence derived therefrom in subsequent criminal proceedings, as such immunity from use and derivative use is coextensive with the scope of the privilege and sufficient to compel testimony over a claim of the privilege.
Transactional immunity would afford broader protection than the Fifth Amendment privilege and is not constitutionally required. In a subsequent criminal prosecution, the prosecution has the burden of proving affirmatively that evidence proposed to be used is derived from a legitimate source, wholly independent of the compelled testimony.
References
Further reading
External links
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:Legal immunity
"""

From "Katz v. United States" ==> """
Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347 (1967), was a landmark decision of the U.S. Supreme Court in which the Court redefined what constitutes a "search" or "seizure" with regard to the protections of the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. The ruling expanded the Fourth Amendment's protections from an individual's "persons, houses, papers, and effects", as specified in the Constitution's text, to include any areas where a person has a "reasonable expectation of privacy".Katz v. United States, 389 US 347 (1967). The reasonable expectation of privacy standard, known as the Katz test, was formulated in a concurring opinion by Justice John Marshall Harlan II. 
The Katz test has since been used in numerous cases, particularly because of technological advances that create new questions about privacy norms and government surveillance of personal data.
Background
Charles Katz was a sports bettor who by the mid-1960s had become "probably the preeminent college basketball handicapper in America." In 1965, Katz regularly used a public telephone booth near his apartment on Sunset Boulevard in Los Angeles to communicate his gambling handicaps to bookmakers in Boston and Miami. Unbeknownst to Katz, the FBI had begun investigating his gambling activities and was recording his conversations via a covert listening device attached to the outside of the phone booth. After recording many of his phone calls, FBI agents arrested Katz and charged him with eight counts of knowingly transmitting wagering information by telephone between U.S. states, which is a federal crime under Section 18 of the United States Code, particularly a law on the transmission of wagering information..
Katz was tried in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of California. Katz made a motion to suppress the FBI's recordings, arguing that because the agents did not have a search warrant allowing them to place their listening device, the recordings had been made in violation of the Fourth Amendment and should be inadmissible in court per the exclusionary rule. The judge denied Katz's motion and ruled that the recordings were admissible as evidence, and Katz was convicted based on them. 
Katz appealed his conviction to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. In 1966, the Ninth Circuit affirmed Katz's conviction, ruling that because the FBI's eavesdropping device did not physically penetrate the telephone booth's wall, no Fourth Amendment search occurred, and so the FBI did not need a warrant to place the device.Katz v. United States, 369 F. 2d 130 (9th Cir., 1966).  Katz then appealed to the Supreme Court, which agreed to hear his case and granted certiorari.
Opinion of the court
On December 18, 1967, the Supreme Court issued a 7–1 decision in favor of Katz that invalidated the FBI's wiretap evidence and overturned Katz's criminal conviction.thumb|upright=0.9|right|Justice Potter Stewart, who authored the Court's opinion in Katz
The majority opinion was written by Justice Potter Stewart. The Court began by dismissing the parties' characterization of the case in terms of traditional trespass-based analysis that hinged on, first, whether the public telephone booth Katz had used was a "constitutionally protected area" where he had a "right of privacy"; and second, on whether the FBI had "physically penetrated" the protected area and thus violated the Fourth Amendment. Instead, the Court viewed the situation through the lens of how Katz's use of the phone booth would be perceived by himself and then objectively by others. In a now well-known passage, Stewart wrote:
The Supreme Court then briefly surveyed the history of American jurisprudence on governmental searches and seizures. It described how American courts had traditionally analyzed Fourth Amendment searches by analogizing them to the long-established doctrine of trespass. In their legal briefs, the parties had focused on the 1928 precedent Olmstead v. United States, in which the Court ruled that surveillance by wiretap without any trespass did not constitute a "search" for Fourth Amendment purposes. However, the Court stated that in later cases it had begun recognizing that the Fourth Amendment applied to recorded speech obtained without any physical trespassing, and that the law had evolved. Stewart wrote:
Stewart then concluded the Court's opinion by ruling that even though the FBI knew there was a "strong probability" that Katz was breaking the law when using the phone booth, their use of the wiretap was an unconstitutional search because they did not obtain a warrant before placing the listening device.
Harlan's concurrence
thumb|upright=0.9|right|Justice John Marshall Harlan II, whose concurring opinion created the two-part "Katz test" that is regularly applied in Fourth Amendment cases
Justice John Marshall Harlan II's concurring opinion in Katz has become even more influential than the majority opinion. It describes a two-part test which has come to be known as the Katz test.
Harlan began his opinion by noting that he was writing separately to elaborate on the meaning of Stewart's majority opinion. Harlan explained that he interpreted Stewart's statements that "the Fourth Amendment protects people, not places" and "what a person knowingly exposes to the public [...] is not a subject of Fourth Amendment protection" to mean that the Fourth Amendment is activated any time a person has an expectation of privacy that is both subjective and objectively reasonable in the eyes of society at large. He summarized his view of the law as comprising a two-part test:
The Supreme Court adopted Harlan's two-part test as a formulation of the Fourth Amendment search analysis for most subsequent cases involving governmental searches that generated constitutional challenges.
Black's dissent
Justice Hugo Black was the only dissenter in the decision. He argued that the Fourth Amendment was only meant to protect "things" from physical search and seizure, and was not meant to protect personal privacy. Additionally, Black argued that the modern act of wiretapping was analogous to the act of eavesdropping, which was around even when the Bill of Rights was drafted. Black concluded that if the drafters of the Fourth Amendment had meant for it to protect against eavesdropping they would have included the proper language.
Impact and legacy
The Supreme Court's decision in Katz significantly expanded the scope of the Fourth Amendment's protections, and represented an unprecedented shift in American search and seizure jurisprudence. Many law enforcement practices that previously were not "within the view" of the Fourth Amendmentsuch as wiretaps on public phone wiresare now covered by the Fourth Amendment and cannot be conducted without first obtaining a search warrant. The Katz precedent continues to be consulted regularly in relation to disputes over modern electronic surveillance by the National Security Agency and law enforcement entities, though with some concerns that the Katz test is becoming outdated due to modern surveillance technologies. 
However, Katz also created significantly more uncertainty surrounding the application of the Fourth Amendment. The Katz test of an objective "reasonable expectation of privacy", which has been widely adopted by U.S. courts, has proven much more difficult to apply than the traditional analysis of whether a physical intrusion into "persons, houses, papers, and effects" occurred. In a 2007 Stanford Law Review article, the American legal scholar Orin Kerr described the scholarly consensus that the Katz test has been a failure: 
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 389
Notes
References
Works cited
External links
 Katz v. United States from C-SPAN's Landmark Cases: Historic Supreme Court Decisions
Category:1967 in United States case law
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:Gambling in the United States
Category:History of Los Angeles
Category:Privacy of telecommunications
Category:Public phones
Category:Search and seizure case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
"""

From "Katzenbach v. McClung" ==> """
Katzenbach v. McClung, 379 U.S. 294 (1964), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court which unanimously held that Congress acted within its power under the Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution in forbidding racial discrimination in restaurants as this was a burden to interstate commerce.
 Background 
Ollie McClung's restaurant, Ollie's Barbecue, was a family-owned restaurant that operated in Birmingham, Alabama, and seated 220 customers. It was located on a state highway and was 11 blocks from an interstate highway. In a typical year, approximately half of the food it purchased from a local supplier originated out-of-state. It catered to local families and white-collar workers and provided take-out service to African American customers.
Congress passed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 outlawing segregation based on race, color, religion, or national origin in all public accommodations engaged in interstate commerce, including restaurants. One section of the act, Title II, was specifically intended to grant access to public facilities such as hotels, restaurants,  and public recreation areas. On the same day, the Supreme Court heard challenges to Title II from a motel owner and from Ollie McClung. Both claimed that the federal government had no right to impose any regulations on small, private businesses. Both ultimately lost. Ollie McClung had won an initial round in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Alabama when he received an injunction preventing the government from enforcing Title II against his restaurant. But then Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach appealed this decision to the U.S. Supreme Court.
 Decision 
McClung argued that the Civil Rights Act was unconstitutional, at least as applied to a small, private business such as his. McClung further argued that the amount of food purchased by Ollie's that actually crossed state lines (about half of the food at Ollie's) was so minuscule that Ollie's effectively had no effect on interstate commerce (although McClung admitted that a significant amount of Ollie's business was to interstate travelers). Consequently, McClung argued that Congress had no power to regulate Ollie's Barbecue under the Commerce Clause.
The court ruled unanimously that the Civil Rights Act is constitutional and that it was properly applied against Ollie's Barbecue.
Justice Clark wrote the majority opinion, with concurrences by Justices Black, Douglas, and Goldberg. In section 2 of the opinion, the Court agreed with McClung that Ollie's itself had virtually no effect on interstate commerce. In section 4 of the opinion, the Court held that racial discrimination in restaurants had a significant impact on interstate commerce and so Congress has the power to regulate this conduct under the Commerce Clause. The Court's conclusion was based on extensive Congressional hearings on the issue. The Court cited testimony that African AmericansThe text of the decision makes reference to "Negroes," not "African-Americans." spent significantly less time in areas with racially segregated restaurants and that segregation imposed an artificial restriction on the flow of merchandise by discouraging African Americans from making purchases in segregated establishments. The Court gave the greatest weight to evidence that segregation in restaurants had a "direct and highly restrictive effect upon interstate travel by Negroes."
In Section 5 of the decision, the Court affirmed previous decisions that Congress has the authority to regulate local intrastate activities if the activities significantly affect interstate commerce in the aggregate, citing United States v. Wrightwood Dairy Co., Wickard v. Filburn, Gibbons v. Ogden, and United States v. Darby Lumber Co.
The appellees objected to Congress' approach in determining what affects commerce, the court held, “Where we find that the legislators, in light of the facts and testimony before them, have a rational basis for finding a chosen regulatory scheme necessary to the protection of commerce, our investigation is at an end.”
 Subsequent developments 
After decades in operation, Ollie's Barbecue moved to the suburb of Pelham in 1999 and closed in 2001.Ollie's BBQ closes, but the sauce will live on, Birmingham Business Journal, Friday, September 21, 2001.
 See also 
 Heart of Atlanta Motel v. United States
 Civil Rights Movement
 References 
 External links 
LIFE Magazine article (Oct. 9, 1964)
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States racial desegregation case law
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:History of Birmingham, Alabama
Category:Restaurants in Birmingham, Alabama
Category:African-American history of Alabama
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Civil rights movement case law
"""

From "Katzenbach v. Morgan" ==> """
Katzenbach v. Morgan, 384 U.S. 641 (1966), was a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States regarding the power of Congress, pursuant to Section 5 of the 14th Amendment, to enact laws that enforce and interpret provisions of the Constitution.
 Background 
Prior to the 1960s, many US states and municipalities used literacy tests to disenfranchise minorities. In 1959, the Supreme Court of the United States held, in Lassiter v. Northampton County Board of Elections, that literacy tests were not necessarily violations of the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment, nor of the 15th Amendment.
In 1965, Congress passed the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which sought to safeguard the voting rights of disenfranchised minorities. Among other provisions, the Voting Rights Act made some literacy tests illegal. Section 4(e) was aimed at securing the franchisement of New York City's large Puerto Rican population and "provides that no person who has completed the sixth grade in a public school, or an accredited private school, in Puerto Rico in which the language of instruction was other than English shall be disfranchised for inability to read or write English."
Registered voters in the state of New York brought suit by alleging that Congress exceeded its powers of enforcement under the 14th Amendment and alleging that Congress infringed on rights reserved to states by the 10th Amendment.
Decision
By a 7–2 decision, the Supreme Court sided with Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach, reversed the District Court, and held that Section 4(e) was constitutional. Writing the majority opinion, Justice Brennan stressed that Section 5 of the amendment is "a positive grant of legislative power authorizing Congress to exercise its discretion in determining the need for and nature of legislation to secure Fourteenth Amendment guarantees." Justice Brennan applied the appropriateness standard of McCulloch v. Maryland (1819) to determine whether the legislation passed constitutional muster.
Section 4(e) arguably expanded rights beyond what the Court had recognized in Lassiter, but Brennan ruled that Section 4(e) was appropriate. In doing so, he has often been credited with introducing the "ratchet theory" for congressional legislation enacted under Section 5. It held that Congress could ratchet up civil rights beyond what the Court had recognized, but Congress could not ratchet down judicially recognized rights. The "ratchet theory" essentially set judicially recognized rights as a support on which Congress could expand if it so chose. According to the theory, Brennan's opinion allowed for multiple interpreters of the Fourteenth Amendment, as opposed to just that of the judiciary.
In dissent, Justice Harlan criticized the "ratchet theory" and the idea of multiple interpreters of the 14th Amendment. Harlan relied on the separation of powers doctrine to argue that allowing Congress to interpret the 14th Amendment undercut the power of the judiciary. He objected to Congress having the power to interpret the 14th Amendment substantively (to create new rights). Harlan argued that the appropriate use of Section 5 power was the enforcement of judicially-recognized 14th Amendment rights.
Significance
Katzenbach v. Morgan is a prime example of judicial deference to Congressional authority. It allowed Congress great latitude in use of Section 5.
The Supreme Court, 31 years after Katzenbach, revisited the "ratchet" interpretation, in the case of City of Boerne v. Flores (1997) and stated, "This is not a necessary interpretation, however, or even the best one." By striking down the state application of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993, it addressed the separation of powers concerns that had been voiced earlier by Harlan.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 384
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States elections case law
Category:1966 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of New York (state)
Category:Puerto Rican diaspora
Category:History of voting rights in the United States
Category:Political history of New York City
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Kawaauhau v. Geiger" ==> """
Kawaauhau v. Geiger, 523 U.S. 57 (1998), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that debt arising from a medical malpractice judgment, attributable to negligent or reckless conduct is dischargeable under the Bankruptcy Code..
 Background 
Margaret Kawaauhau sought treatment from Dr. Paul Geiger for an injured foot, and he hospitalized her for fear of infection. Even though he knew intravenous penicillin would be more effective in warding off infection, he gave he oral penicillin instead, realizing she was trying to cut down on her medical costs. Afterwards, Dr. Geiger left Kawaauhau in the care of other physicians at the hospital he worked at while he went off on a business trip. The physicians decided she should be transferred to a specialist for infections. However, before that could be arranged, Dr. Geiger returned, and not only did he cancel such a transfer, he ended the antibiotics treatments, believing the infection had passed.
Over time, Kawaauhau's condition worsened and her leg had to be amputated below the knee. She and her husband sued Dr. Geiger for malpractice in federal district court, won, and were awarded $355,000 by the jury. Geiger had no malpractice insurance, and in an attempt to avoid paying the settlement, he moved to Missouri. His wages were then garnished by the Kawaauhaus, and Geiger subsequently filed for bankruptcy.
The Kawaauhaus asked the bankruptcy court to hold Geiger's settlement debts non-dischargeable, which it did. Dr. Geiger appealed to the Eighth Circuit Court, which overturned the bankruptcy court's decision, saying the Bankruptcy Code's discharge exception of debts caused through "willful and malicious injury by the debtor to another" did not apply in this case because the injury was unintentional. The Kawaauhaus appealed to the Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
In a unanimous decision delivered by Justice Ginsburg, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of Dr. Geiger, saying unintentional malpractice torts were dischargeable by bankruptcy (that this instance did not fall under the exception provided for in §523(a)(6)), and thus upheld the decision of the Eighth Circuit Court.
References
External links
Category:Medical malpractice
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1998 in United States case law
Category:United States bankruptcy case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Kawakita v. United States" ==> """
Kawakita v. United States, 343 U.S. 717 (1952), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that a dual U.S./Japanese citizen could be convicted of treason against the United States for acts performed in Japan during World War II.Kawakita v. United States, . Tomoya Kawakita, born in California to Japanese parents, was in Japan when the war broke out and stayed in Japan until the war was over. After returning to the United States, he was arrested and charged with treason for having abused American prisoners of war. Kawakita claimed he could not be found guilty of treason since he had lost his U.S. citizenship while in Japan, but this argument was rejected by the courts (including the Supreme Court), which ruled that he had in fact retained his U.S. citizenship during the war. Originally sentenced to death, Kawakita's sentence was commuted to life imprisonment, and he was eventually released from prison, deported to Japan, and barred from ever returning to the United States.
Kawakita is currently one of the last people to be convicted of treason in the United States. One other person, John David Provoo, was convicted of treason in 1952. However, Provoo's conviction was overturned on appeal. The distinction currently goes to Herbert John Burgman, who was convicted of treason in 1949.
 Background 
 was born in Calexico, California, on September 26, 1921, of Japanese-born parents. He was born with U.S. citizenship due to his place of birth, and also Japanese nationality via his parents.  A former high school classmate of Kawakita, Joe Gomez, recalled him as quiet and serious, but sadistic in nature.
After finishing high school in Calexico in 1939, Kawakita traveled to Japan with his father (a grocer and merchant). He enrolled in Meiji University in 1941. In 1943, he registered officially as a Japanese national.
Kawakita was in Japan when the attack on Pearl Harbor drew the United States and Japan into World War II. In August 1943, with the assistance of a family friend, Takeo Miki, Kawakita took a job as an interpreter at a mining and metal processing plant.. Shortly after Kawakita started working there, British and Canadian POWs arrived. Kawakita was tasked with interpreting for them. The POWs were sometimes forced to work in the mine.
In 1944 and early in 1945, approximately 400 American POWs, many of whom were captured in Bataan in 1942 and had survived the subsequent death march, arrived in the camp. Kawakita brutalized multiple American POWs during this time.The work done at the mine by the American prisoners consisted of digging nickel ore from the face of the mountain side, and loading it onto cars which were emptied into hoppers. The prisoners also performed other general labor in the mine area, including such duty as carrying logs to be used for construction and maintenance work.After Japan's surrender, Kawakita's attitude towards American POWs reportedly changed entirely. After the end of the war, Kawakita renewed his U.S. passport, explaining away his having registered as a Japanese national by claiming he had acted under duress. He returned to the U.S. in 1946 and enrolled at the University of Southern California.
In October 1946, a former POW, William L. Bruce saw Kawakita in a Los Angeles department store and recognized him from the war. Bruce reported this encounter to the FBI, and in June 1947, Kawakita was arrested and charged with 15 counts of treason arising from alleged abuse of American POWs.
In an interview shortly after the arrest, Bruce described his reaction to seeing Kawakita:"I was so dumbfounded, I just halted in my tracks and stared at him as he hurried by. It was a good thing, too. If I'd reacted then, I'm not sure but that I might have taken the law into my own hands--and probably Kawakita's neck."
 Trial and appeal
Nearly 100 ex-POWs said they were willing to testify against Kawakita. At Kawakita's trial, presided over by U.S. District Judge William C. Mathes and prosecuted by James Marshall Carter, over 30 ex-POWs testified that Kawakita had brutalized American POWs. He was said to have beaten prisoners, forced them to beat each other, and forced them to run until they collapsed from exhaustion if they finished their work assignments early. In one case, Kawakita was accused of causing the death of Einar Latvala, and American POW (he was later acquitted of that charge after two Canadians said Latvala had been killed by another guard). Two of the treason charges against Kawakita were later dropped.
One of the witnesses in Kawakita's defense was his childhood friend, Meiji Fujizawa. Fujizawa had also worked in Camp Oeyama, but wasn't prosecuted due to American POWs having overwhelmingly favorable opinions of him; they said Fujizawa had done the best he could to help them and get them medicine. Fujizawa said he never saw Kawakita beat anyone. He said beatings did happen in the camp, but those were done by military officials.
The defense conceded that Kawakita had acted abusively toward American POWs, but argued that his actions were relatively minor, and that in any event, they could not constitute treason against the United States as Kawakita was not a U.S. citizen at the time, having lost his U.S. citizenship when he confirmed his Japanese nationality in 1943. The prosecution argued that Kawakita had known he was still a U.S. citizen and still owed allegiance to the country of his birth—citing the statements he had made to consular officials when applying for a new passport as evidence that he had never intended to give up his U.S. citizenship.
Judge Mathes's instructed the jury that if they found Kawakita had genuinely believed he was no longer a U.S. citizen, then he must be found not guilty. He reminded them that Kawakita was on trial for treason, not for war crimes. During their deliberations, the jury reported several times that they were hopelessly deadlocked, but the judge insisted each time that they continue trying to reach a unanimous verdict. In the end—on September 2, 1948—the jury found Kawakita guilty of 8 of 13 counts of treason, and he was sentenced to death. As a consequence of his conviction for treason, Kawakita's U.S. citizenship was also revoked.
In passing sentence, Mathes gave a speech:You gentlemen have performed your duties in this case most diligently. So has the jury. And this is now my responsibility.
I want to make it perfectly clear that the sentence I impose here has no relation to any brutalities that may have been involved in this defendant's treatment of American prisoners of war. That is only an incident. So with any kindness that he may have shown them. It is only an incident. The defendant stands here convicted of the crime of treason. The fact that he was born of Japanese nationals has nothing to do with it. My views would be the same no matter who he was.
Treason is the only crime, as has been said here several times, mentioned in our Constitution. The framers thought it of sufficient gravity to provide it as the only crime mentioned in the Constitution of the United States.
As I view this matter, it is not a question of whether the defendant kicked some American prisoner of war or a dozen of them. His crime might be briefly put in two sentences. He said that from 1943 on he did everything he could to help the Japanese Government win the war.
The jury found that he owed a duty of loyalty at that time to the United States. So his crime cannot be considered, I take it, in terms of beating up someone, no matter how brutal. His crime is a crime against the country of his birth. His crime is not against a few American prisoners of war. His crime is against the whole people of this country where he was born and where he was fed and where he was educated.
Throughout history treason has always been the crime most abhorred by English-speaking peoples. The traitor has always been considered even worse than a murderer. And the distinction is based upon reason: for the murderer violates at most only a few, while the traitor violates all all the members of his society, all the members of the group to which he owes his allegiance. The punishment inflicted by the common law when traitors were publicly dragged to the place of execution and there drawn, quartered and beheaded recalls the extreme odium which our forebears attached to the crime of betraying one's country. The penalty for murder was death; for treason, death with vengeance.
Today our law permits the life of a traitor to be spared.
As it has been truly said: "It is the essence of treachery that those who commit it would still be severely punished if the law forgot its duty to provide deterrents to crime and did not lay a finger on them."
If the defendant were to go from this Court a free man, he would be condemned to live out his life in bitter scorn of himself. Haunting him to the end of his days would be the memory not only of his base treason against the land of his birth, but also of Sadao Munemori who won the Congressional Medal of Honor; of Privates First Class, Fumitaka Nagato and Saburo Tanamachi, who are buried with the American heroes of all time at Arlington National Cemetery; and the memory of almost seven hundred other boys of like American birthright, of like Japanese parentage, who stood the supreme test of loyalty to their native land, and gave up their lives that America and her institutions might continue to live.
These thoughts and others must tell the defendant that his life, if spared, would not be worth living. Considering the inherent nature of treason and the purpose of the law in imposing punishment for the crime, reflection leads to the conclusion that the only worth-while use for the life of a traitor, such as this defendant has proved himself to be, is to serve as an example to those of weak moral fiber who may hereafter be tempted to commit treason against the United States.Kawakita's mother broke down after hearing the sentence, and her son begged her not to kill herself. Kawakita was sent to San Quentin State Prison to await his execution. His execution would be carried out via lethal gas.
Kawakita appealed to a three-judge panel of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, which unanimously upheld the verdict and death sentence. Certiorari was granted by the United States Supreme Court,Kawakita v. United States,  (granting certiorari). and oral arguments before the Supreme Court were heard on April 3, 1952.
 Opinion of the Court 
right|thumb|alt=William O. Douglas|Associate Justice William O. Douglas wrote the opinion of the Court in the Kawakita case.left|thumb|alt=Tomoya Kawakita at his trial|Tomoya Kawakita, in a photograph taken at his 1948 trial for treason
In a 4–3 decision issued on June 2, 1952, the Supreme Court upheld Kawakita's treason conviction and death sentence. The Court's opinion was written by Associate Justice William O. Douglas, joined by Associate Justices Stanley F. Reed, Robert H. Jackson, and Sherman Minton.
The Court's majority held that the jury in Kawakita's trial had been justified in concluding that he had not lost or given up his U.S. citizenship while he was in Japan during the war. The Court added that an American citizen owed allegiance to the United States, and could be found guilty of treason, no matter where he lived—even for actions committed in another country that also claimed him as a citizen. Further, given the flagrant nature of Kawakita's actions, the majority found that the trial judge had not acted arbitrarily in imposing a death sentence.
 Dissent 
right|thumb|alt=Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson|Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson wrote the dissent in the Kawakita case.
Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson authored a dissenting opinion, which was joined by Associate Justices Hugo Black and Harold H. Burton. The dissent concluded that "for over two years, [Kawakita] was consistently demonstrating his allegiance to Japan, not the United States. As a matter of law, he expatriated himself as well as that can be done." On this basis, the dissenting justices would have reversed Kawakita's treason conviction.
 Subsequent developments 
On October 29, 1953, President Dwight D. Eisenhower, responding to appeals from the Japanese government commuted Kawakita's sentence to life imprisonment plus a $10,000 fine. After the commutation of his sentence, Kawakita was transferred to the Alcatraz Federal Penitentiary. He was transferred to McNeil Island Federal Penitentiary after the closure of Alcatraz in 1963.
Throughout his imprisonment, Kawakita's three sisters lobbied for his release. They said their brother's trial had been unfair and racist. They questioned the fairness of his trial in California, given its horrendous history against Japanese-Americans. The Kennedy administration initially refused to release Kawakita. However, on October 24, 1963, President Kennedy ordered his release on the condition that he permanently leave the United States. This was one of his last presidential acts before his assassination.
Earlier that year, the Attorney General, Robert F. Kennedy had sought the opinions of those who were involved in the case. Mathes was adamantly opposed, but James Carter supported clemency, as did the lower appellate judge who wrote the opinion upholding Kawakita's conviction.
Carter said Kawakita should be released, but exiled. Robert Kennedy, forwarded the recommendation to his brother. He acknowledged Kawakita's crimes, but said he'd been a model prisoner. The Japan Desk of the Department of State said releasing Kawakita would boost foreign relations.
On October 24, 1963, President John F. Kennedy—in what would be one of his last official acts before his assassination—ordered Kawakita released from prison on the condition that he leave the United States and be banned from ever returning. Kennedy justified Kawakita's release by saying he had now served more time than any other war criminal in Japan (the last Japanese war criminals serving time in Sugamo Prison were paroled in 1958). Kawakita flew to Japan on December 13, 1963, and reacquired Japanese citizenship upon his arrival. In 1978, Kawakita sought permission to travel to the United States to visit his parents' grave, but his efforts were unsuccessful. As of late 1993, he was living quietly with relatives in Japan. When exactly he died, assuming he has died, is unknown.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 343
 Iva Toguri D'Aquino, another Japanese-American convicted of treason for actions committed during World War II
 Kanao Inouye, a Japanese-Canadian convicted of treason and executed for actions committed during World War II
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:1952 in United States case law
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:Japan–United States relations
Category:United States in World War II
Category:Treason Clause case law
Category:Deportation from the United States
"""

From "Kawashima v. Holder" ==> """
Kawashima v. Holder, 565 U.S. 478 (2012), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that "filing a false tax return in violation of 26 U.S.C. Section 7206 qualifies as an aggravated felony under the Immigration and Nationality Act when the Government's revenue loss exceeds $10,000.".
 Background 
Akio and Fusako Kawashima, Japanese nationals who legally resided in the U.S., owned the successful Nihon Seibutsu Kagaku restaurant in Thousand Oaks, California which filed false tax returns.
 Opinion of the Court 
In a 6—3 opinion written by Justice Clarence Thomas, the Court held that "filing a false tax return in violation of 26 U.S.C. Section 7206 qualifies as an aggravated felony under the Immigration and Nationality Act when the Government's revenue loss exceeds $10,000."
 See also 
 Immigration and Nationality Act
 References 
 External links 
 Coverage of the case on SCOTUSblog
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2012 in United States case law
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:History of Thousand Oaks, California
Category:Japanese restaurateurs
Category:Restaurants in California
Category:Japan–United States relations
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Keeton v. Hustler Magazine, Inc." ==> """
Keeton v. Hustler Magazine, Inc., 465 U.S. 770 (1984), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that a state could assert personal jurisdiction over the publisher of a national magazine which published an allegedly defamatory article about a resident of another state, and where the magazine had wide circulation in that state..
Facts
Keeton was a case for defamation brought by Kathy Keeton, a New York resident and publisher of Penthouse magazine, against the nationally distributed Hustler magazine. 
The plaintiff claimed that she was libeled by material published in magazine since 1975, including a cartoon that falsely suggested she had contracted a sexually transmitted infection from fellow Penthouse publisher (and her later to be husband) Bob Guccione, as well as a nude pictorial spread of a model who was identified as Keeton. Keeton chose to bring the case in New Hampshire, even though the plaintiff was not a resident there, because New Hampshire allowed six years to bring suit under that state's statute of limitations, which is longer than any other state. Also, New Hampshire's "Single Publication Rule" could increase the amount of damages the plaintiff could collect by accounting for publication in all 50 states.
Issue
The issue was whether the federal court had personal jurisdiction if the case was brought in New Hampshire, by a plaintiff from a foreign state against a nationally circulated magazine.
Opinion of the Court
The U.S. Supreme Court upheld personal jurisdiction, stating that the plaintiff in a case had never been required to have "minimum contacts" in a state to bring suit in that state and since the magazine did conduct business within the state of New Hampshire.
Other developments
Keeton was later awarded a $2 million judgment by a New Hampshire jury.
This case was decided at the same time as Calder v. Jones, which held that a state had personal jurisdiction over author or editor of an article published in a magazine widely circulated in the state the case was brought, if the claim brought was that the article was libelous about activities in the state by a resident of state.. Like Keeton, Rehnquist authored a unanimous decision there. However, key differences between the cases were that Calder involved a plaintiff suing in her state of residence and she was suing the author and editor involved in the piece in addition to the newspaper itself, while Keeton involved a plaintiff suing only the magazine itself.
See also
 Mavrix Photo, Inc. v. Brand Technologies, Inc.
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 465 
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:United States personal jurisdiction case law
Category:United States defamation case law
Category:Penthouse (magazine)
Category:Larry Flynt Publications
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Keller v. State Bar of California" ==> """
Keller v. State Bar of California, 496 U.S. 1 (1990), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that attorneys who are required to be members of a state bar association have a First Amendment right to refrain from subsidizing the organization’s political or ideological activities..
 Introduction 
Attorneys licensed to practice in California are required by law to be members of, and pay dues to, the State Bar of California.  In this action, 21 California attorneys sued the State Bar, objecting to the agency's use of its members' dues to fund political and ideological activities that the members did not support.  The attorneys argued that such use of their compulsory dues violated their right to freedom of speech and freedom of association, or more precisely, the freedom not to associate, under the First Amendment, as applied to the states by the Fourteenth Amendment.496 U.S. at 5-6
 Facts of the case 
In 1982, when the complaint in this case was filed, the State Bar of California was an active voice on political issues, both within California and nationally.  The State Bar lobbied on matters pending before the legislature and before other state agencies, filed briefs in politically charged cases, and convened a Conference of Delegates to adopt resolutions taking positions on highly contentious political and ideological issues.496 U.S. at 6 n.2
The objecting attorneys challenged the use of their dues for (1) lobbying on issues such as gun control, the death penalty, special education, exclusions from gift taxes, voter approval of low-rent housing projects, and immigration; (2) filing amicus curiae briefs in cases involving the constitutionality of a victim's bill of rights, the power of a workers’ compensation board to discipline attorneys, a requirement that attorney-public officials disclose names of clients, and the disqualification of a law firm; and (3) the adoption of resolutions by the State Bar's Conference of Delegates endorsing a gun control initiative, disapproving the statements of a United States senatorial candidate regarding court review of a victim’s bill of rights, endorsing a nuclear weapons freeze initiative, and opposing federal legislation limiting federal-court jurisdiction over abortions, public school prayer, and busing.  The plaintiffs asked for an injunction forbidding the State bar from using mandatory dues for ideological or political purposes.
 Prior history 
The trial court granted summary judgment to the State Bar, ruling that, as a government agency, the Bar itself had a First Amendment right to engage in political speech.496 U.S. at 6.  This ruling was reversed by the California Court of Appeal, which, in a published decision, found that the State Bar's activities were similar to those of a labor union, and its authority to use mandatory dues for political or ideological purposes was similarly constrained.Keller v. State Bar of California, 226 Cal. Rptr. 448 (Cal. App. 1986)  This opinion in turn was reversed by the California Supreme Court in 1989.Keller v. State Bar of California, 47 Cal. 3d 1152, 255 Cal.Rptr. 542, 767 P.2d 1020 (1989).  That court found that the State Bar functioned essentially as a government agency, and scrutinizing the Bar's activities under the First Amendment would impose an "extraordinary burden" on the organization's mission.Keller, 47 Cal. 3d  at 1166.  The United States Supreme Court granted certiorari in 1989..
Decision of the Court
In a unanimous decision by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, the Court held that attorneys may be compelled to belong to the State Bar, but that their mandatory dues could be used only to regulate the legal profession or improve the quality of legal services available to the people of the state.496 U.S. at 13-14  Reasoning that membership in the State Bar was analogous to membership in a labor union, the Court held that the Bar would have to implement the procedures established in Chicago Teachers Union v. Hudson,. that is, the objectors were entitled to an adequate explanation of the basis for the fee, a reasonably prompt opportunity to challenge the amount of the fee before an impartial decisionmaker, and an escrow for the amounts reasonably in dispute while such challenges are pending.Keller, 496 U.S. at 16, citing Hudson, 475 U.S. at 310.
 Subsequent history 
The State Bar was slow to comply with the Keller, decision, resulting in a follow-up lawsuit in 1991 brought by the second-named plaintiff in Keller, Raymond L. Brosterhous, and 40 other attorneys who objected to the Bar’s continued use of their dues for political and ideological activities.  This litigation eventually resulted in a court order that the Bar’s Conference of Delegates, lobbying, special activities designed to promote the careers of women and minorities, and other social and political programs could not constitutionally be funded by compulsory Bar dues.The State Bar of California Test for Chargeabilty and Summary of State Bar Activities Permitted and Prohibited under Brosterhous Analysis (Distribution authorized by the Board of Governors February 5, 2000) http://www.calbar.ca.gov/portals/0/documents/bog/minutes_00-02-05_4010_chargeabilty.pdf
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
References
Further reading
 .
 .
 .
 .
External links
Category:Legal history of California
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1990 in United States case law
Category:1990 in California
"""

From "Kelley v. Arizona" ==> """
redirectChambers v. Maroney#Aftermath
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1970 in United States case law
"""

From "Kellogg Bridge Co. v. Hamilton" ==> """
Kellogg Bridge Company v. Hamilton, 110 U.S. 108 (1884), was an Implied warranty of fitness for a particular purpose lawsuit which took place in 1884.discussion
 Background 
The company Kellogg Bridge Co. undertook to construct for the Lake Shore and Michigan Southern Railway Company an iron bridge across Maumee River at Toledo, Ohio. After doing a portion of the work it entered into a written contract with Hamilton (a subcontractor) for the completion of the bridge. The bridge was put up in several spans and in order to support the spans, falsework, consisting of piles driven in the river between the piers upon which the spans were to rest, was needed. The Bridge Company had previously constructed a part of the falsework involved in between the first and second spans, which Hamilton paid for as he had agreed to do. A part of the falsework put up by the company sank under the weight of the first span and was replaced by Hamilton. When the second fixed span was about two-thirds complete, ice in the river broke up due to a flood and the falsework was carried away causing the whole of the iron material in place on that span to fall into the river. If the piles had been driven in more firmly, they would have withstood the force of the ice and the flood. Hamilton was subject to delay of the completion of the bridge and increased expense.
Hamilton brought suit in the State court to recover the contract price of the bridge, extra claimed to be done on it, and the damages sustained by the insufficiency of the false work constructed by the Bridge Company for $3,693.78.
On diversity jurisdiction, the cause was removed to the Circuit Court of the US where the Bridge Company answered with a counterclaim for $6,619.70. The trial ended with a verdict and judgment for the plaintiff for $3,039.89. The defendant brought a writ of error to reverse that judgment. The case came to the Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
The court said that under the circumstances, the buyer had the right to rely and necessarily relied on the judgment of the seller and not upon his own. In ordinary circumstances, the buyer has the opportunity to inspect the article sold and the seller is not the maker, so they stand on equal grounds of ignorance. But when the seller is the manufacturer, the fair presumption is that he understood the process of its manufacture and was cognizant of any latent defect caused by such process and which reasonable diligence might have prevented.
 References 
External links
Category:United States contract case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1884 in United States case law
Category:History of Toledo, Ohio
Category:Lake Shore and Michigan Southern Railway
Category:Railroad bridges in Ohio
"""

From "Kellogg Brown & Root Services, Inc. v. United States ex rel. Carter" ==> """
Kellogg Brown & Root Services, Inc. v. United States ex rel. Carter, 575 U.S. 650 (2015), was a United States Supreme Court involving KBR and a former KRB contractor, Benjamin Carter., slip op. at 1. In a unanimous opinion written by Associate Justice Samuel Alito, the Court held that Wartime Suspension of Limitations Act only applies to criminal offenses.Kellogg Brown, slip op. at 5. The Court also held that qui tam lawsuits filed under the False Claims Act are no longer considered "pending" after they have been dismissed.Kellogg Brown, slip op. at 13.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2015 in United States case law
"""

From "Kellogg Co. v. National Biscuit Co." ==> """
Kellogg Co. v. National Biscuit Co., 305 U.S. 111 (1938), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that the Kellogg Company was not violating any trademark or unfair competition laws when it manufactured its own Shredded Wheat breakfast cereal, which had originally been invented by the National Biscuit Company (later called Nabisco).  Kellogg's version of the product was of an essentially identical shape, and was also marketed as "Shredded Wheat"; but Nabisco's patents had expired, and its trademark application for the term "Shredded Wheat" had been turned down as a descriptive, non-trademarkable term.
The Court therefore "forcefully applied the principle that once a patent has expired, its benefits are to be freely enjoyed by the public."David W. Carstens, Preemption of Direct Molding Statutes: Bonito Boats v. Thunder Craft Boats, 3  170 (1990). Kellogg has been called possibly "the Supreme Court's most versatile and influential trademark decision."Graeme B. Dinwoodie, "The Story of Kellogg Co. v. National Biscuit Co.: Breakfast with Brandeis", p. 1, Retrieved on 15 December 2008.  It had a direct impact on the structure of the Lanham Act and is a "routine starting point for analysis in trademark opinions in lower courts."
 Background 
Inventor Henry Perky developed a shredded wheat machine and introduced the cereal in 1893; he was issued utility patents in 1895 on both the shredded wheat and on the machine.  John Kellogg tasted a sample and commented that they were like "eating a whisk broom."Graeme B. Dinwoodie, "The Story of Kellogg Co. v. National Biscuit Co.: Breakfast with Brandeis", p. 3, Retrieved on 15 December 2008.  Nevertheless, the cereal became successful, and Perky's company, the Shredded Wheat Company, continued to manufacture the product after he retired.
The Kellogg Company started manufacturing shredded wheat cereal in 1912 after Perky's patents expired; after the Shredded Wheat Company objected, Kellogg stopped manufacturing their version in 1919.  The nature of the settlement is not clear.Graeme B. Dinwoodie, "The Story of Kellogg Co. v. National Biscuit Co.: Breakfast with Brandeis", p. 5, Retrieved on 15 December 2008.  In 1927, the Kellogg Company resumed manufacturing shredded wheat, prompting a lawsuit from the Shredded Wheat Company; the lawsuit was settled.  In 1930, the Shredded Wheat Company was acquired by the National Biscuit Company (later Nabisco), which again sued Kellogg, both in Canada and in the United States, for unfair competition.
Nabisco complained in its lawsuit about Kellogg's use of the term "Shredded Wheat"; the similarity of its cereal biscuits' shape to the Nabisco cereal biscuits; and Kellogg's use on the product box of a picture of two of the pillow-shaped cereal biscuits submerged in milk.  The complaint about the picture was based on trademark law; the other two complaints were that Kellogg's was fraudulently trying to "pass off" its cereal as Nabisco's.  Nabisco had previously failed in its attempt to register "Shredded Wheat" as a trademark, as the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office had rejected the registration, as descriptive.
 Opinion of the Court 
In a 7–2 opinion written by Justice Brandeis, the U.S. Supreme Court rejected Nabisco's arguments, and allowed Kellogg to continue to manufacture its shredded wheat cereal, and name it "Shredded Wheat".
On the protection of the cereal's shape, the Court decided that the shape was functional and that there was a right to copy it after its patent expired, as the use of unfair competition and trademark laws could otherwise be used to impede the ability of rivals to create any competitive product, even though the patent had expired.
On the picture of the two shredded wheat biscuits in the bowl of milk, the Court noted that "the name Kellogg was so prominent on all of the defendant's cartons as to minimize the possibility of confusion", and hence there was no fraudulent "passing off" of Kellogg's cereal biscuits as having been created by Nabisco.
On the use of the term "Shredded Wheat", the Court ruled that the term was generic and not trademarkable; and dismissed a claim by Nabisco that it had acquired a "secondary meaning" under case law.
The Court concluded:
Justice McReynolds and Justice Butler dissented, writing that Kellogg was "fraudulently seeking to appropriate to itself the benefits of a goodwill built up at great cost by the respondent", which should be viewed as illegal.U.S. Supreme Court, U.S. Supreme Court 301 U.S. 111, Kellogg Co. v. National Biscuit Co.
 Subsequent developments 
Kellogg has become a foundation of the functionality doctrine, that product designs that are intrinsic to functionality cannot be protected under unfair competition or trademark laws, because this would impede the ability of competitors to make a rival product.Graeme B. Dinwoodie, "The Story of Kellogg Co. v. National Biscuit Co.: Breakfast with Brandeis", p. 22, Retrieved on 15 December 2008.
Trademark law was in a state of flux in 1938, when Kellogg was decided, and the U.S. Department of Justice sought to explicitly codify the Kellogg decision into law, as part of the Lanham Act.
One commentator maintained that one could properly—
...view Kellogg as vindication of the views that he [Brandeis] expressed in INS [v. AP]. That Nabisco had invested in the shredded wheat product did not give it control over the use of the pillow shape (or the term SHREDDED WHEAT); it had no property right against misappropriation of the shape after the expiry of the patents. Instead, Brandeis inquired [only] whether Kellogg had engaged in any acts of misrepresentation.Graeme B. Dinwoodie, The Story of Kellogg Co. v. National Biscuit Co.: Breakfast with Brandeis p. 29 (2005).
 See also 
 Attorney General of Quebec v. Kellogg's Co. of Canada
 References 
 External links 
Category:1938 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States trademark case law
Category:United States competition law
Category:Kellogg's
Category:Nabisco
Category:Breakfast cereals
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
"""

From "Kelly v. United States" ==> """
Kelly v. United States, 590 U.S. ___ (2020), was a United States Supreme Court case involving the 2013 Fort Lee lane closure scandal, also known as "Bridgegate". The case centered on whether Bridget Anne Kelly, the chief of staff to New Jersey Governor Chris Christie who was running for reelection at the time, and Bill Baroni, the Deputy Executive Director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, improperly used lane closures on the George Washington Bridge to create traffic jams as a means of retaliation against Mark Sokolich, the mayor of Fort Lee, New Jersey, when he refused to support Christie's reelection campaign. While lower courts had convicted Kelly and Baroni on federal fraud, wire fraud and conspiracy charges, the Supreme Court unanimously overturned the convictions in its May 2020 ruling, stating that such charges could not apply as "the scheme here did not aim to obtain money or property", and remanded their cases back to the lower courts..
Background
During New Jersey Governor's Chris Christie's 2013 reelection campaign, he sought support from the mayors of several New Jersey cities. While several backed the Republican governor for reelection, the mayor of Fort Lee, New Jersey, Mark Sokolich, a Democrat, refused to provide his support. As asserted by prosecutors in the legal cases that followed, Christie's deputy chief of staff Bridget Anne Kelly contacted through email Bill Baroni, the Deputy Executive Director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, and David Wildstein, the director of interstate capital projects at the Port Authority, to suggest they create traffic problems for Fort Lee in retaliation for Sokolich's refusal and coerce his support. Over a period of four days starting on the first school day that year, September 9, 2013, the Port Authority shut down two of three lanes of traffic from Fort Lee onto the George Washington Bridge into New York City without any notice, causing major traffic jams, and later justified the lane closures as a traffic study. Local media began investigating the closure and discovered the email communications between Kelly, Baroni, and Wildstein that demonstrated the political collusion in the closures.
As the emails suggested there was a potential federal crime, several investigations were launched in 2014 by the New Jersey Legislature, the Port Authority, United States Attorney for the District of New Jersey Paul J. Fishman and the United States Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation. Fishman's investigation led to the indictments issued against Kelly and Baroni in May 2015 on charges of conspiracy and fraud; Wildstein, who had been convicted earlier, had agreed to testify against the two as part of a plea bargain. The jury trial concluded in November 2016 with Kelly and Baroni found guilty on all nine charges of fraud and conspiracy. Kelly was sentenced to 18 months of prison while Baroni to 24 months, with both serving 500 hours of community service. Wildstein, in a separate trial, was also convicted and sentenced to three years in prison and 500 hours of community service.
Both Baroni and Kelly appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit. In November 2018, the Third Circuit upheld a majority of the convictions, through reversed the charge that they had violated the civil rights of travelers, which the Appeals Court ruled was not an established right. Both received reduced sentences; Baroni's to 18 months and Kelly's to 13 months, and Kelly additionally ordered to pay  to New Jersey as restitution for the lost toll revenue.
Supreme Court
Petition
Kelly petitioned to the Supreme Court after the Third Circuit's decision upholding the jury's convictions. Kelly's petition asked the question "Does a public official 'defraud' the government of its property by advancing a 'public policy reason' for an official decision that is not her subjective 'real reason' for making the decision?" The Court accepted to hear Kelly's case on June 28, 2019. Legal analysts believed that this signaled a likelihood the Court would overturn the conviction as it had followed a number of similar cases of reversals or overturning of convictions of high-level state and federal officials on federal fraud charges due to the lack of evidence to demonstrate corruption or fraud.
Oral arguments
Oral arguments for the case were heard on January 14, 2020. Court observers found that there was no discernible pattern to how the Justices questioned both sides of the case, making it difficult to determine how they would ultimately decide. Much of the questioning related to the authority that Kelly and Baroni had in ordering the lane changes, and what fraud, if any, would have occurred if this had been in their authority.
Decision
Justice Elena Kagan delivered the unanimous opinion of the Court on May 7, 2020, which overturned the immediate convictions against Kelly and Baroni. Kagan wrote that "[t]he question presented is whether the defendants committed property fraud." Kagan elaborated that the lane closures could be taken as "an exercise of regulatory power – a reallocation of the lanes between different groups of drivers", and that the prosecution in the case has failed to show that the actions taken by the government were an "object of fraud", as previously held in Pasquantino v. United States.. Kagan concluded that "[b]ecause the scheme here did not aim to obtain money or property, [William] Baroni and Kelly could not have violated the federal-program fraud or wire fraud laws." The decision reversed the convictions and remanded the case to the lower courts for additional review based on the decision.
References
External links
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Mail and wire fraud case law
Category:Fort Lee, New Jersey
Category:Chris Christie
"""

From "Kelo v. City of New London" ==> """
Kelo v. City of New London, 545 U.S. 469 (2005), was a landmark decision by the Supreme Court of the United States in which the Court held, 5–4, that the use of eminent domain to transfer land from one private owner to another private owner to further economic development does not violate the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment. In the case, plaintiff Susette Kelo sued the city of New London, Connecticut, for violating her civil rights after the city tried to acquire her house's property through eminent domain so that the land could be used as part of a "comprehensive redevelopment plan". Justice John Paul Stevens wrote for the five-justice majority that the city's use of eminent domain was permissible under the Takings Clause, because the general benefits the community would enjoy from economic growth qualified as "public use"..
After the Court's decision, the city allowed a private developer to proceed with its plans; however, the developer was unable to obtain financing and abandoned the project, and the contested land remained an undeveloped empty lot.
 Background 
This case was appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States from a decision by the Supreme Court of Connecticut in favor of the City of New London. The owners, including lead plaintiff Susette Kelo of 8 East Street, sued the city in Connecticut courts, arguing that the city had misused its eminent domain power. The power of eminent domain is limited by the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment and the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The Takings Clause reads, ". . . nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just compensation." Under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, this limitation also applies to the actions of state and local governments.  The plaintiffs argued that economic development, the stated purpose of the taking and subsequent transfer of land to the New London Development Corporation, did not qualify as a public use under the Fifth Amendment.
The Connecticut Supreme Court heard arguments on December 2, 2002. The state court issued its decision (268 Conn. 1, SC16742) on March 9, 2004, siding with the city in a 4–3 decision, with the majority opinion authored by Justice Flemming L. Norcott, Jr., joined by Justices David M. Borden, Richard N. Palmer and Christine Vertefeuille.Kelo v. The city of New London, 268 Conn. 1, 843 A.2d 500 (Conn. 2004). Justice Peter T. Zarella wrote the dissent, joined by Chief Justice William J. Sullivan and Justice Joette Katz.Kelo, 268 Conn. at 144, 843 A.2d at 587 (Zarella, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).
The State Supreme Court held that the use of eminent domain for economic development did not violate the public use clauses of the state and federal constitutions.  The court held that if a legislative body has found that an economic project will create new jobs, increase tax and other city revenues, and revitalize a depressed urban area (even if that area is not blighted), then the project serves a public purpose, which qualifies as a public use.  The court also ruled that the government’s delegation of its eminent domain power to a private entity was constitutional under the Connecticut Constitution.
The United States Supreme Court granted certiorari to consider questions raised in Berman v. Parker,  and later in Hawaii Housing Authority v. Midkiff, . Namely, whether a "public purpose" constitutes a "public use" for purposes of the Fifth Amendment's Taking Clause: "nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just compensation." Specifically, does the Fifth Amendment, applicable to the states through the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment (see main article: Incorporation of the Bill of Rights), protect landowners from takings for economic development, rather than, as in Berman, for the elimination of slums and blight?
Kelo was the first major eminent domain case heard at the Supreme Court since 1984.  In that time, states and municipalities had slowly extended their use of eminent domain, frequently to include economic development purposes.  In the Kelo case, Connecticut had a statute allowing eminent domain for "economic development" even in the absence of blight. There was also an additional twist in that the development corporation was ostensibly a private entity; thus the plaintiffs argued that it was not constitutional for the government to take private property from one individual or corporation and give it to another, if the government was simply doing so because the repossession would put the property to a use that would generate higher tax revenue.
Kelo became the focus of vigorous discussion and attracted numerous supporters on both sides.  Some 40 amicus curiae briefs were filed in the case, 25 on behalf of the petitioners. Susette Kelo's supporters ranged from the libertarian Institute for Justice (the lead attorneys on the case) to the NAACP, AARP, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference and South Jersey Legal Services. The latter groups signed an amicus brief arguing that eminent domain has often been used against politically weak communities with high concentrations of minorities and elderly.
The case was argued on February 22, 2005. Oral arguments were presented on behalf of the petitioners (plaintiffs) by Scott G. Bullock of the Institute for Justice in Washington, D.C. and on behalf of the respondents (defendants) by Wesley W. Horton of Horton, Shields & Knox in Hartford, CT. The case was heard by only seven members of the court with Associate Justice Sandra Day O'Connor presiding, as Chief Justice William Rehnquist was recuperating from medical treatment at home and Associate Justice John Paul Stevens was delayed on his return to Washington from Florida; both absent Justices read the briefs and oral argument transcripts and participated in the case decision.
During the case, Justice Antonin Scalia, asked whether a ruling in favor of the city would destroy "the distinction between private use and public use." He also asked if private use, which provided merely incidental benefits to the state, was "not enough to justify use of the condemnation power."
 Opinion of the Court 
 Majority and concurrence 
On June 23, 2005, the Supreme Court ruled in a 5–4 decision in favor of the City of New London. Justice John Paul Stevens wrote the majority opinion, joined by Justices Anthony Kennedy, David Souter, Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen Breyer. Justice Kennedy wrote a concurring opinion setting out a more detailed standard for judicial review of economic development takings than that found in Stevens's majority opinion.  In so doing, Justice Kennedy contributed to the Court's trend of turning minimum scrutiny—the idea that government policy need only bear a rational relation to a legitimate government purpose—into a fact-based test.
In Romer v. Evans, 517 U.S. 620, 633 (1996), the Court said that the government purpose must be "independent and legitimate."  And in United States v. Virginia, 518 U.S. 515, 533 (1996), the Court said the government purpose "must be genuine, not hypothesized or invented post hoc in response to litigation."  Thus, the Court made it clear that, in the scrutiny regime established in West Coast Hotel v. Parrish, 300 U.S. 379 (1937), government purpose is a question of fact for the trier of fact.
Kennedy fleshed out this doctrine in his Kelo concurring opinion; he sets out a program of civil discovery in the context of a challenge to an assertion of government purpose.  However, he does not explicitly limit these criteria to eminent domain, nor to minimum scrutiny, suggesting that they may be generalized to all health and welfare regulation in the scrutiny regime. He wrote:
A court confronted with a plausible accusation of impermissible favoritism to private parties should [conduct]... a careful and extensive inquiry into 'whether, in fact, the development plan [chronology]
[1.]  is of primary benefit to... the developer... and private businesses which "may" eventually locate in the plan area...
[2.]   and in that regard, only of incidental benefit to the city...'"
Kennedy is also interested in facts of the chronology which show, with respect to government,
[3.]  awareness of... depressed economic condition and evidence corroborating the validity of this concern...
[4.]  the substantial commitment of public funds... before most of the private beneficiaries were known...
[5.]  evidence that [government] reviewed a variety of development plans...
[6.]  [government] chose a private developer from a group of applicants rather than picking out a particular transferee beforehand and...
[7.]  other private beneficiaries of the project [were]... unknown [to government] because the... space proposed to be built [had] not yet been rented...Kelo, 545 U.S. at 491–92.
Kelo v. City of New London did not establish entirely new law concerning eminent domain. Although the decision was controversial, it was not the first time "public use" had been interpreted by the Supreme Court as "public purpose." In the majority opinion, Justice Stevens wrote the "Court long ago rejected any literal requirement that condemned property be put into use for the general public" (545 U.S. 469). Thus precedent played an important role in the 5–4 decision of the Supreme Court. The Fifth Amendment was interpreted the same way as in Midkiff (467 U.S. 229) and other earlier eminent domain cases.
Dissenting opinions
The principal dissent was issued on June 25, 2005 by Justice O'Connor, joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justices Scalia and Thomas.  The dissenting opinion suggested that the use of this taking power in a reverse Robin Hood fashion—take from the poor, give to the rich—would become the norm, not the exception:
O'Connor argued that the decision eliminates "any distinction between private and public use of property—and thereby effectively delete[s] the words 'for public use' from the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment."Kelo, 545 U.S. at 494 (O'Connor, J., dissenting).
Thomas also issued a separate originalist dissent, in which he argued that the precedents the court's decision relied upon were flawed.  He accuses the majority of replacing the Fifth Amendment's "Public Use" clause with a very different "public purpose" test:
Thomas additionally observed:
Thomas also made use of the argument presented in the NAACP/AARP/SCLC/SJLS amicus brief on behalf of three low-income residents' groups fighting redevelopment in New Jersey, noting: 
 Subsequent developments 
right|thumb|200px|One of the few remaining houses in the Fort Trumbull neighborhood, September 1, 2006.  Underneath the white paint can just barely be read the words "" and the web URLs of two organizations protesting over-use of eminent domain, Castle Coalition and Institute for Justice.
right|thumb|200px|The same house, June 10, 2007. The "thank you" is still visible, but some windows are broken and others are boarded up, and "No Trespassing" has been spray-painted on it, as well as the URLs being obscured by spray paint.
Following the decision, many of the plaintiffs expressed an intent to find other means by which they could continue contesting the seizure of their homes.  Soon after the decision, city officials announced plans to charge the residents of the homes for back rent for the five years since condemnation procedures began.  The city contended that the residents have been on city property for those five years and owe tens of thousands of dollars of rent.  In June 2006, Governor M. Jodi Rell intervened with New London city officials, proposing the homeowners involved in the suit be deeded property in the Fort Trumbull neighborhood so they may retain their homes. A group of New London residents formed a local political party, One New London, to combat the takings.
The controversy was eventually settled when the city paid substantial additional compensation to the homeowners and agreed to move Kelo's home to a new location.  The land was never deeded back to the original homeowners, most of whom have left New London for nearby communities. Three years after the Supreme Court case was decided, the Kelo house was dedicated after being relocated to 36 Franklin Street, a site close to downtown New London. Susette Kelo, however, has moved to a different part of Connecticut.
In spite of repeated efforts, the redeveloper (who stood to get a  waterfront tract of land for $1 per year) was unable to obtain financing, and the redevelopment project was abandoned. As of the beginning of 2010, the original Kelo property was a vacant lot, generating no tax revenue for the city. In the aftermath of 2011's Hurricane Irene, the now-closed New London redevelopment area was turned into a dump for storm debris such as tree branches and other vegetation.
Pfizer, whose employees were supposed to be the clientele of the Fort Trumbull redevelopment project, completed its merger with Wyeth, resulting in a consolidation of research facilities of the two companies.  Pfizer chose to retain the Groton campus on the east side of the Thames River, closing its New London facility in late 2010 with a loss of over 1,000 jobs. That coincided with the expiration of tax breaks on the New London site that would have increased Pfizer's property tax bill by almost 400 percent.
After the Pfizer announcement, the San Francisco Chronicle, in November 2009, in its lead editorial called the Kelo decision infamous:
 The well-laid plans of redevelopers, however, did not pan out. The land where Susette Kelo's little pink house once stood remains undeveloped. The proposed hotel-retail-condo "urban village" has not been built. And earlier this month, Pfizer Inc. announced that it is closing the $350 million research center in New London that was the anchor for the New London redevelopment plan, and will be relocating some 1,500 jobs.
The Chronicle editorial quoted from The New York Times:  "They stole our home for economic development," ousted homeowner Michael Cristofaro told the New York Times. "It was all for Pfizer, and now they get up and walk away."
The final cost to the city and state for the purchase and bulldozing of the formerly privately held property was $78 million. The promised 3,169 new jobs and $1.2 million a year in tax revenues had not materialized. As of 2021, the area remains an empty lot.
 Public reaction 
Opposition to the ruling was widespread, coming from groups such as AARP, the NAACP, the Libertarian Party and the Institute for Justice. The American Conservative Union condemned the decision.  Much of the public viewed the outcome as a gross violation of property rights and as a misinterpretation of the Fifth Amendment, the consequence of which would be to benefit large corporations at the expense of individual homeowners and local communities. Many owners of family farms also disapproved of the ruling, as they saw it as an avenue by which cities could seize their land for private developments. Since the opposition to the ruling was so widespread American journalist Charles C. W. Cooke argued in 2015 that a constitutional amendment like the one drafted by law professor Ilya Somin might attract enough support by a non-partisan coalition of progressives, independents and conservatives to undo the Supreme Court ruling in Kelo v. City of New London.
Some in the legal profession construed the public's outrage as being directed not at the interpretation of legal principles involved in the case, but at the broad moral principles of the general outcome.Nicole Stelle Garnett, "The Neglected Political Economy of Eminent Domain ", 105 Mich. L. Rev. 101, 136; Marcilynn A. Burke, "Much Ado About Nothing: Kelo v. City Of New London, Babbit v. Sweet Home, And Other Tales From the Supreme Court", 75 U. Cin. L. Rev. 663, 683. Federal appeals court judge Richard Posner wrote that the political response to Kelo is "evidence of [the decision's] pragmatic soundness." Judicial action would be unnecessary, Posner suggested, because the political process could take care of the problem."
As a result, most states changed their eminent domain laws. Prior to the Kelo decision, only seven states specifically prohibited the use of eminent domain for economic development except to eliminate blight. Since the decision, forty-five states have amended their eminent domain laws, although some of these changes are cosmetic.
The New York Times editorial board agreed with the ruling, calling it "a welcome vindication of cities' ability to act in the public interest."The Limits of Property Rights, The New York Times, June 24, 2005 The Washington Posts editorial board also agreed with the ruling, writing, "[t]he court's decision was correct. . . . New London's plan, whatever its flaws, is intended to help develop a city that has been in economic decline for many years."However the New York Times has a conflict of interest because its current headquarters building was erected on land taken by eminent domain for economic redevelopment.Eminent Latitude, The Washington Post, June 24, 2005
The Kelo fiasco eventually cost the taxpayers tens of millions of dollars, with nothing to show for it. The "carefully vetted" municipal plans that formed the basis for the Supreme Court's decision proved to be illusory. Eventually, the City of New London extended an apology to Susette Kelo and her neighbors. In 2011, Richard N. Palmer, one of the Connecticut Supreme Court justices who voted with the 4–3 majority for the city, also apologized and said that he should've voted differently.
 Presidential reaction 
On June 23, 2006, the first anniversary of the original decision, President George W. Bush issued an executive order instructing the federal government to restrict the use of eminent domain  However, since eminent domain is most often exercised by local and state governments, the executive order was largely symbolic.
 Congressional reaction 
On June 27, 2005, Senator John Cornyn (R-Tex.) introduced legislation, the "Protection of Homes, Small Businesses and Private Property Act of 2005" (S.B. 1313), to limit the use of eminent domain for economic development. The operative language
 prohibits the federal government from exercising eminent domain power if the only justifying "public use" is economic development; and
 imposes the same limit on state and local government exercise of eminent domain power "through the use of Federal funds."
Similar bills have subsequently been put forth in the House of Representatives by Congressman Dennis Rehberg (R-Mont.), Tom DeLay (R-Tex.), and John Conyers (D-Mich.) with James Sensenbrenner (R-Wisc.). As some small-scale eminent domain condemnations (including notably those in the Kelo case) can be local in both decision and funding, it is unclear how much of an effect the bill would have if it passed into law. This bill has been reintroduced several times.
 Scholarly reaction 
In 2008, land use Professor Daniel R. Mandelker argued that the public backlash against Kelo is rooted in the historical deficiencies of urban renewal legislation. In particular, the article cited the failure to incorporate land use planning and a precise definition of blight in urban renewal legislation as problematic. In 2009, Professor Edward J. Lopez of San Jose State University studied passed laws and found that states with more economic freedom, greater value of new housing construction, and less racial and income inequality were more likely to have enacted stronger restrictions sooner.
Severe criticism of the Kelo decision came from Professor Gideon Kanner of the Loyola Law School, Los Angeles. Kanner wrote, "The principal failing of the Kelo decision is that it misreads the case law on which it purports to rely as a seminal precedent, and by its holding frustrates the usual mode of constitutional analysis." He likened the language in the majority's decision ("'public' means 'private' and 'use' means 'purpose,' or 'prognosticated municipal prosperity'") to the abuse of language in George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four.
 State legislation 
Prior to Kelo, eight states specifically prohibited the use of eminent domain for economic development except to eliminate blight: Arkansas, Florida, Kansas, Kentucky, Maine, New Hampshire, South Carolina and Washington.NCSL: State Case Law Prohibiting Eminent Domain for Economic Development, August 2005. , 45 states had enacted some type of reform legislation in response to the Kelo decision. Of those states, 22 enacted laws that severely inhibited the takings allowed by the Kelo decision, while the rest enacted laws that place some limits on the power of municipalities to invoke eminent domain for economic development. The remaining five states have not passed laws to limit the power of eminent domain for economic development.
 Arizona 
Proposition 207, the Private Property Rights Protection Act, passed in 2006.
 California 
Under pre-existing California law, takings (for conveyance to a private party, as opposed to a public use that may incidentally benefit private parties) were already illegal.
Proposition 90, which attempted to exploit the unpopularity of Kelo for a different objective, failed in the November 2006 election. The initiative also included language requiring that government pay financial compensation to any property owners who could successfully argue that regulation caused them significant economic loss. Subsequently, Proposition 99 passed in the June 2008 election. It amends the state constitution to prohibit (subject to some exceptions):  In 2012, California abolished its redevelopment agencies.
 Florida 
Florida passed a 2006 ballot measure amending the Florida Constitution to restrict use of eminent domain. The amendment says in part:
 Iowa 
The Iowa Legislature passed a 2006 bill restricting the use of eminent domain for economic development. Gov. Tom Vilsack (D) vetoed the bill,  prompting the first special session of the Iowa Legislature in more than 40 years. The veto was overridden by votes of 90–8 in the Iowa House and 41–8 in the Iowa Senate.
 Kansas 
In response to the Kelo decision, the Kansas Legislature enacted K.S.A. 26-501a and K.S.A. 26-501b and amended K.S.A. 26-501.
K.S.A. 26-501a. Eminent domain; limited to public use; transfer to private entity prohibited; exception. On and after July 1, 2007: (a) Private property shall not be taken by eminent domain except for public use and private property shall not be taken without just compensation.
(b) The taking of private property by eminent domain for the purpose of selling, leasing or otherwise transferring such property to any private entity is prohibited except as provided in K.S.A. 2009 Supp. 26–501b, and amendments thereto.
(c) This section shall be part of and supplemental to the eminent domain procedure act.
History: L. 2006, ch. 192, § 1; May 25.
K.S.A. 26-501b. Eminent domain; transfer to private entity authorized, when. On and after July 1, 2007, the taking of private property by eminent domain for the purpose of selling, leasing, or otherwise transferring such property to any private entity is authorized if the taking is:
(a) By the Kansas department of transportation or a municipality and the property is deemed excess real property that was taken lawfully and incidental to the acquisition of right-of-way for a public road, bridge or public improvement project including, but not limited to a public building, park, recreation facility, water supply project, wastewater and waste disposal project, storm water project and flood control and drainage project;
(b) by any public utility, as defined in K.S.A. 66-104, and amendments thereto, gas gathering service, as defined in K.S.A. 55-1,101, and amendments thereto, pipe-line companies, railroads and all persons and associations of persons, whether incorporated or not, operating such agencies for public use in the conveyance of persons or property within this state, but only to the extent such property is used for the operation of facilities necessary for the provision of services;
(c) by any municipality when the private property owner has acquiesced in writing to the taking;
(d) by any municipality for the purpose of acquiring property which has defective or unusual conditions of title including, but not limited to, clouded or defective title or unknown ownership interests in the property;
(e) by any municipality for the purpose of acquiring property which is unsafe for occupation by humans under the building codes of the jurisdiction where the structure is situated;
(f) expressly authorized by the legislature on or after July 1, 2007, by enactment of law that identifies the specific tract or tracts to be taken. If the legislature authorizes eminent domain for private economic development purposes, the legislature shall consider requiring compensation of at least 200% of fair market value to property owners.
(g) This section shall be part of and supplemental to the eminent domain procedure act.
History: L. 2006, ch. 192, § 2; May 25.
 Michigan 
Michigan passed a restriction on the use of eminent domain in November 2006, Proposition 4, 80% to 20%.  The text of the ballot initiative was as follows:
A proposed constitutional amendment to prohibit government from taking private property by eminent domain for certain private purposes
The proposed constitutional amendment would:
 Prohibit government from taking private property for transfer to another private individual or business for purposes of economic development or increasing tax revenue.
 Provide that if an individual's principal residence is taken by government for public use, the individual must be paid at least 125% of property's fair market value.
 Require government that takes a private property to demonstrate that the taking is for a public use; if taken to eliminate blight, require a higher standard of proof to demonstrate that the taking of that property is for a public use.
 Preserve existing rights of property owners.
 Minnesota 
The state restricts eminent domain to public use. Minnesota Statute 117.025 Subd. 11(b) (passed in 2006) clearly states: "The public benefits of economic development, including an increase in tax base, tax revenues, employment, or general economic health, do not by themselves constitute a public use or public purpose."
 Mississippi 
On November 8, 2011, Mississippi Initiative #31 restricting eminent domain, was approved by voters 73–27%. The text of Initiative # 31 is as follows:
 Nevada 
On November 25, 2008, a voter-approved amendment to the Nevada constitution, colloquially titled the People's Initiative to Stop the Taking of Our Land, or PISTOL, was put into effect following its review by the Nevada State Supreme Court.  Among other provisions, the amendment included the following text:
The amendment also modifies the definition of "fair market value"—used to determine the monetary compensation a property owner receives—to represent the highest value the property would be sold for on the open market, and returns seized property to the original property owner "if the property is not used within five years for the original purpose stated by the government."
 New Hampshire 
In New Hampshire, various libertarian activists, in response to the decision, sought to use eminent domain to seize Justice David Souter's farmhouse in Weare, New Hampshire and build a hotel (the "Lost Liberty Hotel") on the site.Eminent domain this! Justice's farm is target, Associated Press (June 29, 2005). The proposal was not supported by the town's five-member board of selectmen, and Weare voters rejected the activists' attempt to place a proposal on the local ballot to seize Souter's farm.Angry Activists Lose Fight to Evict Justice Souter, Associated Press (February 8, 2006).
In 2006, the New Hampshire Legislature proposed an amendment to the state constitution providing that "no part of a person's property shall be taken by eminent domain and transferred, directly or indirectly, to another person if the taking is for the purpose of private development or other private use of the property."Lawrence Friedman, The New Hampshire State Constitution (2d ed.: Oxford University Press: 2015), pp. 65–66. The amendment was overwhelmingly approved by New Hampshire voters in the November 2006 elections.N.H. voters opt to curb eminent domain; smaller House districts also at stake, Associated Press (November 8, 2006). Some New Hampshire commentators suggested that the state had gone too far in restricting the exercise of eminent domain in the Kelo backlash.Elizabeth E. J. Nickerson, The Kelo Backlash: Have We Gone Too Far in Restricting the Exercise of Eminent Domain?, New Hampshire Bar Journal (Summer 2007).
 Ohio 
An attempted use of eminent domain was brought before the Ohio Supreme Court in City of Norwood v. Horney. In July 2006, the Supreme Court of Ohio unanimously held in favor of the property owners, finding the seizure would violate the Constitution of Ohio.
 Virginia 
In 2012, the Virginia General Assembly approved a ballot measure for the November general election that would amend the state constitution to greatly restrict the government's ability to condemn land for private benefit. The measure succeeded with nearly 75% of the electorate in support of the eminent domain reform. The reform resulted in an amendment to Virginia's Bill of Rights seeking to prevent a situation like Kelo which read in part: "a taking or damaging of private property is not for public use if the primary use is for private gain, private benefit, private enterprise, increasing jobs, increasing tax revenue, or economic development, except for the elimination of a public nuisance existing on the property. The condemnor bears the burden of proving that the use is public, without a presumption that it is."
 Wisconsin 
On March 29, 2006, Gov. Jim Doyle signed into law 2005 Wisconsin Act 233, which prohibits condemnation of nonblighted property for transfer to a private entity. Nonblighted property is defined by a list of conditions that may make the property a detriment to the "public health, safety, or welfare." Two days earlier the governor signed into law 2005 Wisconsin Act 208, which creates procedures designed to protect property owners including public notice and public hearing requirements.
The Wisconsin law has been criticized as one having little or no real protection for property owners because it provides protection against property condemnation for economic development but does allow property condemnation under a broadly defined description of blighted.
 Legacy 
Jeff Benedict wrote an account of the case in a 2009 book, Little Pink House: A True Story of Defiance and Courage. Benedict's account was adapted into a film, Little Pink House, released in 2018.
 See also 
 Lost Liberty Hotel
 Constitution Park
 References 
 Further reading 
 External links 
 Full text of the Connecticut Supreme Court's decision – Kelo v. City of New London, 843 A.2d 500 (Conn. 2004)
 State Eminent Domain Legislation and Ballot Measures – National Conference of State Legislatures summary of state legislation and ballot measures adopted from 2005 to 2011, following Kelo
 [ The Supreme Court Docket for the case and list of amicus briefs]
 Transcript of the oral argument in Kelo
 State of Property Rights in America Ten Years After Kelo v. City of New London, Hearing before the Subcommittee on the Constitution and Civil Justice of the Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, One Hundred Fourteenth Congress, First Session, July 9, 2015
 The Kelo House (1890) at Historic Buildings of Connecticut
 Original location: 
 Current location: 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States land use case law
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:Pfizer
Category:New London, Connecticut
Category:Real estate holdout
"""

From "Kennedy v. Bremerton School District" ==> """
Kennedy v. Bremerton School District, 597 U.S. ___ (2022), is a landmark decision by the United States Supreme Court in which the Court held, 6–3, that the government, while following the Establishment Clause, may not suppress an individual from engaging in personal religious observance, as doing so would violate the Free Speech and Free Exercise Clauses of the First Amendment.
The case involved Joseph Kennedy, a high school football coach in the public school system of Bremerton, Washington. Kennedy had taken the practice of praying at the middle of the field immediately after each game. The practice was soon joined by the players and others. The school board were concerned the practice would be seen as infringing on the Establishment Clause separating church and state. They attempted to negotiate with Kennedy to pray elsewhere or at a later time, but Kennedy continued the practice. His contract was not renewed, leading Kennedy to sue the board. Lower Courts, including the Ninth Circuit, ruled in favor of the school board and their argument regarding the Establishment Clause.
The majority opinion from the Supreme Court found that the Establishment Clause does not allow a government body to take a hostile view of religion in considering personal rights under the Free Speech and Free Exercise Clauses, ruling that the board acted improperly in not renewing Kennedy's contract. The decision all but overturned Lemon v. Kurtzman (1971) and abandoned the subsequent "Lemon test", which had been used to evaluate government actions within the scope of the Establishment Clause but had been falling out of favor for decades prior.
 Background 
Joseph Kennedy is a practicing Christian and was an assistant football coach at Bremerton High School, a public school in Bremerton, Washington, starting in 2008. Inspired by the film Facing the Giants, Kennedy began praying after each football game, in the center of the field, at the 50-yard line. Over time, he was joined by his players, and then by players and coaches from the opposing team. Kennedy continued the practice for seven years, but the school board only learned of the practice after an opposing team commented positively that the district would allow for the practice. The board became concerned that they would be seen as complicit in violating the separation of church and state by allowing for Kennedy's prayers to continue, as well as the implicit coercion that players may feel to join in on the prayer. The board negotiated with Kennedy to reduce the public display of the prayer, offering to provide Kennedy with a private location for his prayer or suggesting that he held his prayer after the spectators had left, among other accommodations. Through the athletic director, Kennedy was warned that any such display should be clearly student-led. Kennedy wrote to his Facebook page that he felt he was likely being fired, and a few games later, he continued to pray after the game with additional coverage by the press and local politicians. Spectators knocked over members of the marching band while racing to join the prayer and directed profanity at Bremerton's head coach, who said he feared being "shot from the crowd." After Kennedy continued this prayer for two more games, the board put him on paid leave for violating the school's policies and endangering students. The board suggested to not renew Kennedy's annual contract, and Kennedy did not re-apply.
 Lower courts 
Kennedy filed suit in the United States District Court for the Western District of Washington to regain his job, claiming the school's policy violated the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment. The board stated that they were trying to avoid any conflicts with the Establishment Clause by preventing public displays of faith at a public school. The district court ruled for the school board, and its decision was upheld at the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in an opinion by Judge Milan Smith. In 2019, the Supreme Court denied his first petition for a writ of certiorari, but Justice Alito, joined by Thomas, Gorsuch, and Kavanaugh, wrote, respecting the denial, but calling the case "troubling and may justify review in the future."
After conducting further fact-finding, the district court granted summary judgment in favor of the school district in March 2020. In March 2021, the Ninth Circuit again ruled for the school district on appeal. In July 2021, the full Ninth Circuit denied rehearing en banc. The Ninth Circuit was split in this denial; while Judge Milan Smith, writing for the majority in denying en banc, said that "Kennedy made it his mission to intertwine religion with football", Judge Diarmuid O'Scannlain in the dissenting opinion wrote that the majority went against Tinker v. Des Moines in that "It is axiomatic that teachers do not 'shed' their First Amendment protections ‘at the schoolhouse gate'."
Kennedy filed a petition for a writ of certiorari.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case on January 14, 2022. Oral arguments were held on April 25, 2022. According to Adam Liptak of The New York Times, the conservative majority of the Court appeared to favor Kennedy's arguments in the case though their questioning likely looked towards a narrow ruling that would not fully disrupt past case law on religion in public schools.
On June 27, 2022, the Supreme Court reversed the Ninth Circuit in a 6–3 vote. Justice Gorsuch wrote the majority opinion, while Justice Sotomayor wrote the dissenting opinion. Justices Thomas and Alito both wrote concurring opinions.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Gorsuch wrote that the school's actions against Kennedy violated his rights under both the Free Speech and Free Exercise Clauses of the First Amendment. He further wrote "We are aware of no historically sound understanding of the Establishment Clause that begins to '(make) it necessary for government to be hostile to religion' in this way". Gorsuch's opinion stated that Kennedy "offered his prayers quietly while his students were otherwise occupied" and that he made "short, private, personal prayer". Gorsuch rejected the school district’s argument that it could prohibit Kennedy’s post-game prayers so that students did not feel compelled to join him in praying. Gorsuch noted that "There is no indication in the record ... that anyone expressed any coercion concerns to the District about the quiet, postgame prayers that Mr. Kennedy asked to continue and that led to his suspension.” Gorsuch distinguished this case from cases "in which this Court has found prayer involving public schools to be problematically coercive". Gorsuch reasoned that unlike those earlier cases, Kennedy’s prayers "were not publicly broadcast or recited to a captive audience" and students “were not required or expected to participate". Gorsuch concluded that the school district’s actions "rested on a mistaken view that it had a duty to ferret out and suppress religious observances even as it allows comparable secular speech", and that "The Constitution neither mandates nor tolerates that kind of discrimination".
Dissent
In the dissent, Justice Sotomayor criticized Gorsuch's interpretation of the facts of the case. Gorsuch had described the situation as 'Mr. Kennedy prayed during a period when school employees were free to speak with a friend, call for a reservation at a restaurant, check email, or attend to other personal matters. He offered his prayers quietly while his students were otherwise occupied." Sotomayor in the dissent wrote the situation as "The record reveals that Kennedy had a long-standing practice of conducting demonstrative prayers on the 50-yard line of the football field. Kennedy consistently invited others to join his prayers and for years led student-athletes in prayer at the same time and location. The court ignores this history. The court also ignores the severe disruption to school events caused by Kennedy’s conduct." Sotomayor also described the implicit coercion from peer pressure that had been demonstrated in the lower courts' proceedings. Sotomayor summarized these points as "To the degree the court portrays petitioner Joseph Kennedy’s prayers as private and quiet, it misconstrues the facts." Sotomayor also wrote that the Supreme Court "has consistently recognized that school officials leading prayer is constitutionally impermissible." The majority ruling, she wrote, "charts a different path, yet again paying almost exclusive attention to the Free Exercise Clause’s protection for individual religious exercise while giving short shrift to the Establishment Clause’s prohibition on state establishment of religion".
Sotomayor included several photographs in her dissent, which is highly unusual for Court opinions.
 Impact 
The majority reasoning appears to effectively overturn Lemon v. Kurtzman (), which had established a three-part Lemon test to determine if a government statute or similar action violated the Establishment Clause. While the Lemon test was popular in courts in the 1970s, it had lost favor starting in the 1980s, and continued to so even after Justice Sandra Day O'Connor had refined the test in Agostini v. Felton (). The Supreme Court had most recently considered the Lemon test in American Legion v. American Humanist Association (), where several members of the Court rejected the use of the Lemon test. Within Kennedy, the majority opinion did not explicitly overturn Lemon, but stated that they used a history-based approach "in place of Lemon and the endorsement test". Justice Sotomayor's dissent further establishes that the majority opinion "overrules" Lemon, and "calls into question decades of subsequent precedents that it deems offshoots".
An analysis by Ian Millhiser of Vox suggests that the decision's impact may be limited, as the opinion's description of Kennedy's actions as "private" would have already been permissible under Lee v. Weisman.
Some religious groups claim the decision allows for school prayer, but other legal analysts find no support for the overturning of Abington School District v. Schempp, which disallows public school teachers from leading students in prayer. The Court in Kennedy found that Kennedy had not required or asked students to join him, but had instead joined him voluntarily, and thus was not a violation of Schempp. However these analyses did affirm that the design allows a teacher to pray quietly on their own or with other teachers.
Kennedy was reinstated to his previous position as assistant football coach for the Bremerton school by March 2023.
 References 
 Further reading 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
"""

From "Kennedy v. Louisiana" ==> """
Kennedy v. Louisiana, 554 U.S. 407 (2008), is a landmark decision by the Supreme Court of the United States that held that the Eighth Amendment's Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause prohibits imposing the death penalty for a crime where the victim did not die.
Background
Patrick O'Neal Kennedy (born December 13, 1964), a man from Harvey, Louisiana in Greater New Orleans, was sentenced to death after being convicted of raping and sodomizing his eight-year-old stepdaughter. The rape, taking place in March 1998, was uncommonly brutal: it tore the victim's perineum "from her vaginal opening to her anal opening. [It] tore her vagina on the interior such that it separated partially from her cervix and allowed her rectum to protrude into her vagina. Invasive emergency surgery was required to repair these injuries." Kennedy maintained that the battery was committed by two neighborhood boys, and refused to plead guilty when a deal was offered to spare him from a death sentence. Nevertheless, he was convicted in 2003 and sentenced under a 1995 Louisiana law that allowed the death penalty for the rape of a child under the age of 12.
On appeal, Kennedy challenged the constitutionality of executing a person solely for child rape, and the Louisiana Supreme Court rejected the challenge on the grounds that the death penalty was not too harsh for such a heinous offense.See Louisiana v. Kennedy, 957 So.2d 757 (La. 2007) The court distinguished the U.S. Supreme Court's plurality decision in Coker v. Georgia (1977), concluding that Coker'''s rejection of death as punishment for rape of an adult woman did not apply when the victim was a child. Rather, the Louisiana Supreme Court applied a balancing test set out by the U.S. Supreme Court in more recent death penalty cases, Atkins v. Virginia and Roper v. Simmons, first examining whether there is a national consensus on the punishment and then considering whether the court would find the punishment excessive. The Louisiana Supreme Court concluded that the adoption of similar laws in five other states, coupled with the unique vulnerability of children, satisfied Atkins and Roper.Id.; see also 
Kennedy was one of two men in the country under sentence of death for a crime other than murder; the other, Richard L. Davis, had been sentenced under the same Louisiana law. Kennedy sought direct review of the Louisiana Supreme Court's decision in the Supreme Court of the United States,See  ("Final judgments or decrees rendered by the highest court of a State in which a decision could be had, may be reviewed by the Supreme Court by writ of certiorari where the validity of ... a statute of any State is drawn in question on the ground of its being repugnant to the Constitution, treaties, or laws of the United States....") which agreed to hear the case in January 2008.
Argument
In seeking certiorari to the U.S. Supreme Court, Jeffrey L. Fisher, a Stanford Law School professor appealing on behalf of Kennedy, argued that five states do not constitute a "national consensus" for the purposes of Eighth Amendment analysis, that Coker v. Georgia should apply to all rapes regardless of the age of the victim, and that the law was unfair in its application, singling out black child rapists for death at a significantly higher rate than whites. Certiorari to the defendant was granted on January 4, 2008.[ U.S. Supreme Court Docket 07-343] - Retrieved April 27, 2008
The case pitted the Eighth Amendment definition of "cruel and unusual punishment" against states' rights as defined in the Tenth Amendment, with the issue being whether states may constitutionally impose the death penalty for any crime other than murder as a principle of a state's right to impose punishment as it saw fit, under the Tenth Amendment, and, in particular, whether a death sentence is a disproportionate penalty, under the Eighth Amendment, for raping a child. No person has been executed in the United States for rape since 1964.
Jefferson Parish, Louisiana assistant district attorney Juliet L. Clark argued for the State of Louisiana and Texas Solicitor General Ted Cruz argued for the State of Texas and other amicus curiae states.
Questions presented
Does the Eighth Amendment's Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause permit a State to use the death penalty to punish the crime of rape of a child?
If so, does Louisiana's capital rape statute violate the Eighth Amendment insofar as it fails genuinely to narrow the class of such offenders eligible for the death penalty?U.S. Supreme Court Docket 07-343 - Questions Presented - Retrieved April 27, 2008
Opinion of the Supreme Court
Majority
On June 25, 2008, the Supreme Court, splitting 5–4, held that "the Eighth Amendment bars Louisiana from imposing the death penalty for the rape of a child where the crime did not result, and was not intended to result, in the victim's death." In its majority opinion authored by Justice Kennedy, the Court explained that the application of the death penalty had to rest on national consensus, and that as only six States permitted the death penalty for child rape, no such consensus existed. "Unlike Louisiana, those states all require that a defendant have a previous rape conviction or some other aggravating factor in order to be subject to the death penalty, and no one has yet been sentenced to death under any of the laws." In formulating the idea of "national consensus" the Court relied on the previous cases Roper v. Simmons (2005), which outlawed the execution of minors, and Coker v. Georgia (1977), which outlawed the application of the death penalty for the crime of rape. According to the Court, "[t]he death penalty is not a proportional punishment for the rape of a child." The opinion, which was joined by the court's four more liberal judges, went on to state, "The court concludes that there is a distinction between intentional first-degree murder, on the one hand, and non-homicide crimes against individuals, even including child rape, on the other. The latter crimes may be devastating in their harm, as here, but in terms of moral depravity and of the injury to the person and to the public, they cannot compare to murder in their severity and irrevocability." The opinion concluded that in cases of crimes against individuals, "the death penalty should not be expanded to instances where the victim's life was not taken".
The majority opinion left open the possibility of the death penalty for "drug kingpin activity", as well as treason, espionage and terrorism, these being considered crimes against "the State" rather than against "individual persons":
Dissent
In his dissent, Justice Alito sharply criticized the majority for usurping the role of the legislature. Alito argued that Kennedy's rationale for defining national consensus was flawed, because the previous Coker decision had "stunted legislative consideration of the question whether the death penalty for the targeted offense of raping a young child is consistent with prevailing standards of decency." In this Alito followed former Chief Justice Warren Burger, who had dissented from Coker because it, in his view, prevented a full debate over the uses of the recently reinstated death penalty. In this vein, Alito also argued that "The Eighth Amendment protects the right of an accused. It does not authorize this Court to strike down federal or state criminal laws on the ground that they are not in the best interests of crime victims or the broader society."Kennedy v. Louisiana, Alito, J., dissenting, slip op., at 15.
Factual error
A central point of the court's analysis was the observation that child rape was a capital offense in only six states, and that no other state, nor any federal jurisdiction, authorized the death penalty for that crime.
Three days after the case was decided, Dwight Sullivan, a colonel in the United States Marine Corps Reserve who was the Chief Defense Counsel for the Office of Military Commissions, noted in his CAAFlog on military justice that Congress had revised the Uniform Code of Military Justice in 2006 to add child rape to the list of offenses punishable in the military by death. None of the 10 briefs filed with the Court, and neither the majority nor dissent, mentioned the provision. On July 2, 2008, Linda Greenhouse of The New York Times highlighted Sullivan's post, bringing the issue to national attention.
After the error was discovered, supporters of the law—including the governors of Missouri and Louisiana, and 85 members of Congress—petitioned for rehearing. The United States Department of Justice also filed a brief supporting rehearing. It noted that it too had missed the 2006 amendment; since it has a duty to defend all federal laws, and since the decision called that law into question, it was duty-bound to favor rehearing.
The court requested briefs from both the state and the defense on the matter with the possibility of amending the ruling. On October 1, 2008, however, the Supreme Court decided 7–2 not to revisit its decision. In addition to the majority of five in the original case, Scalia and Roberts also filed a concurrence, writing that "the views of the American people on the death penalty for child rape were, to tell the truth, irrelevant to the majority's decision in this case ... and there is no reason to believe that absence of a national consensus would provoke second thoughts." Only Thomas and Alito voted for the rehearing.
Reactions
The decision was handed down in the run-up to a presidential election and both the Democratic and Republican presidential candidates, Barack Obama and John McCain, criticized the majority opinion.
Barack Obama said at a news conference in Chicago:
Obama also argued that the high court had gone too far in restricting the powers of the states. If the court had "said we want to constrain the abilities of states to do this to make sure that it's done in a careful and appropriate way, that would have been one thing. But it basically had a blanket prohibition and I disagree with that decision."
John McCain responded to the ruling by calling it:
In January 2009, U.S. Senator for Louisiana David Vitter introduced S. Res. 4, "A resolution expressing the sense of the Senate that the Supreme Court of the United States erroneously decided Kennedy v. Louisiana, No. 07-343 (2008), and that the eighth amendment to the Constitution of the United States allows the imposition of the death penalty for the rape of a child." This resolution was never voted upon by the full Senate and died in committee when the 111th Congress adjourned.
During his 2012 campaign for a Texas Senate seat, Ted Cruz was criticized for not including the military case law in his brief to the Supreme Court. Cruz responded stating that the oversight did not affect the ruling as Louisiana raised the issue when it requested a rehearing, which was denied.
In 2023, Governor of Florida Ron DeSantis supported moves to have the death penalty for Child rapists. This could overturn precedent of Kennedy v. Louisiana.https://slate.com/news-and-politics/2023/04/ron-desantis-supreme-court-conservatives-attack-precedent.htmlhttps://www.washingtonexaminer.com/policy/courts/desantis-backed-death-penalty-could-prompt-scotus-review
Aftermath
Since the Supreme Court decision set aside the death sentence, the Louisiana Supreme Court remanded the case back to the district court for resentencing. After a brief hearing, Kennedy was sentenced to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole on January 7, 2009, which was the mandatory sentence for the crime.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 554
 Ford v. Wainwright (1986), interdicted death sentences for those who qualify as mentally insane
 Thompson v. Oklahoma (1988), outlawed the death penalty for anyone under 16
 Payne v. Tennessee (1991), recognized testimony concerning emotional distress of victims' families as non-violative of the Eighth Amendment, thereby reversing previous rulings including South Carolina v. Gathers Graham v. Florida (2010), declared life incarceration without the possibility of parole a "cruel and unusual" sentence for non-murder crimes by minors
 Miller v. Alabama (2012), superseded Graham'' by proscribing life incarceration without parole outright for crimes committed when a defendant was under 18
References
External links
 Sex Crimes: Patrick Kennedy v. Louisiana Resource Page: Contains Merits/Amicus Briefs & Media Links
 U.S. Supreme Court Argument Transcript
 Legal Information Institute Bulletin: Cornell University Law School - Kennedy v. Louisiana (07-343)
Category:Capital punishment in Louisiana
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:Legal history of Louisiana
Category:Jefferson Parish, Louisiana
Category:Rape in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2008 in Louisiana
Category:2008 in United States case law
Category:American people convicted of rape
"""

From "Kennedy v. Mendoza-Martinez" ==> """
Kennedy v. Mendoza-Martinez, 372 U.S. 144 (1963), was a Supreme Court of the United States case in which the Court amended United States nationality law with respect to draft evasion.
Background
Francisco Mendoza-Martinez (a natural-born United States citizen.) confessed to the court that he had moved to Mexico (where he also had citizenship status) in 1942 for the purpose of evading the responsibilities of the Selective Training and Service Act of 1940 (for which he served a year in prison).  After his release from prison, Mendoza-Martinez was ordered deported on the grounds that he was not a US citizen (part of the Selective Training and Service Act, as amended by the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952, stripped draft evaders of their citizenship).
Mendoza-Martinez charged that the penalties prescribed by Section 401(j) of the Selective Training and Service Act and by Section 349(a)(10) of the Immigration and Nationality Act were in violation of the due process protections granted by the Fifth and Sixth Amendments to the United States Constitution.  The case, heard jointly with Rusk v. Cort, was appealed to the Supreme Court by United States Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy.
Supreme Court decision
In a five-to-four decision, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of Mendoza-Martinez (but upheld his conviction for draft evasion), upholding the ruling by the Southern District Court of California.  The two statutes in question were declared unconstitutional.  Speaking for the court, Supreme Court Justice Arthur Goldberg stated:
The imperative necessity for safeguarding these rights to procedural due process under the gravest of emergencies has existed throughout our constitutional history, for it is then, under the pressing exigencies of crisis, that there is the greatest temptation to dispense with guarantees which, it is feared, will inhibit government action.
In other words, the court acknowledged the expanded powers of Congress during wartime, but also ruled that those wartime powers do not permit Congress to circumvent the measures of due process.
See also
The Constitution is not a suicide pact
"The Man Without a Country"
References
External links
Category:1963 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States case law
Category:Conscription in the United States
Category:Opposition to World War II
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:Mexico–United States relations
Category:Draft evasion
"""

From "Kent v. Dulles" ==> """
Kent v. Dulles, 357 U.S. 116 (1958), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court on the right to travel and passport restrictions as they relate to First Amendment free speech rights.. It was the first case in which the U.S. Supreme Court made a distinction between the constitutionally protected substantive due process freedom of movement and the right to travel abroad (subsequently characterized as "right to international travel"). relative to area restrictions/foreign policy, e.g., travel to Cuba and  relative to personal restrictions/national security.
Background
From 1950 to 1955, Rockwell Kent repeatedly applied for passports in order to travel to Europe for pleasure, in order to paint, and to attend peace conferences. He was denied a passport because he was allegedly a communist and was alleged to have "a consistent and prolonged adherence to the Communist Party line". He was told that he would not be issued a passport unless he submitted a non-communist affidavit, which he refused to do although he publicly disavowed party membership. Once he had exhausted his administrative appeals, his case became ripe for a constitutional challenge. Kent, represented by Leonard Boudin of the Emergency Civil Liberties Union, sued in U.S. District Court for declaratory relief. The District Court granted summary judgment against him.
On appeal, Kent's case was heard with that of Dr. Walter Briehl, a psychiatrist. When Briehl applied for a passport, the Director of the Passport Office asked him to supply an affidavit with respect to his membership in the Communist Party. Briehl, like Kent, refused. His application for a passport was tentatively disapproved. Briehl filed his complaint in the District Court, which held that his case was indistinguishable from Kent's and dismissed it.
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit heard the two cases en banc and affirmed the District Court by a divided vote.
Decision of the Supreme Court
The cases were heard on writ of certiorari.. The Court reversed the Court of Appeals. Kent v. Dulles was the first case in which the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the right to travel is a part of the "liberty" of which the citizen cannot be deprived without due process of law under the Fifth Amendment. It did not decide the extent to which this liberty can be curtailed. The Court was first concerned with the extent, if any, to which Congress had authorized its curtailment by the U.S. Secretary of State. The Court found that the Secretary of State exceeded his authority by refusing to issue passports to Communists.
It did not rule on the constitutionality of the law because the only law which Congress had passed expressly curtailing the movement of Communists across U.S. borders had yet to take effect. Six years later, the Court in Aptheker v. Secretary of State,. found that the law violated First Amendment principles and left unsettled the extent to which this liberty to travel can be curtailed.
Majority opinion
In a majority opinion written by Justice William O. Douglas, the Court reviewed the history of the issuance and regulation of US passports, noting that the passport is "a document which, from its nature and object, is addressed to foreign powers; purporting only to be a request that the bearer of it may pass safely and freely, and is to be considered rather in the character of a political document by which the bearer is recognized in foreign countries as an American citizen" citing Urtetiqui v. D'Arbel,. and that except in wartime "for most of our history, a passport was not a condition to entry or exit" concluding that the issuance of passports is "a discretionary act" on the part of the Secretary of State.
The Court then surveyed Angevin law under Magna Carta, citing Article 42 in support of the right to travel as a "liberty" right. It referenced Chafee in Three Human Rights in the Constitution of 1787. At that point the Court began to use the phrase "freedom of movement" as in "Freedom of movement is basic in our scheme of values", citing Crandall v. Nevada. Williams v. Fears,. Edwards v. California,. and Vestal, Freedom of Movement, 41 Iowa L.Rev. 6, 13–14, although all the cases it cited involved interstate travel. The Court concluded that although "Freedom to travel is, indeed, an important aspect of the citizen's liberty" it need not decide the extent to which it can be curtailed because it was first concerned with the extent, if any, to which Congress had authorized its curtailment.
It reviewed prior administrative practice, noting that the power of the Secretary of State over the issuance of passports is expressed in broad terms, but long exercised quite narrowly.  Historically, the cases of refusal of passports generally fell into two categories. First was the question pertinent to the citizenship of the applicant and his allegiance to the United States. Second was the question whether the applicant was participating in illegal conduct, trying to escape the toils of the law, promoting passport frauds, or otherwise engaging in conduct which would violate the laws of the United States. It considered wartime measures, citing Korematsu v. United States,. for the proposition that the government could exclude citizens from their homes and restrict their freedom of movement only on a showing of "the gravest imminent danger to the public safety". It found that although there were scattered rulings of the State Department concerning Communists, they were not consistently of one pattern.
The Court concluded that although the issuance of a passport carries some implication of intention to extend the bearer diplomatic protection, its crucial function is control over exit and that the right of exit is a personal right included within the word "liberty" as used in the Fifth Amendment. It found that when that power is delegated, the standards must be adequate to pass scrutiny by the accepted tests, citing Panama Refining Co. v. Ryan,. Cantwell v. Connecticut,. and Niemotko v. Maryland,. and that where activities or enjoyment natural and often necessary to the wellbeing of an American citizen, such as travel, are involved, the Court will construe narrowly all delegated powers that curtail or dilute them. Consequently, it found that § 1185 and § 211a did not delegate to the Secretary the kind of authority exercised in this case.
Dissent
The minority opinion was written by Justice Tom Clark with Justices Burton, Harlan and Whitaker concurring.  The minority argued that historically Congress meant the Secretary to deny passports to those whose travel abroad would be contrary to American national security both in wartime and during peace, pointing out that passport restrictions on Communists were first implemented shortly after the 1917 Russian Revolution and continued periodically until 1952.
It felt an even more serious error of the majority was its determination that the Secretary's wartime use of his discretion was wholly irrelevant in determining what discretionary practices were approved by Congress in enactment of § 215.  It was not a case of judging what may be done in peace by what has been done in war.  Were it a time of peace, there might very well have been no problem for the Court to decide, since petitioners then would not need a passport to leave the country. The wartime practice may be the only relevant one, for the discretion with which the Court was concerned was discretionary control over international travel.  Only in times of war and national emergency has a passport been required to leave or enter the country, and hence only in such times has passport power necessarily meant power to control travel.
It faulted the majority's assertion that the passport denials here were beyond the pale of congressional authorization because they do not involve grounds either of allegiance or criminal activity.  It argued that neither of the propositions set out by the majority — (1) that the Secretary's denial of passports in peacetime extended to only two categories of cases, those involving allegiance and those involving criminal activity, and (2) that the Secretary's wartime exercise of his discretion, while admittedly more restrictive, had no relevance to the practice which Congress could have been said to have approved in 1952 — had any validity: the first was contrary to fact, and the second to common sense.
On this multiple basis, then, Judge Clark was constrained to disagree with the majority as to the authority of the Secretary to deny petitioners' applications for passports and would affirm on the issue of the Secretary's authority to require the affidavits involved in this case.  He did not reach any constitutional questions, delegating to the majority's resolution of the authority question, the inability to rule on the constitutional issues raised by petitioners relating to claimed unlawful delegation of legislative power, violation of free speech and association under the First Amendment, and violation of international travel under the Fifth Amendment.
See also
 Eunique v. Powell: 9th Circuit Court of Appeals case involving withholding passports based on overdue child support
 Zemel v. Rusk
References
External links
Freedom to Travel Campaign v. Newcomb
Three human rights in the Constitution of 1787, Chafee, Zechariah 1956, University of Kansas Press (Lawrence)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:1958 in United States case law
Category:World Peace Council
Category:Passports
Category:Communist Party USA litigation
"""

From "Kentucky Retirement Systems v. EEOC" ==> """
Kentucky Retirement Systems v. EEOC, 554 U.S. 135 (2008) is a United States Supreme Court case that ruled Kentucky's retirement system does not amount to age discrimination under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act when granting pensions to disabled persons who had not yet reached the permitted retirement age of 55.
Associate Justice Stephen Breyer explained in the majority opinion that "where an employer treats employees differently based on their pension status and even if the pension status does depend on age, the plaintiff still has to show that that age made a difference rather than just a pension status, that it was actually motivated this discrimination or there's a reason for it that was based upon age and not pension status."
 References 
Category:Ageism case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Ker v. California" ==> """
Ker v. California, 374 U.S. 23 (1963), was a case before the United States Supreme Court, which incorporated the Fourth Amendment's protections against illegal search and seizure.  The case was decided on June 10, 1963, by a vote of 5–4.
Prior history
George Douglas and Diane Ker (a married couple) were convicted of possession of marijuana in Southern California.  The two were arrested after officers from the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department saw George Ker meeting another person who was suspected of selling illegal drugs.  Although lighting conditions and distance prevented the officers observing this meeting from seeing any exchange of money or drugs between Ker and the other man, they believed Ker was part of a drug-trading ring.  After losing their prime suspect, the  officers went to the Ker's apartment and entered without consent or a warrant using a pass key supplied by the building manager.  An officer observed a “brick-shaped package of green leafy substance” on the kitchen table and arrested both Kers.  A subsequent warrantless search of the apartment and the Ker's car found more packaged and loose marijuana and marijuana seeds, all of which was used as evidence against the Kers.
After conviction in state Superior Court, both the California District Court of Appeals and the California Supreme Court upheld the conviction, ruling that the evidence was not seized in the course of an unlawful search.
Case
The Court had decided two years earlier in Mapp v. Ohio that evidence seized in the course of an illegal search was inadmissible in a criminal trial in a state court.  The Court extended that holding in this case, addressing the standard for deciding what are the fruits of an illegal search in state criminal trials.   Clark's opinion addressed “the specific question as to whether Mapp requires the exclusion of evidence in this case which the California District Court of Appeal has held to be lawfully seized.”  Unlike the previous case, where the search was clearly unreasonable, the District Court had found that the seizure of the drugs in the Kers’ apartment was allowed as being incident to an otherwise lawful arrest.  The Supreme Court granted certiorari to give lower courts guidance on decide when evidence is the fruit of an unlawful search or seizure.
The Court declared that the standards of reasonableness are the same under the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments applying in Federal and State courts.  Clark interpreted the Court's precedents in determining if the search of the Kers’ apartment and car were reasonable.
Effects of the decision
The Kers themselves did not, however, personally benefit from this decision.  The Supreme Court analyzed the evidence presented and agreed with the California courts that the seizure was incident to a lawful arrest.  The Sheriff's officers had probable cause to make a warrantless arrest, and the most prominent evidence (the brick of marijuana) was in plain sight.   Clark also dismissed the other reasonableness objections raised by the Kers.  Brennan's opinion diverged from Clark's on this point, saying that the search was not reasonable under existing precedent.
Subsequent history
Ker has been cited by subsequent decisions both for the holding of Fourth Amendment incorporation and for allowing warrantless search and seizure with probable cause or to prevent destruction of contraband.  For example, Michigan v. Tyler, , and Wilson v. Arkansas, .
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 374
Miller v. United States, 
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:Incorporation case law
Category:1963 in United States case law
Category:1963 in California
Category:1963 in cannabis
Category:Legal history of California
Category:History of Los Angeles County, California
Category:Cannabis law reform in the United States
"""

From "Ker v. Illinois" ==> """
Ker v. Illinois, 119 U.S. 436 (1886),Ker v. Illinois,  is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court unanimously held that a fugitive kidnapped from abroad could not claim any violation of the Constitution, laws or treaties of the United States. 
The incident that led to this decision involved a Pinkerton Detective Agency agent, Henry Julian, was hired by the federal government to collect a larcenist, Frederick Ker, who had fled to Peru. Although Julian had the necessary extradition papers—the two governments had negotiated an extradition treaty a decade earlier—he found that there was no official to meet his request due to the recent Chilean military occupation of Lima. Rather than return home empty-handed, Julian kidnapped the fugitive, with assistance from Chilean forces, and placed him on a U.S. vessel heading back to the United States.
A very important provision in all these US Supreme Court rulings on international extradition is that the extradited defendant must be tried by an impartial jury, according to the Sixth Amendment of the US Constitution.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 119
Ker-Frisbie Doctrine
United States v. Rauscher, 
Frisbie v. Collins, 
United States v. Verdugo-Urquidez, 
United States v. Alvarez-Machain, 
Further reading
 References 
External links
Category:Pinkerton (detective agency)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Criminal cases in the Waite Court
Category:Extradition case law
Category:1886 in United States case law
Category:United States criminal investigation case law
Category:Peru–United States relations
"""

From "Kerr-McGee Corp. v. Navajo Tribe" ==> """
Kerr-McGee v. Navajo Tribe, 471 U.S. 195 (1985), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that an Indian tribe is not required to obtain the approval of the Secretary of the Interior in order to impose taxes on non-tribal persons or entities doing business on a reservation.
Background
thumb|left|200px|alt=map of Navajo reservation|Map of Navajo reservation
History
The Navajo Tribe is an Indian (Native American) tribe with a reservation occupying parts of Arizona, Utah and New Mexico. In 1978, the tribal council passed two taxing ordinances.Wilkinson, Charles F. (1996), Home Dance, the Hopi, and Black Mesa Coal: Conquest and Endurance in the American Southwest, 1996 BYU L. R. 449, Brigham Young Univ. The first was a tax of 3% on leaseholds (such as mineral rights) and the second was a 5% tax on business activity. The tribe forwarded the ordinances to the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) in the Department of the Interior for approval. The BIA informed the tribe that there was no law that required federal approval for a tribal tax.Kerr-McGee v. Navajo Tribe, .
Lower courts
Kerr-McGee held substantial mineral rights in the reservation and filed a lawsuit in the federal district court seeking an injunction to prohibit the tribe from collecting the tax. Kerr-McGee argued that any tax of non-Indians by a tribe required approval by the Secretary of the Interior and the district court agreed, granting the injunction. The tribe appealed to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. The Ninth Circuit overruled the district court, finding no federal statute or regulation required such approval. Kerr-McGee then appealed to the Supreme Court, which granted certiorari and agreed to hear the case.
Decision
thumb|right|200px|alt=portrait of Chief Justice Warren Burger|Chief Justice Warren Burger, author of the unanimous opinion
Arguments
Alvin H. Shrago argued the case for Kerr-McGee. Elizabeth Bernstein argued the case for the tribe. The United States argued the case on behalf of the tribe. Amicus curiae briefs were filed in support of Kerr-McGee by the Arizona Public Service Co., the Peabody Coal Co., the Phillips Petroleum Co., the Salt River Project Agricultural Improvement and Power District and Texaco, Inc. Amicus curiae briefs were filed in support of the tribe by Association on American Indian Affairs and for the Shoshone Indian Tribe Reservation.
Kerr-McGee argued that the Indian Reorganization ActIndian Reorganization Act of 1934, , . (IRA) required the Secretary of the Interior to approve any tribal taxes on non-Indians. They also argued that the Indian Mineral Leasing ActIndian Mineral Leasing Act of 1938, , . (IMLA) required BIA approval for taxes.
Opinion of the Court
Chief Justice Burger delivered the unanimous opinion of the court. Burger noted that the IRA only required BIA approval of tribal constitutions and bylaws, not the power to tax. He noted that it would not affect the Navajo tribe in any case, since the tribe declined to accept the provisions of the IRA.Resnik, Judith (1989), Dependent Sovereigns: Indian Tribes, States, and the Federal Courts, 56 U. Chi. L. R. 671, Univ. of Chicago. Burger also took note that the tribal authority to tax had been recognized long before the IRA was enacted. The IMLA also did not require approval for taxes, merely requiring that the Secretary issue regulations on oil and gas leases, which he has done. The regulations do not require his approval for taxes by tribes.
Burger noted that the policy of the federal government was to promote tribal self-government, and the power to tax is an inherent power of government. When a tribe executes a mineral rights lease it is acting in a commercial matter, and that does not prevent the tribe from exercising tribal sovereignty in enacting a tax. Since there is not a federal law prohibiting such a tax, the tribe is within its rights to enact one. The judgment of the Ninth Circuit was affirmed.
Subsequent developments
Kerr-McGee is one of a series of cases where the Supreme Court has ruled, based on tribal sovereignty, that tribes have the right to tax non-Indians.Allen, Mark (1989), Native American Control of Tribal Natural Resource Development in the Context of the Federal Trust and Tribal Self-Determination, 16 B.C. Envtl. Aff. L. Rev. 857, Boston College.Krakoff, Sarah (2004), A Narrative of Sovereignty: Illuminating the Paradox of the Domestic Dependent Nation, 83 Ore. L. R. 1109, Univ. of Oregon. These cases led to tribes renegotiating inequitable mineral leases, forming their own natural resources regulatory agencies, and tribal development companies.Stout, Jacob (2011), Tribal Self-Determination in Natural Resources: Management, Control, and Trust Responsibilities or the Lack Thereof in Navajo Nation v. United States, 129 S. Ct. 1547 (2009), 89 Neb. L. R. 538, Univ. of Nebraska. In the case of the Navajo tribe, which had a long history of uranium mining and radioactive contamination of both tribal members and its water sources by mining firms (including Kerr-McGee), it supported the outright ban on uranium mining.Newton, Nell Jessup (1992), Indian Claims in the Courts of the Conqueror , 41 Am. Univ. L. R. 753, American Univ. It has been used to support the right of tribes to control their natural resources, including exercising civil jurisdiction over non-Indians.Krakoff, Sarah (2001), Undoing Indian Law One Case at a Time: Judicial Minimalism and Tribal Sovereignty, 50 Am. Univ. L. R. 1177, American Univ. In recognition of the importance of the decision to the tribe, the tribal council declared that the date of the decision was a tribal holiday, known as "Navajo National Sovereignty Day."
See also
 Uranium mining and the Navajo people
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 471
References
External links
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Uranium mining on the Navajo Nation
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:Navajo history
Category:Kerr-McGee
"""

From "Kerry v. Din" ==> """
Kerry v. Din, 576 U.S. 86 (2015), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court analyzed whether there is a constitutional right to live in the United States with one's spouse and whether procedural due process requires consular officials to give notice of reasons for denying a visa application. In Justice Anthony Kennedy's concurring opinion, the controlling opinion in this case,, slip op. at 1 (2015) (Breyer, J., dissenting) (noting that Justice Scalia's plurality opinion "is not controlling"); see also Marks v. United States,  (holding that in plurality opinions, the narrowest concurring opinion is the controlling opinion). he wrote that notice requirements “[do] not apply when, as in this case, a visa application is denied due to terrorism or national security concerns.”Din, slip op. at 5-6 (Kennedy, J., concurring). Because the consular officials satisfied notice requirements, there was no need for the Court to address the constitutional question about the right to live with one's spouse.Din, slip op. at 6 (Kennedy, J., concurring).
Writing for a plurality of the court, Justice Antonin Scalia wrote that there is no constitutional right to live with one’s spouse, and because Din was not denied “life, liberty, or property,” she was not entitled to due process.Din, slip op. at 15 (2015) (plurality opinion). Justice Stephen Breyer wrote a dissenting opinion in which he argued that Din was denied liberty without due process of law, and that there is a fundamental right for spouses to “live together and to raise a family,” which enjoys basic due process protections.Din, slip op. at 1-2 (plurality opinion). In the weeks following the announcement of the Court's decision, some analysts suggested the Justices' opinions in Kerry v. Din would foreshadow the outcome in Obergefell v. Hodges.See, e.g., Kevin Johnson, Opinion Analysis: Limited judicial review of consular officer visa decisions – foreshadowing the result in the same-sex marriage case? ,  (Jun. 15, 2015, 5:02 PM); Ruthann Robson, , Does Immigration Marriage Case Foreshadow Same-Sex Marriage Case? (Accessed June 15, 2015); Ian Millhiser, , Justice Scalia Turns Obscure Immigration Case Into A Proxy War Over Marriage Equality (Accessed June 29, 2015).
Background
Immigration and Nationality Act visa requirements
The Immigration and Nationality Act prohibits non-citizens from entering the United States without a visa.66 Stat. 163, as amended, 8 U.S.C. § 1101 et seq. The Act allows individuals classified as "immediate relatives" of those living in the United States to apply for a visa at a United States Embassy or consular office. However, non-citizen "immediate relatives" are ineligible for admission into the United States if they provide "material support to a terrorist organization" or serve "as a terrorist organization’s representative."Din, slip op. at 2 (plurality opinion) (citing 8 U.S.C. § 1182(a)(3)(B)).
Kanishka Berashk's visa application
Fauzia Din arrived to the United States from Afghanistan as a refugee in the year 2000, and she became a naturalized citizen in 2007.Din, slip op. at 2-3 (plurality opinion). In 2006, she married Kanishka Berashk, who was a former civil servant in Afghanistan during the Taliban regime.Din, slip op. at 1, 3 (plurality opinion). Din filed paperwork to classify Berashk as an "immediate relative," and Berashk filed a visa application to gain entry to the United States.Din, slip op. at 3 (plurality opinion). The United States Embassy in Islamabad, Pakistan reviewed Berashk's application and conducted an interview but ultimately denied his visa application. A consular official informed Berashk he was ineligible for entry under the portion of the Immigration and Nationality Act that precludes admission for individuals with connections to terrorist organizations, but the official provided no further explanation for this determination.
Initial legal challenges
Because Berashk was an unadmitted, non-resident alien, he had no right of entry into the United States and could not challenge his denial of his visa application.Din, slip op. at 1 (plurality opinion) (citing Kleindienst v. Mandel, ). Consequently, Din filed suit in United States District Court, where she claimed the government denied her due process of law by depriving her of her "constitutional right to live in the United States with her spouse" and for denying her husband's visa application without adequate explanation. The District Court rejected Din's claims, but the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed, concluding that Din had "a protected liberty interest in marriage that entitled [her] to review of the denial of [her] spouse’s visa."Din, slip op. at 1, 3 (plurality opinion) (citing Din v. Kerry, 718 F.3d 856, 860 (9th Cir. 2013)) (internal quotations omitted). The United States appealed, and the Supreme Court granted certiorari on October 2, 2014.Kerry v. Din, 135 S.Ct. 44 (2014).
Judgment of the Court
thumb|right|upright|In his dissenting opinion, Justice Stephen Breyer wrote that the constitution protects "the right of spouses to live together and to raise a family."Din, slip op. at 2-3 (Breyer, J., dissenting).
In his plurality opinion, Justice Antonin Scalia wrote that there is no constitutional right to live in the United States with one's spouse.Din, slip op. at 1 (plurality opinion). He argued that under the Fifth Amendment's due process clause, citizens are only entitled to redress if they are denied "life, liberty, or property."Din, slip op. at 3-4 (plurality opinion) (citing Swarthout v. Cooke,  (per curiam)). Because visa applications have not historically been understood as "life, liberty, or property," the denial of a visa application does not implicate Fifth Amendment due process protections.Din, slip op. at 4-5 (plurality opinion). Additionally, Justice Scalia rejected the argument that the denial of the visa application implicated a fundamental liberty interest.Din, slip op. at 6-11 (plurality opinion). Although Justice Scalia conceded that Loving v. Virginia and its progeny “invok[e] a fundamental right to marriage,” the parties “implicitly concede that no such right has been infringed in this case.”Din, slip op. at 7, 11–15 (plurality opinion).
Justice Kennedy's concurring opinion
In Justice Anthony Kennedy's opinion concurring in the judgment, he argued that the Court need not rule upon whether Din has a right to live with her spouse.Din, slip op. at 1-2 (Kennedy, J., concurring). Even if the Court assumed that Din did have a fundamental liberty interest in living with her spouse, "the notice she received regarding her husband’s visa denial satisfied due process."Din, slip op. at 1 (Kennedy, J., concurring). Justice Kennedy concluded that notice requirements “[do] not apply when, as in this case, a visa application is denied due to terrorism or national security concerns.”Din, slip op. at 5-6 Kennedy, J., concurring).
Justice Breyer's dissenting opinion
Justice Stephen Breyer wrote a dissent in which he argued that consular officials had denied Din due process by preventing her from living with her husband.Din, slip op. at 2-4 (Breyer, J., dissenting). He wrote that the Supreme Court "has long recognized, the institution of marriage, which encompasses the right of spouses to live together and to raise a family, is central to human life, requires and enjoys community support, and plays a central role in most individuals’ 'orderly pursuit of happiness.'"Din, slip op. at 2-3 (Breyer, J., dissenting) (citing Meyer v. Nebraska, ). Additionally, Justice Breyer argued that the notice provided to Berashk was inadequate, and was the equivalent of "telling a criminal defendant only that he is accused of 'breaking the law.'"Din, slip op. at 7-9 (Breyer, J., dissenting).
Commentary and analysis
Reaction to the Court's decision
In the weeks following the Court's decision, some analysts criticized the Court's ruling for focusing too much attention on "social norms" and not enough attention on the realities of the immigrant experience.See, e.g., Elizabeth Keyes, , Symposium on Kerry v. Din: Another Choiceless Choice (Accessed June 29, 2015). The Los Angeles Times' editorial board criticized the Court for allowing consular officials to deny a visa "simply by asserting a vague connection to terrorism."Los Angeles Times Editorial Board, , The "Terrorist" Who Didn't Get A U.S. Visa (June 17, 2015). Others noted that the lack of a majority opinion meant that the case would likely have little precedential value in the future.See, e.g., Chuck Roth, , Symposium on Kerry v. Din: What Is the "Holding" of Kerry v. Din? (Accessed June 29, 2015). Because Justice Kennedy was the only Justice to not author a majority opinion from the February sitting, some commentators believed that he was initially assigned the role of writing an opinion for the majority of the Court, but three justices defected sometime after the assignment was made.Josh Blackman,  Who Will Write The Remaining Three Opinions Since AMK (Probably) Lost Ayala Majority? (Accessed June 29, 2015). In June 2015, Nina Totenberg reported that Din was in the process of submitting further character evidence about her husband to the State Department so that officials can re-evaluate Berashk's visa application.Nina Totenberg, , High Court Sides With Government On Spousal Visa Denial (Accessed June 29, 2015).
Speculation about Obergefell v. Hodges
In light of the case's extensive discussion about fundamental rights associated with marriage, analysts suggested the Justices' views in Kerry v. Din would foreshadow the outcome of Court's upcoming decision in Obergefell v. Hodges.See, e.g., Kevin Johnson, Opinion Analysis: Limited judicial review of consular officer visa decisions – foreshadowing the result in the same-sex marriage case? ,  (Jun. 15, 2015, 5:02 PM); Ruthann Robson, , Does Immigration Marriage Case Foreshadow Same-Sex Marriage Case? (Accessed June 15, 2015). Some commentators even described the opinion as a "proxy war" for the debate in Obergefell.Ian Millhiser, , Justice Scalia Turns Obscure Immigration Case Into A Proxy War Over Marriage Equality (Accessed June 29, 2015). Other commentators opined that Justice Kennedy's narrow concurrence in Kerry v. Din was evidence he would ultimately write the majority opinion in Obergefell.Nicholas Datlowe, Former Taliban Civil Servant’s Wife Not Entitled to Visa Denial Explanation, 83  1899 (June 16, 2015). When the Court ultimately released its decision in Obergefell, Justice Kennedy was the author of the majority's opinion, while Chief Justice Roberts, Justice Alito, Justice Scalia, and Justice Thomas all wrote dissenting opinions.Obergefell v. Hodges, 576 U.S. ___ (2015).
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 576
List of United States Supreme Court cases
Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution
Loving v. Virginia (1967)
Notes
References
External links
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Kessler v. Eldred" ==> """
Kessler v. Eldred, 206 U.S. 285 (1907), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court defined some effects of a court decision that an inventor had not infringed on a patent..
 Background 
Eldred had acquired a patent for an electric lamp lighter.The original inventor was Chambers, whose 1893 was US patent 492913 (available at google patents).  Kessler's business manufactured electric cigar lighters.  Eldred sued Kessler's company for patent infringement, but Indiana courts found no infringement.  Later Eldred sued a distributor of Kessler's devices for infringement, and Kessler lost business as a result.  Kessler took over the defense against this lawsuit too, and countersued. The case came from the seventh Circuit Court to the Supreme Court.
Justice Moody issued the opinion, finding among other things that Eldred's second lawsuit was a "wrongful interference" in Kessler's business.
One analyst says "The seldom-used Kessler Doctrine (Kessler v. Eldred, 206 U.S. 285 (1907)) bars patent infringement litigation against systems found not to infringe in a prior action but sold subsequent to that action, even though claim and issue preclusion do not."Peter E. Heuser. The Federal Circuit Breathes New Life into the Kessler Doctrine. March 28, 2014.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States patent case law
Category:1907 in United States case law
"""

From "Kessler v. Treat" ==> """
Kessler v. Treat, 205 U.S. 33 (1907), was a decision in which the Supreme Court of the United States adjudicated allegations that prisoners were unlawfully imprisoned by Morgan Treat, the United States Marshall for the Eastern District of Virginia.Kessler v. Treat, 205 U.S. 33, 33-34 (1907); Tinsley v. Treat, 205 U.S. 20, 24-26 (1907); see also Brief for James G. Tinsley, Petitioner, Kessler v. Treat, no. 369, 205 U.S. 33 (1907). In a one-sentence opinion written by Chief Justice Melville Fuller, the Court identified ten cases for which the Court entered the same decree as the one issued in Tinsley v. Treat.Kessler, 205 U.S. at 34. Justice John Marshall Harlan dissented without writing a separate opinion.Kessler, 205 U.S. at 34 (Harlan, J., dissenting).
Cases for which decrees were entered
The Court entered decrees for the following cases:
 William De. C. Kessler v. Morgan Treat, United States Marshal, el al.
 Samuel T. Morgan v. Morgan Treat, etc.
 Austin B. Carpenter v. Morgan Treat, etc.
 Fortesque Whittle v. Morgan Treat, etc.
 Frank E. Wilcox v. Morgan Treat, etc.
 George Braden v. Morgan Treat, etc.
 Frank S. Royster v. Morgan Treat, etc.
 J. Rice Smith v. Morgan Treat, etc.
 Charles F. Burroughs v. Morgan Treat, etc.
 Charles H. McDowell v. Morgan Treat, etc.
See also
 Andersen v. Treat (1898)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 205
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1907 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Keyes v. School District No. 1, Denver" ==> """
Keyes v. School District No. 1, Denver, 413 U.S. 189 (1973),  was a United States Supreme Court case that claimed de facto segregation had affected a substantial part of the school system and therefore was a violation of the Equal Protection Clause. The entire district in Denver, Colorado, must be desegregated. In this case, black and Hispanic parents filed suit against all Denver schools due to racial segregation. The decision on this case, written by Justice William J. Brennan, was key in defining de facto segregation. Brennan found that although there were no official laws supporting segregation in Denver, "the Board, through its actions over a period of years, intentionally created and maintained the segregated character of the core city schools." The issue of "intent" would become a key factor in the Boston case.
 Background 
After the Supreme Court of the United States ruled in both Brown v. Board of Education and Brown II that racially segregated schools in the United States were unconstitutional, many states began the arduous process of desegregating their public school systems. Prior to this case many of these initial efforts to desegregate were done primarily in the southern states, as segregation by law was far more common than in the northern states. 
However, in one school district located in Denver, Colorado, there had been evidence of de facto school segregation almost 15 years after the Brown ruling. The Denver school district was accused of maintaining this de facto segregation by means of attendance zones, optional zones, and mobile classroom units in the Park Hill neighborhood. But in April 1969, a plan was put forth by the superintendent of the school board to begin desegregating public schools in the Denver Area by means of integrated busing. 
However, two months later after these plans were introduced, a new superintendent was voted in to power over the incumbent. The new superintendent cancelled the previous integration plan all together.
Less than two weeks later, a group of parents brought suit against the Denver School District, alleging that the entirety of the Denver school system was guilty of racial segregation and was therefore in violation of their 14th Amendment right to Equal Protection of the laws. The defending party rejected this claim, asserting that even if it was true that the Denver School District was guilty of racial segregation that did not mean that all other school districts in the Denver area were likewise guilty.
 Holding 
Writing for the majority, Justice William Brennan ruled against the Denver School District authority and held that "where, as in this case, a policy of intentional segregation has been proved with respect to a significant portion of the school system, the burden is on the school authorities (regardless of claims that their 'neighborhood school policy' was racially neutral) to prove that their actions as to other segregated schools in the system were not likewise motivated by a segregative intent.". Thus, the evidence of segregation in the Denver School District was determined to be of such significance that it implicated the entire Denver school system as a result. 
In relation to the fact that much of the segregation at question was a result of a de facto nature for ten years, the Majority also held that, "if the actions of school authorities were to any degree motivated by segregative intent and the segregation resulting from those actions continues to exist, the fact of remoteness in time certainly does not make those actions any less 'intentional'."
References
External links
Category:United States school desegregation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1973 in United States case law
Category:Education in Denver
Category:United States equal protection case law
"""

From "Keyishian v. Board of Regents" ==> """
Keyishian v. Board of Regents, 385 U.S. 589 (1967), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that states cannot prohibit employees from being members of the Communist Party and that this law was overbroad and too vague.
 Background 
New York State had laws that prohibited state employees from belonging to any organization that advocated the overthrow of the US government or was "treasonous" or "seditious." The regents of the State University of New York also required teachers and employees to sign an oath that they were not members of the Communist Party.
Some faculty and staff of the University were terminated for refusing to sign the oath and appealed to the Supreme Court.
 Decision 
The Supreme Court, in a 5–4 decision, overturned the New York state laws prohibiting membership in seditious groups because it was too vague and was overbroad. That largely reversed the 1952 decision in Adler v. Board of Education, in which Irving Adler had been dismissed for the New York City public school system because of a previous connection with the Communist Party USA.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 385
 References 
 External links 
 Heins, Marjorie. (2012, January 23). "The Keyishian Ruling: 45 Years Later," Academe Blog
 Wilson, John K. (2012, January 23). "Interview with Harry Keyishian," Academe Blog
Category:1967 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:State University of New York
Category:Anti-communism in the United States
Category:Communist Party USA litigation
Category:United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States education case law
Category:Higher education case law
"""

From "Keystone Bituminous Coal Ass'n v. DeBenedictis" ==> """
Keystone Bituminous Coal Ass'n v. DeBenedictis, 480 U.S. 470 (1987), is a United States Supreme Court case interpreting the Fifth Amendment's Takings Clause. In this case, the court upheld a Pennsylvania statute which limited coal mining causing damage to buildings, dwellings, and cemeteries through subsidence.
Background
Pennsylvania enacted the Subsidence Act in 1966 "to prevent or minimize subsidence and to regulate its consequences." In other words, the Subsidence Act was designed to prevent the harmful effects that underground mining can have on the surface above. Some examples of coal mine subsidence damage include cracked foundations, sinkholes, and groundwater loss.
In 1982, the Keystone Light Bituminous Coal Association, an association formed by four coal companies, brought an action in the United States District Court for the Western District of Pennsylvania. They sought to enjoin the Secretary of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (DER), Nicholas DeBenedictis, and his lower officers, from enforcing the Bituminous Mine Subsidence and Land Conservation Act (Subsidence Act) and its implementing regulations.Keystone Bituminous Coal Ass'n v. DeBenedictis, 480 U.S. 470, 474, 478 (1987).
The petitioners challenged two sections of the Subsidence Act. First, they challenged Section 4, which "[P]rohibits mining that causes subsidence damage to three categories of structures . . . :  [1.] public buildings and noncommercial buildings generally used by the public; [2.] dwellings used for human habitation; and [3.] cemeteries." Second, the petitioners challenged Section 6 of the Act. This section "[A]uthorizes the DER to revoke a mining permit if the removal of coal causes damage to a structure or area protected by Section 4 and the operator has not . . . [done any of the following within six months: 1.] repaired the damage, [2.] satisfied any claim arising [from the damage], or [3.] deposited a sum equal to the reasonable cost of repair with the DER as security."
In their complaint, the petitioners contended that "Pennsylvania recognizes three separate estates in land: The mineral estate; the surface estate; and the 'support estate.'" All but 10% of the coal to be mined by the petitioners was severed from the surface estates around the turn of the 20th century. However, surface owners generally waived any claims against petitioners or prior coal companies for damages caused by mining.
Relying on the Supreme Court’s decision in Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon (1922),. the petitioners’ primary argument was that Sections 4 and 6 of the Subsidence Act violated the Takings Clause of the Constitution's Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments by taking their property without providing just compensation. They also argued that Section 6 violated the Constitution's Contracts Clause.
The petitioners' main contention was that one restriction imposed by the DER is that "50% of the coal beneath structures protected by § 4" must be left unearthed to support the surface land, and that consequently their "support estate[s] had been entirely destroyed" because they had to leave 50% of the coal beneath the surface in place, so they could only mine the mineral estate while leaving the support estate untouched. In answers to interrogatories, the petitioners claimed that from 1966 to 1982 their land use rights at their 13 coal mines had been restricted to the point of a taking because of the Subsidence Act. As a result, they claimed that they had to leave about 27 million tons of coal in place. Altogether, these mines contained at least 1.46 billion tons of coal. The percentage of coal that had to remain unmined was less than 2% of the petitioners' total coal.
Procedural history
The District Court held that Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon did not apply and that there was not a taking. Finding "that the Subsidence Act served valid public purposes," the District Court determined that the Act was a legitimate exercise of the state's police power. In response to the petitioners' support estate argument, the District Court found that "[T]he support estate consists of a bundle of rights, including some that were not affected by the Act." In essence, the District Court recognized that the support estate was a separate estate in land, but that the Act did not effect a taking of the whole support estate involved in this case. The District Court also rejected the Contracts Clause claim because the petitioners did not present evidence that the Act "had impaired any contract to which the Commonwealth was a party."
The Court of Appeals found that there was not a taking and affirmed the holding of the District Court. It also found that Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon did not apply. The Court of Appeals took a different approach to analyzing the support estate than the District Court did and "[C]onsidered the support estate as just one segment of a larger bundle of rights that invariably includes either the surface estate or the mineral estate." So, instead of finding that there were three separate estates in land, the Court of Appeals decided that the support estate was not a separate estate in land. Instead, the support estate was to be included as part of the surface estate or the mineral estate. By combining the support estate with the surface estate or the mineral estate, the petitioners' "bundle of rights" became larger. Therefore, the Court of Appeals found that "'their entire 'bundle' of property rights ha[d] not been destroyed.'" In addition, the Court of Appeals affirmed the District Court's holding concerning the Contracts Clause claim.
Both lower courts cited Andrus v. Allard (1979),. a Supreme Court case describing the "bundle of rights" that a property owner possesses.  Relying on Andrus, both courts found that the support estate was just a "'strand'" in a larger bundle of rights. According to these courts, the Act had to effect a taking of the combined bundle of the surface estate, support estate, and mineral estate to be deemed a taking.
Majority opinion
When Keystone was argued before the Supreme Court in 1986, its facts were strikingly similar to the facts of Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon. However, the Court began its opinion by rejecting the petitioners' argument that Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon should control in this case because "[T]he similarities . . . [between the two cases were] far less significant than the differences," and concluded that there was no taking.
Citing prior takings cases, the Court listed two factors that must be considered when evaluating whether a taking has occurred. These factors suggest that a land use regulation will be deemed a taking if it 1) "'does not substantially advance legitimate state interests,'" or 2) "'denies an owner economically viable use of his land.'".
Using the two factors above, the Court found that the petitioners didn't meet their burden of proof in order to establish a taking.Keystone Bituminous Coal Ass'n, 480 U.S. at 485. The Court found that the Subsidence Act "substantially advanced legitimate state interests" by trying to prevent "a significant threat to the common welfare" and that it wasn't "impossible for petitioners to profitably engage in their business."
According to the Court, the first difference between Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon and this case was that one act benefited a few and the other act benefited many. The Kohler Act challenged in Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon was intended to benefit a few private parties, while the Subsidence Act in this case was intended to benefit the general public. The Court stressed that the Kohler Act was not a legitimate exercise of the State's police power because it was only meant to protect "some private landowners' homes." Conversely, the Subsidence Act was a legitimate exercise of the State's police power because it was meant "to protect the public interest in health, the environment, and the fiscal integrity of the area." To be a legitimate exercise of the State's police power, "the nature of the State's action" must protect the general well-being of the community. Regulations protecting the general well-being of the community generally involve health, safety, or morals.  In this case, the Court deferred to the Pennsylvania Legislature's finding "that important public interests are served by enforcing a policy that is designed to minimize subsidence in certain areas" because this purpose was "genuine, substantial, and legitimate."Keystone Bituminous Coal Ass'n, 480 U.S. at 485-86. Basically, the Court found that the Subsidence Act was meant to protect the general well-being of the community, rather than just a select few in the community, and was an acceptable use of the police power.
Second, the Court pointed out that the two cases are distinguishable because they were decided at different points in time. The Subsidence Act showed that "'[C]ircumstances may so change in time ... as to clothe with such a [public] interest what at other times ... would be a matter of purely private concern.'" Therefore, during the 44 years between the Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon decision and the enactment of the Subsidence Act there was a change in the public's attitude toward regulations affecting private land.
A third difference between the two cases was that the mining being regulated in this case was compared to a public nuisance, while the mining being regulated in Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon was not. In this case, the Court held that there is not a taking if "the State merely restrains uses of property that are tantamount to public nuisances."Keystone Bituminous Coal Ass'n, 480 U.S. at 491. This public nuisance argument is associated with the "'reciprocity of advantage'" analysis in takings law. Reciprocity of advantage means that people may have burdensome restrictions on their private property, but they will benefit greatly from the restrictions that are placed on others. Apparently, the Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon majority did not think there was a reciprocity of advantage in restricting the few private landowners' land use, but the Keystone majority did.
The last difference between the two cases was the diminution in value of the coal companies' properties. In Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon, "mining of 'certain coal'" was deemed "commercially impracticable" as a result of the Kohler Act. Here, the Court held that there was no "show[ing of] any deprivation significant enough to satisfy the heavy burden placed upon one alleging a regulatory taking." The Court categorized the cause of action in this case as a "facial challenge" to the Act. From the Court's perspective, the petitioners challenged the statute's possible consequences without showing that any actual injury had occurred. As the Court mentioned, there was no evidence that any of the petitioners' mines could "no longer be mined for profit."
In regulatory takings cases, the Court "compare[s] the value that has been taken from the property with the value that remains in the property."Frank I. Michelman, Property, Utility, and Fairness: Comments on the Ethical Foundations of "Just Compensation" Law, 80 Harv. L. Rev. 1165, 1192 (1967)  The property that the Court analyzed was the whole parcel, not "discrete segments" of the whole property.Keystone Bituminous Coal Ass'n, 480 U.S. at 497. So, the Court found that the 27 million tons of coal to be left in place was not "a separate segment of property for takings law purposes." Instead, the Court looked at the petitioners' total amount of coal. For this reason, the Court decided that the Subsidence Act had not denied the petitioners "economically viable use" of their coal mine properties and that their "reasonable 'investment-backed expectations'" in the properties had not been "materially affected."
The Court denied the petitioners' argument that their support estate had been taken. It analogized the support estate in this case to the "air rights" above Grand Central Station in Penn Central Transportation Co. v. New York City (1978) and found that it was not "a separate segment of property for Takings Clause purposes." Declining to allow state law definitions of property interests to govern its takings analysis, the Court viewed Pennsylvania's three estates in land as one combined property interest.Keystone Bituminous Coal Ass'n, 480 U.S. at 500.
Finally, the petitioners' Contract Clause violation claim alleged that Section 6 of the Subsidence Act interfered with the liability waivers that they had with surface property owners.  Rejecting this claim, the Court held that the state's "strong public interest" in preventing subsidence outweighed any contractual obligations between surface property owners and the petitioners.
Dissent
In his dissenting opinion, Chief Justice Rehnquist argued that the facts of this case were analogous to the facts of Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon and that the Subsidence Act effected a taking of the petitioners' property without just compensation.
To begin with, Rehnquist attacked the majority's view that Justice Holmes' opinion in PA Coal was "uncharacteristically ... advisory." Rehnquist believed that no part of the Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon opinion was advisory in nature. In fact, he found the majority's opinion "particularly disturbing" and believed that their disregard for Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon essentially ignored a case that "for 65 years [had] been the foundation of [the Court's] 'regulatory takings' jurisprudence." He pointed to the often quoted phrase from Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon that "'if regulation goes too far it will be recognized as a taking'" and listed five cases where it had been relied on in reaching an outcome. Rehnquist was very troubled by the fact that Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon had been cited and relied on as precedent in previous takings cases, but was now only considered to be advisory.Keystone Bituminous Coal Ass'n, 480 U.S. at 507-08 (Rehnquist, C.J., dissenting).
Rehnquist also disagreed with the majority because he felt that the Kohler Act in Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon was intended to benefit private parties and the general public. He argued that similar to the purpose of the Subsidence Act, the Kohler Act was intended to prevent damage to buildings, infrastructure, pipelines, and avoid injuries and deaths. So, he believed that both statutes had public purposes and were too similar to be distinguished.Keystone Bituminous Coal Ass'n, 480 U.S. at 511. In his opinion, both statutes were designed to protect not only private interests, but public interests as well.
Pointing to precedent cases, Rehnquist didn’t believe that this case fell under the “nuisance exception” either. He argued that the majority expanded the nuisance exception concept farther than it should have by putting this case in that category. Instead, the nuisance exception should only encompass the "prevent[ion of] a misuse or illegal use."
Finally, Rehnquist argued it was incorrect for the majority to overlook Pennsylvania's three defined property interests. He disagreed with the majority's view that the 27 million tons of coal that couldn't be mined as a result of the Subsidence Act wasn't a separate property interest.Keystone Bituminous Coal Ass'n, 480 U.S. at 515. Rehnquist pointed out that Pennsylvania divides property interests into three categories. These categories are "the support estate, the surface estate, and the mineral estate." Each interest is deemed separate from the other and may have separate owners in fee simple.Captline v. County of Allegheny, 459 A.2d 1298, 1301 (Pa. Commw. Ct. 1983) For example, under Pennsylvania law, one person could own the surface estate, a second person could own the support estate, and a third person could own the mineral estate. If one owner purchased a mineral estate to  mine and couldn't after the Subsidence Act was passed, then it reduced the value of that estate. Instead of considering the three separate estates in land, Rehnquist believed that the majority only considered a "broader, yet undefined, segment of property." Looking at this broader property interest led the majority to hold that there was no taking of the whole estate (the three separate estates combined). Rehnquist did not agree with the majority's analysis on this issue and would have found a taking.
Supreme Court cases cited
Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon, 260 U.S. 393 (1922)
Andrus v. Allard, 444 U.S. 51 (1979)
Agins v. City of Tiburon, 447 U.S. 255 (1980)
Penn Central Transportation Co. v. New York City, 438 U.S. 104 (1978)
Block v. Hirsh, 256 U.S. 135 (1921)
Plymouth Coal Co. v. Pennsylvania, 232 U.S. 531 (1914)
Mugler v. Kansas, 123 U.S. 623 (1887)
Hadacheck v. Sebastian, 239 U.S. 394 (1915)
Reinman v. Little Rock, 237 U.S. 171 (1915)
Powell v. Pennsylvania, 127 U.S. 678 (1888)
Miller v. Schoene, 276 U.S. 272 (1928)
Euclid v. Ambler Realty Co., 272 U.S. 365 (1926)
Omnia Commercial Co. v. United States, 261 U.S. 502 (1923)
Goldblatt v. Town of Hempstead, 369 U.S. 590 (1962)
California Reduction Co. v. Sanitary Reduction Works, 199 U.S. 306 (1905)
Kimball Laundry Co. v. United States, 338 U.S. 1 (1949)
Hodel v. Virginia Surface Mining & Reclamation Association, 452 U.S. 264 (1981)
Socialist Labor Party v. Gilligan, 406 U.S. 583 (1972)
Rescue Army v. Municipal Court, 331 U.S. 549 (1947)
Alabama State Federation of Labor v. McAdory, 325 U.S. 450 (1945)
Kaiser Aetna v. United States, 444 U.S. 164 (1979)
Gorieb v. Fox, 274 U.S. 603 (1927)
W.B. Worthen Co. v. Thomas, 292 U.S. 426 (1934)
Home Building & Loan Ass'n v. Blaisdell, 290 U.S. 398 (1934)
Manigault v. Springs, 199 U.S. 473 (1905)
Hudson Water Co. v. McCarter, 209 U.S. 349 (1908)
Allied Structural Steel Co. v. Spannaus, 438 U.S. 234 (1978)
Energy Reserves Group, Inc. v. Kansas Power & Light Co., 459 U.S. 400 (1983)
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 480
Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon (1922)
Penn Central Transportation Co. v. New York City (1978)
 References 
Further reading
Susan J. Krueger, Comment, Keystone Bituminous Coal Association v. DeBenedictis: Toward Redefining Takings Law, 64 N.Y.U.L. Rev. 877 (1989).
External links
Stuart Taylor, Jr, High Court Bolsters States' Control Over Mining, N.Y. Times, Mar. 10, 1987, at D2.
Posting of Benjamin Barros to PropertyProf Blog, http://lawprofessors.typepad.com/property/2006/03/why_singling_ou.html (Mar. 30, 2006).
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States land use case law
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:Coal mining in the United States
Category:Mining in Pennsylvania
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Coal mining law
"""

From "Kidd v. Pearson" ==> """
Kidd v. Pearson, 128 U.S. 1 (1888), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a distinction between manufacturing and commerce meant that an Iowa law that prohibited the manufacture of alcohol (in this case for sale out-of-state) was constitutional as it did not conflict with the power of the US Congress to regulate interstate commerce.
Background
In 1882, Iowa became a dry state with a passage of a state constitutional amendment. An Iowa state law supporting that prohibition made the manufacturing of liquor in Iowa illegal unless it was for mechanical, medicinal, culinary, and sacramental purposes.  Nonetheless, the Polk County Board of Supervisors granted J. S. Kidd a license to operate a distillery in 1884 for other uses based on his intent to only sell the liquor outside the state of Iowa. When the state moved to close the distillery as a public nuisance, Kidd sued and argued it was outside of state jurisdiction as an exclusively interstate business under the commerce clause.
Question before the Supreme Court
Is there a conflict between the power of Congress to regulate interstate commerce.
Decision of the Court
The court ruled that there was not a conflict between Congress' power to regulate interstate commerce and the state law covering manufacturing within a given state. Therefore, the law was valid..
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 128
Varnum v. Brien, 763 N.W.2d 862 (Iowa 2009), another U.S. Supreme Court case from Polk County
References
Further reading
External links
Category:1888 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:Prohibition in the United States
Category:Legal history of Iowa
Category:Polk County, Iowa
"""

From "Kiefer-Stewart Co. v. Seagram & Sons, Inc." ==> """
Kiefer-Stewart Co. v. Seagram & Sons, Inc., 340 U.S. 211 (1951), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court, which held that an agreement among competitors in interstate commerce to fix maximum resale prices of their products violates the Sherman Antitrust Act.. 
Background
The petitioner, Kiefer-Stewart Company, was an Indiana drug concern which does a wholesale liquor business. Respondents, Seagram and Calvert corporations, are affiliated companies that sell liquor in interstate commerce to Indiana wholesalers. Kiefer-Stewart brought this action in a federal district court for treble damages under the Sherman Act,  and . The complaint charged that respondents had agreed or conspired to sell liquor only to those Indiana wholesalers who would resell at prices fixed by Seagram and Calvert, and that this agreement deprived Kiefer-Stewart of a continuing supply of liquor, to its great damage.
On the trial, evidence was introduced tending to show that Seagram had fixed maximum prices above which the wholesalers could not resell. The jury returned a verdict for petitioner, and damages were awarded. The United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit reversed. It held that an agreement among respondents to fix maximum resale prices did not violate the Sherman Act, because such prices promoted, rather than restrained, competition. It also held the evidence insufficient to show that respondents had acted in concert. Doubt as to the correctness of the decision on questions important in antitrust litigation prompted the Supreme Court to grant certiorari.
Holding
The Supreme Court ruled that the Court of Appeals erred in holding that an agreement among competitors to fix maximum resale prices of their products does not violate the Sherman Act. For such agreements, no less than those to fix minimum prices, cripple the freedom of traders, and thereby restrain their ability to sell in accordance with their own judgment. The Supreme Court reaffirmed United States v. Socony-Vacuum Oil Co. (1940):
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 340
Albrecht v. Herald Co. (1968)
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:1951 in United States case law
Category:Seagram
"""

From "Kilbourn v. Thompson" ==> """
Kilbourn v. Thompson, 103 U.S. 168 (1880), was a United States Supreme Court case that dealt with the question whether or not the United States House of Representatives may compel testimony. 
Hallet Kilbourn was subpoenaed to testify before a Special Committee established by the House of Representatives to investigate the bankruptcy of Jay Cooke & Company. Though he appeared, he refused to answer any questions and did not tender requested documents. John G. Thompson, Sergeant-At-Arms for the House, took Kilbourn into custody. Kilbourn continued to refuse to testify and provided no explanation for his refusal. The House resolved that Kilbourn was in contempt and should be held in custody until he agreed to testify and produce the requested documents. The Court found that the House did have the power to punish for contempt. However, House members could not be sued for false imprisonment as they were exercising their official duties and protected by the Speech and Debate Clause, Art. I, § 6, cl. 1.  In addition the Supreme Court established several limits in the scope of investigations, called the "Kilbourn Test". 
The Kilbourn Test
(1) Inquiries must not "invade areas constitutionally reserved to the courts or the executive"
(2) Inquiries must deal "with subjects on which Congress could validly legislate"
(3) The resolution authorizing the investigation must specify " a congressional interest in legislating on that subject."
(4) Where the inquiry can result in "no valid legislation," then the "Private affairs of individuals" are not valid targets for inquiry
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 103
Calder v. Bull, 
Ex parte Milligan, 
United States v. Cruikshank, 
Further reading
External links
The road to impeachment* 
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States House of Representatives
Category:1880 in United States case law
Category:Speech or Debate Clause case law
Category:Legal tests
"""

From "Kimball Laundry Co. v. United States" ==> """
Kimball Laundry Co. v. United States, 338 U.S. 1 (1949), affirmed the principle set forth in The West River Bridge Company v. Dix et al., ; that is, that intangible property rights are condemnable via the eminent domain power, and that just compensation must be given to the owners of such rights.
In this case, the United States filed a petition in the United States District Court for the District of Nebraska to condemn the plant of the Kimball Laundry Company in Omaha, Nebraska, for use by the Army. After the District Court granted the United States immediate possession of the facilities of the company for the requested period, the owner of the family business claimed that he had been denied just compensation, and contended that the award should have included some allowance for diminution in the value of the business due to the destruction of its customer base.
Supreme Court Decision
This litigation began after the United States took over a laundry's facilities to do washing for the army.  The laundry, having no other means of serving its customers, suspended business for the duration of the army's occupation.  The company was given the rental value of the facilities for the period the army used the premises, but no award for the loss of customers and resultant diminution in going business value, which was claimed by the company and recognized as probable by the appraisers.D. Michael Risinger, Direct Damages: The Lost Key To Constitutional Just Compensation When Business Premises Are Condemned, 15 Seton Hall L. Rev. 483 (1985).
The Court, through Justice Frankfurter, made the government pay the diminution in the going concern value of the business. In reaching this conclusion, Justice Frankfurter first observed that the loss in going concern value, though related in part to intangibles, is property capable of being destroyed by the government so as to give rise to an obligation of just compensation under the Fifth Amendment.
In his opinion, Frankfurter posed the question: "When do such circumstances occur?"  Justice Frankfurter conceded, arguendo, that such circumstances do not arise in the normal taking of a fee interest.  This, he said, could only be justifiable because the intangible parts of the value of the business are normally transferable. Note that he did not say that there can never be a fee condemnation situation giving rise to an obligation to give full going business value as just compensation. In fact, he illustrated that obligation by cases involving the taking of the land and buildings of a public utility.  Frankfurter concluded:
But the public utility cases plainly cannot be explained by the fact that the taker received the benefit of the utility's going concern value. If benefit to the taker were made the measure of compensation, it would be difficult to justify higher compensation for farm land taken as a firing range than for swamp or sandy waste equally suited to the purpose. It would be equally difficult to deny compensation for value to the taker in excess of value to owner. The rationale of the public utility cases, as opposed to those in which circumstances have brought about a diminution of going concern value although the owner remained free to transfer it, must therefore be that an exercise of the power of eminent domain which has the inevitable effect of depriving the owner of the going concern value of his business is a compensable "taking" of property.Kimball Laundry Co. v. United States
Thus, the Court reasoned that “the intangible acquires a value . . . no different from the value of the business’ physical property,” and concluded that intangibles such as trade routes of a laundry service were condemnable, upon payment of just compensation, when properly taken for a public use.
Concurring Opinion
Justice Rutledge understood the majority opinion to stand for the proposition that short-term takings of property entail considerations not present where complete title has been taken, and agreed with at least this much of the decision.  However, he cautioned against a formulation of theoretical rules defining their nature or prescribing their measurement (for purposes of compensation), and noted that what seems theoretically sound may prove unworkable for judicial administration.  He concluded:
But I do not understand the opinion of the Court to do more than indicate possible approaches to the compensation of such interests.  Since remand of the case will permit the empirical testing of these approaches, I join in the Court's opinion.
Dissenting Opinion
Justice Douglas, with whom Justices Black, Vinson, and Reed concurred, dissented from the majority decision, and asserted that the majority decision forced the United States to pay not for what it gets, but for what the owner loses.  Warning that the majority decision "forged new constitutional doctrine," the dissent argued that government was only required to pay just compensation for the property that it actually receives.  That the trade routes were of no use to the government was particularly persuasive to the dissenting Justices, and they argued that if the business was destroyed, the destruction was an unintended incident of the taking of land, and thus not compensable.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 338
References
External links
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1949 in United States case law
Category:History of Omaha, Nebraska
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
"""

From "Kimble v. Marvel Entertainment, LLC" ==> """
Kimble v. Marvel Entertainment, LLC, 576 U.S. 446 (2015), is a significant decision of the United States Supreme Court for several reasons. One is that the Court turned back a considerable amount of academic criticism of both the patent misuse doctrine as developed by the Supreme Court and the particular legal principle at issue in the case. Another is that the Court firmly rejected efforts to assimilate the patent misuse doctrine to antitrust law and explained in some detail the different policies at work in the two bodies of law. Finally, the majority and dissenting opinions informatively articulate two opposing views of the proper role of the doctrine of stare decisis in US law.
The narrow issue in Kimble v. Marvel was whether the Court should overrule the 50-year-old proposition in Brulotte v. Thys Co., 379 U.S. 29 (1964), that a patent license agreement requiring royalties for the period beyond the life of the licensed patent was unenforceable under the Supremacy Clause, state contract law notwithstanding, because it involved a misuse of patent rights. The Supreme Court in the Kimble case refused to overrule Brulotte and its doctrine against post-expiry royalties.
Criticism of Brulotte
In 1964 the Supreme Court decided Brulotte v. Thys Co., in which it held that a contract to pay patent royalties beyond the expiration of the patent was unenforceable. The decision was widely criticized in academic circles and by the patent bar, as well as in lower court decisions. The thrust of the criticism was that the patent misuse doctrine should be based on antitrust law principles, and that conduct without a significant anticompetitive effect should not be proscribed.
In its opinion in the Kimble case, the Supreme Court listed some of the criticism suggesting that the Brulotte decision was wrong and should be overruled:561 U.S. at - n.3.
 Scheiber v. Dolby Labs., Inc., 293 F. 3d 1014, 1017–1018 (CA7 2002) (Posner, J.) (Brulotte has been "severely, and as it seems to us, with all due respect, justly criticized . . . However, we have no authority to overrule a Supreme Court decision no matter how dubious its reasoning strikes us, or even how out of touch with the Supreme Court's current thinking the decision seems")
 Ayres & Klemperer, Limiting Patentees' Market Power Without Reducing Innovation Incentives: The Perverse Benefits of Uncertainty and Non-Injunctive Remedies, 97  985, 1027 (1999) ("Our analysis . . . suggests that Brulotte should be overruled").
Other criticism of Brulotte includes the following:
 Harold See and Frank M. Caprio, The Trouble with Brulotte: The Patent Royalty Term and Patent Monopoly Extension, 1990 Utah L. Rev. 813 (1990).
 Note, Patents: Supreme Court Holds Post-Expiration Royalty Agreements Unlawful Per Se, 1965  L.J. 836, 841 (1965) ("Thus, the ambiguity in Brulotte, so long as it remains unresolved, may greatly limit marketing available to [patentees].").
 Paul Goldstein, Federal System Ordering of the Copyright Interest, 69  49, 70 (1969) (" In the presence of only the most attenuated federal interest, and absent any generalized public concern, the Brulotte rule gives to the federal courts a broad and probably illegitimate supervisory power over state administration of private contracts.").
 Richard A. Posner. Transaction Costs and Antitrust Concerns in the Licensing of Intellectual Property, 4 J. Marshall Rev. Intell. Prop. L. 325, 332 (2005) ("Brulotte does not reflect the Supreme Court's current thinking about competition and monopoly, but it will continue to bind the lower courts until the Supreme Court decides to overrule it.").
 In addition, decisions of the Federal Circuit have held that a patent cannot be held to have been misused without a showing of substantial anticompetitive effects, except where the Supreme Court has expressly ruled otherwise.See, e.g., Princo v. ITC, 616 F.3d 1318, 1328 (Fed. Cir. 2010) ("impermissibly broadened the physical or temporal scope of the patent grant and has done so in a manner that has anticompetitive effects"); Mallinckrodt, Inc. v. Medipart, Inc., 976 F.2d 700, 706 (Fed. Cir. 1992) ("To sustain a misuse defense involving a licensing arrangement not held to have been per se anticompetitive by the Supreme Court, a factual determination must reveal that the overall effect of the license tends to restrain competition unlawfully in an appropriately defined relevant market."); Windsurfing Int'l Inc. v. AMF, Inc., 782 F.2d 995, 1001-02 (1986).
Other commentators, however, have rejected adoption of an antitrust lens for analysis of patent misuse:
 Robin C. Feldman, The Insufficiency of Antitrust Analysis for Patent Misuse, 55  L.J. 399, 422 (2003) ("the antitrust rule of reason focuses on one particular issue: the impact on competition, rather than all possible equitable considerations" relevant to patent policy); id. at 448 ("A behavior that retards the progress of science would be of concern to patent policy" but antitrust tests are not attuned to this type of problem.")
 Marshall Leaffer, Patent Misuse and Innovation, 10 J.  L. 142, 148 (2010) ("patent misuse should transcend the contours of traditional antitrust law and should concern itself with policy of patent law and the effect on innovation").
Background
thumb|right|200px|Drawing of patented device in patent
In 1990, plaintiff Stephen Kimble obtained U.S. Patent No. 5,072,856 on a toy that allows children and other persons interested in role-playing as "Spider-Man" to shoot a spider web—really, pressurized foam string—"from the palm of [the] hand."Kimble, 135 S. Ct. at 2405.
Defendant Marvel Entertainment, LLC makes and markets products featuring Spider-Man. Kimble sought to sell or license his patent to Marvel's corporate predecessor and met with its president to negotiate a contract. But the company instead began marketing the "Web Blaster"—a toy that, like Kimble's patented invention, enables users to mimic Spider-Man by shooting foam string. Kimble sued Marvel in 1997, alleging breach of contract and patent infringement. The parties settled that litigation and Marvel agreed to purchase Kimble's patent in exchange for a lump sum (of about a half-million dollars) and a 3% running royalty on Marvel's future sales of the Web Blaster and similar products. The parties set no end date for royalties, apparently contemplating that they would continue for as long as customers wanted to buy the product.Kimble, 135 S. Ct. at 2406.
Marvel subsequently learned of the Brulotte decision and realized that under the Brulotte doctrine it was not obliged to pay royalties after the patent expired. Kimble sued Marvel for breach of contract and Marvel counterclaimed for a declaration that it was no longer obligated to pay Kimble after the patent expired. Marvel prevailed in the litigation.Kimble v. Marvel Enters., Inc., 692 F. Supp. 2d 1156 (D. Ariz. 2010).
The Ninth Circuit reluctantly affirmed. It said:
The . . . criticism [of Brulotte] is particularly apt in this case. The patent leverage in this case was vastly overshadowed by what were likely non-patent rights, and Kimble may have been able to obtain a higher royalty rate had the parties understood that the royalty payments would stop when the patent expired. Nonetheless, Brulotte and its progeny are controlling. We are bound to follow Brulotte and cannot deny that it applies here.Kimble v. Marvel Enterprises Inc., 727 F.3d 856, 8__ (9th Cir. 2013).
Supreme Court ruling
The Supreme Court affirmed the judgment below, 6-3, largely on stare decisis grounds, but in the course of its ruling the Court explained why the Brulotte decision was correct and its critics wrong, as to the substantive law.
Majority opinion
thumb|100px|Justice Kagan
The majority opinion by Justice Elena Kagan began by explaining how the US patent system reflects a congressional "balance between fostering innovation and ensuring public access to discoveries." Consequently, once the statutory term of the patent monopoly ends, "the right to make or use the article, free from all restriction, passes to the public."135 S. Ct. at 2406-07.
The Court elaborated the point:
In case after case, the Court has construed those laws to preclude measures that restrict free access to formerly patented, as well as unpatentable, inventions. In one line of cases, we have struck down state statutes with that consequence.  By virtue of federal law, we reasoned, "an article on which the patent has expired," like an unpatentable article, "is in the public domain and may be made and sold by whoever chooses to do so." In a related line of decisions, we have deemed unenforceable private contract provisions limiting free use of such inventions. . . .[F]or example, we determined that a manufacturer could not agree to refrain from challenging a patent's validity. Allowing even a single company to restrict its use of an expired or invalid patent, we explained, "would deprive ... the consuming public of the advantage to be derived" from free exploitation of the discovery. And to permit such a result, whether or not authorized "by express contract," would impermissibly undermine the patent laws.135 S. Ct. at 2407 (citations omitted).
"Brulotte was brewed in the same barrel," the Court said. Agreements under which patent royalties must be paid after the patent expires "conflict with patent law's policy of establishing a 'post-expiration . . . public domain' in which every person can make free use of a formerly patented product."135 S. Ct. at 2407-08.
Brulotte is no bar to business arrangements to defer payment or create joint enterprises, the Court observed. Nonetheless, "Kimble asks us to abandon Brulotte in favor of 'flexible, case-by-case analysis' of post-expiration royalty clauses 'under the rule of reason,' " as under the antitrust laws. But the antitrust approach requires courts to undertake a complex analysis "taking into account a variety of factors, including specific information about the relevant business, its condition before and after the [practice] was imposed, and the [practice's] history, nature, and effect. . . a full-fledged economic inquiry into the definition of the market, barriers to entry, and the like."135 S. Ct. at 2408-09.
Putting aside for the moment the merits and demerits of taking an antitrust approach to the issue, the court turned to the role of stare decisis, acknowledging that sometimes it "means  sticking to some wrong decisions." The reason for that is that usually it is "more important that the applicable rule of law be settled than that it be settled right." Moreover:
Overruling precedent is never a small matter. Stare decisis—in English, the idea that today's Court should stand by yesterday's decisions—is a foundation stone of the rule of law. Application of that doctrine, although not an inexorable command, is the preferred course because it promotes the evenhanded, predictable, and consistent development of legal principles, fosters reliance on judicial decisions, and contributes to the actual and perceived integrity of the judicial process. It also reduces incentives for challenging settled precedents, saving parties and courts the expense of endless relitigation.135 S. Ct. at 2409.
Therefore, for the courts to reverse course there must be a "special, justification" over and beyond just a belief that the precedent was wrongly decided. This is especially true for statutes, as in this case: For "critics of our ruling can take their objections across the street, and Congress can correct any mistake it sees." Moreover, in this case, "Congress has spurned multiple opportunities to reverse Brulotte"—50 years or more during which Congress repeatedly amended the patent laws without disturbing Brulotte and it even "rebuffed bills that would have replaced Brulotte 's per se rule with the same antitrust-style analysis Kimble now urges."135 S. Ct. at 2409-10.
The Court then returned to the patent policy issues it had described earlier. They reinforced the reasons for following stare decisis here and not disturbing the Brulotte precedent.
"First, Brulottes statutory and doctrinal underpinnings have not eroded over time." There was no change in the law, by judicial or congressional action. "[T]he core feature of the patent laws on which Brulotte relied remains just the same. . . .Brulotte, then, is not the kind of doctrinal dinosaur or legal last-man-standing for which we sometimes depart from stare decisis." To the contrary, overruling Brulotte could undermine other case law and thus "unsettle stable law."135 S. Ct. at 2410.
Second, contrary to the critics, "nothing about Brulotte has proved unworkable." The ease of determining whether a license call for royalty payments after patent expiration "appears in still sharper relief when compared to Kimble's proposed alternative. Recall that he wants courts to employ antitrust law's rule of reason to identify and invalidate those post-expiration royalty clauses with anti-competitive consequences." That procedure requires an "elaborate inquiry" that "produces notoriously high litigation costs and unpredictable results." For that reason, "trading in Brulotte for the rule of reason would make the law less, not more, workable than it is now."135 S. Ct. at 2411.
According to Kimble, the Court states, post-expiration royalties are not anticompetitive; they are procompetitive. They lead to lower royalty rates during the patent term, which leads to lower consumer prices. Also, more companies can afford the cheaper licenses, fostering competition among the licensees. Even assuming that this is true, the Court responded, it misconceives the basis for Brulotte. "If Brulotte were an antitrust rather than a patent case, we might [decide] as Kimble would like." But this is a patent case—a patent misuse case. It rests on patent policy. "Congress had made a judgment: that the day after a patent lapses, the formerly protected invention must be available to all for free." The "choice of what patent policy should be" lies with Congress.135 S. Ct. at 2413.
Finally, the Court insisted: "In adhering to our precedent as against such complaints, we promote the rule-of-law values to which courts must attend while leaving matters of public policy to Congress."135 S. Ct. at 2414. The Court concluded with a literary flourish, by quoting from Amazing Fantasy #15, the source of one of the most famous themes of Spider-Man—with great power comes great responsibility.
Dissent
thumb|right|100px|Justice Alito
Speaking for himself and Justices Roberts and Thomas, Justice Samuel Alito dissented, asserting that the Court "employs stare decisis, normally a tool of [judicial] restraint, to reaffirm a clear case of judicial overreach." He insisted that Brulotte:
was not based on anything that can plausibly be regarded as an interpretation of the terms of the Patent Act. It was based instead on an economic theory—and one that has been debunked. The decision interferes with the ability of parties to negotiate licensing agreements that reflect the true value of a patent, and it disrupts contractual expectations. Stare decisis does not require us to retain this baseless and damaging precedent. . . . Brulotte was thus a bald act of policy making. It was not simply a case of incorrect statutory interpretation. It was not really statutory interpretation at all.135 S. Ct. at 2415.
He denied that the principle that stare decisis applies particularly to decisions based on statutes was relevant here. "When a precedent is based on a judge-made rule and is not grounded in anything that Congress has enacted, we cannot 'properly place on the shoulders of Congress' the entire burden of correcting 'the Court's own error.' "135 S. Ct. at 2418.
Justice Alito also rejected the antitrust-patent misuse distinction that the majority made: "Brulotte was an antitrust decision masquerading as a patent case."135 S. Ct. at 2418.
Finally, he disagreed about its being Congress's responsibility rather than the Court's to undo Brulotte:
Passing legislation is no easy task. . . .Within that onerous process, there are additional practical hurdles. A law must be taken up for discussion and not passed over in favor of more pressing matters, and Senate rules require 60 votes to end debate on most legislation. And even if the House and Senate agree on a general policy, the details of the measure usually must be hammered out in a conference committee and repassed by both Houses.135 S. Ct. at 2418-19.
Commentary
 Herbert Hovencamp disagreed with the Court's refusal to interpret patent misuse law through an antitrust lens. He favored widespread use of the antitrust rule of reason to judge the legality (and therefore enforceability) of all commercial transactions in this country. The effect, he said, would be to make arrangements like those in Brulotte "join the general run of agreements that are nearly always legal." He explained:
In other words, using antitrust rather than patent law to address post-expiration royalties would not create nearly the tempest of uncertainty that the Court feared. Nearly all of the situations applying it would simply be lawful. A tiny number of cases involving both market power and plausible anticompetitive exclusion or restraint on trade might be addressable under the antitrust laws. Such an approach would give the parties a better set of tools for managing innovation risk in sensible ways.Herbert Hovenkamp, Brulotte's Web (Aug. 7, 2015) at 19-20.
 Kevin Noonan in the Patent Docs blog lamented the decision, predicting that it will become "another justification for the legitimate scope of patent rights to be constricted to the point that patents no longer are able to promote progress."Kevin Noonan, Kimble v. Marvel Entertainment, LLC (2015),  (Aug. 20, 2015.
 Neil Wilkof in the IP Kat blog puzzled over the "strange judicial bedfellows" making up the six-justice majority: "the four so-called liberal Justices, Breyer, Ginsburg, Sotomayor and Kagan, joined by arch-conservative Justice Scalia and perennial swing vote Justice Kennedy." The four liberal justices "can be understood as giving expression to the longstanding liberal fear of 'over-extending' IP rights, especially patents, given the anticompetitive effects that in their view lurk in the exercise of patent rights." As for Justice Scalia:
[T]he impetus seems to derive from Justice Scalia's deeply rooted judicial conservatism rather than any concern with the scope of IP rights and their exploitation (or how the Brulotte rule has worked in practice). What is interesting is how he split ranks from the other three so-called conservative justices, Chief Justice Roberts, and Justices Thomas and Alito, who focused on what they viewed as the deeply flawed and anachronistic foundations that undergird the Brulotte decision. Justice Scalia seems to ignore these factors in favour of doctrinal considerations, which brought him to the same result as his liberal colleagues.Neil Wilkof, Kimble v Marvel Entertainment: when post-expiry patent royalties meet stare decisis  (July 27, 2015).
 Gene Quinn, in the IP Watchdog, marveled at the role of stare decisis in this case: "If you were going to write a ridiculous piece of fiction that no one in the industry would believe the plot would start with the United States Supreme Court citing stare decisis in a patent case." He compared the approach in Kimble with that in recent patent-eligibility decisions such as Alice v. CLS Bank, which he argued took an opposite view of stare decisis.Gene Quinn, Supreme Court applies stare decisis in patent case,  (June 22, 2015).
 Richard H. Stern, in the European Intellectual Property Review, views Kimble favorably, and sees it as reaffirming a line of previous Supreme Court precedents holding that the misuse doctrine is based on patent policy, not antitrust policy:
The effect of the Kimble decision would seem to be to roll back the line of Federal Circuit decisions culminating in Princo, which had made a showing of substantial anti-competitive effect in the relevant market an essential element of proof in most misuse cases. Kimble reaffirms the doctrine of [those Supreme Court] cases holding that misuse is not antitrust and does not need a showing of actual anticompetitive effect.Richard H. Stern, Kimble: Patent Misuse through the Lens of Patent Policy, not Antitrust Policy, (2016) 38  182, 189.
He wonders, however, whether determining what is patent policy will prove elusive, and points to areas where courts have differed—in particular, whether all types of misuse should result in unenforceability of the misused patent until the misuse is purged, rather than in just a requirement that the misuse must stop.Id. at 190–91. He therefore predicts further litigation because "the Kimble decision will not make those who think the present US patent misuse doctrine is too harsh creep away and vanish into mouse holes."Id. at 192,
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 576
 Patent misuse
References
External links
 Text of decision
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:Marvel Comics
Category:United States patent case law
Category:Spider-Man
Category:United States misuse law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Kimbrough v. United States" ==> """
Kimbrough v. United States, 552 U.S. 85 (2007), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court confirmed that federal district judges utilize, in an advisory (not as law) fashion, Federal Sentencing Guidelines, in cases involving conduct related to possession, distribution, and manufacture of crack cocaine.
 Background 
Derrick Kimbrough was indicted in September 2004 in federal court in Virginia on four drug-related counts: conspiracy to distribute both crack and powder cocaine; possession with intent to distribute more than 50 grams of crack cocaine; possession with intent to distribute powder cocaine; and possession of a firearm in furtherance of a drug trafficking offense. Kimbrough pleaded guilty to all four counts. Under the statutes that define these respective crimes, Kimbrough faced a sentence of between 15 years and life in prison. Based on the facts, Kimbrough admitted at his change-of-plea hearing, as well as the fact that Kimbrough had testified falsely at a codefendant's trial, the district court computed the applicable range under the federal sentencing guidelines at 18 to 22.5 years in prison.
Kimbrough's Guidelines range was so high because his offense involved both crack and powder cocaine. US District Court Judge Raymond Alvin Jackson observed that if Kimbrough's crime had involved powder cocaine only, his sentencing range would have been 97 to 106 months. The mandatory minimum sentence, in turn, was 180 months in prison, and the district judge imposed that sentence. Kimbrough was represented by Assistant Federal Public Defender Riley H. Ross III. The government was represented by Assistant United States Attorney William D. Murh.
The Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals vacated the sentence and remanded for further proceedings. Relying on a prior opinion, the appellate court stated that any sentence that fell outside the Guidelines range was per se unreasonable if that sentence was based on a policy disagreement with the fact that crack cocaine offenses are punished more harshly than powder cocaine offenses. The United States Supreme Court agreed to review the Fourth Circuit's reasoning in this case.
Majority opinion
Under the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, a drug trafficker dealing in crack cocaine is subject to the same sentence as one who trafficks in 100 times as much powder cocaine. The two drugs are chemically similar; they produce the same high, although the modes of ingestion differ. The result of the 100-to-1 ratio is that sentences for crack cocaine offenders are three to six times longer than those for powder cocaine offenders. As the United States Sentencing Commission concluded in a 2002 report, a "major supplier of powder cocaine may receive a shorter sentence than a low-level dealer who buys powder from the supplier but then converts it into crack" cocaine.
In the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986, heroin received a 10-to-1 ratio. Defendants responsible for 100 grams of heroin were subject to a five-year mandatory minimum, but defendants responsible for 1000 grams were subject to a ten-year mandatory minimum sentence. However, the Act imposed a 100-to-1 ratio for powder to crack cocaine. The same five-year mandatory minimum sentence applies to defendants who are held responsible for either 500 grams of powder cocaine or 5 grams of crack. The ten-year mandatory minimum applied to defendants responsible for either 5000 grams of powder cocaine or 50 grams of crack. The Sentencing Commission followed this approach when fixing penalties for powder and crack cocaine, even as it relied on empirical evidence culled from actual sentences imposed in other kinds of criminal cases to formulate the new Sentencing Guidelines.
Later, however, the Sentencing Commission came to the conclusion that the 100-to-1 ratio was "generally unwarranted." The ratio rests on unwarranted assumptions about the relative harmfulness of the two forms of the drugs. Crack cocaine was associated with "significantly less trafficking-related violence than previously assumed." It is no more harmful to developing fetuses than powder cocaine. The epidemic of crack addiction that had been feared in 1986 failed to materialize. Moreover, the 100-to-1 ratio indeed had the effect of punishing low-level dealers more harshly than major traffickers, because it was the low-level dealers and not the traffickers who converted the powder cocaine into crack. Finally, the ratio promoted widespread disrespect and distrust in the criminal justice system, especially because it promoted a racial discrepancy between the sentences imposed on cocaine defendants. Powder cocaine defendants tend to be white and receive shorter sentences than crack cocaine defendants, who tend to be black.
In 1995, the Commission proposed reducing the ratio to 1-to-1 and adding other enhancements targeted at crack cocaine crimes involving violence. Congress exercised its statutory authority to overrule this proposal. Undaunted, the Commission recommended reducing the ratio twice more—to 5-to-1 in 1997, and to 20-to-1 in 2002. Congress ignored these proposals. In 2006, the Commission unilaterally altered the sentencing ranges associated with crack cocaine, achieving in effect a 10-to-1 ratio in sentencing quantities. At the same time, however, it urged Congress to adopt a more comprehensive solution.
With the Court's decision in United States v. Booker, , which made the then-mandatory Guidelines "effectively advisory," district courts were again free to impose sentences that took into account the "history and characteristics of the defendant," the "nature and circumstances of the offense," disparities in sentences that might be "unwarranted," and other factors to fashion a sentence that is "sufficient but not greater than necessary" to achieve the overall goals of sentencing. Even though the commission had implemented the ratio in the Guidelines, the Government contended that the commission could not alter the 100-to-1 ratio because that was a policy choice that Congress had required the commission to implement. The Court rejected this argument for three reasons.
First, it lacked any foundation in the text of the 1986 Anti-Drug Act. Hence, if before Booker the Act could not require the Commission to implement any particular ratio, it cannot impose the same requirement on sentencing judges after Booker.
Second, the fact that in 1995 Congress disapproved the commission's effort to impose a 1-to-1 ratio did not mean that Congress meant for the 100-to-1 ratio to apply in perpetuity. Indeed, when the Commission effectively changed the ratio to 10-to-1, Congress did not disapprove.
Third, "as we explained in Booker, advisory Guidelines combined with appellate review for reasonableness and ongoing revision of the Guidelines in response to sentencing practices" will help to avoid disparities that might result from relaxing the 100-to-1 ratio. Accordingly, the Court affirmed the 180-month sentence the district court had imposed on Kimbrough.
Dissenting opinions
Justice Thomas continued to assert his disapproval of the remedial holding in United States v. Booker. "As a result of the Court's remedial approach, we are called upon to decide a multiplicity of questions that have no discernibly legal answers." One such question, in his view, was whether the district courts are free to disregard a "categorical policy judgment reflected in the Guidelines" when imposing a "reasonable" sentence.  "But the Court's answer to that question necessarily derives from something other than the statutory language or congressional intent."
Justice Alito dissented for the same reason as he did in Gall v. United States.
 See also 
 Fair Sentencing Act
External links
  Merits brief of petitioner Kimbrough
  Links to defense-side merits and amicus briefs
  Brief of the Government as respondent
  Info from the ACLU
  Unpublished decision of the Fourth Circuit
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Drug control law in the United States
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:United States Federal Sentencing Guidelines case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Cocaine in the United States
"""

From "Kimel v. Florida Board of Regents" ==> """
Kimel v. Florida Board of Regents, 528 U.S. 62 (2000), was a US Supreme Court case that determined that the US Congress's enforcement powers under the Fourteenth Amendment to the US Constitution did not extend to the abrogation of state sovereign immunity under the Eleventh Amendment over complaints of discrimination that is rationally based on age.
Facts and result
Employees of Florida State University and Florida International University, including J. Daniel Kimel, Jr., sued under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) of 1967 because the failure to adjust pay had a disparate impact on older employees. Wellington Dickson sued his employer, the Florida Department of Corrections, for not promoting him because of his age. Roderick MacPherson and Marvin Narz, who were associate professors at the University of Montevallo in Alabama, sued under the ADEA and alleged an evaluation system that discriminated against the elderly. The cases of Kimel, Dickson, MacPherson and Narz were consolidated on appeal to the Eleventh Circuit and remained consolidated when the Supreme Court granted certiorari.
Kimel invalidated the ADEA insofar as it allowed plaintiffs to sue states for money damages.Although the Kimel decision bars state employees from suing states for money damages for age discrimination, it is still possible to sue under Ex parte Young (1908) for prospective injunctive relief. See State Police for Automatic Retirement Ass'n v. DiFava, 317 F.3d 6, 12 (1st Cir. 2003) and Bd. of Trs. of the Univ. of Ala. v. Garrett, 531 U.S. 356, 374 n.9 (2001).  Ex parte Young allows state officials to be sued for injunctive relief if they violate federal law.
Legal background
Kimel concerned the ability of Congress to override the states' "sovereign immunity" using its power under the Fourteenth Amendment.  Sovereign immunity is a principle that originally comes from English law and referred to the immunity of the English monarch from suits. Sovereign immunity, according to the Supreme Court in Hans v. Louisiana (1890), normally prevents a state from being sued by its own citizens in federal court. That bar from suits, the Court stated, came from the Eleventh Amendment even though the express terms of the amendment provide only that citizens of one state cannot sue another state.
In Fitzpatrick v. Bitzer (1976), however, the Court made an exception to that usual rule. Fitzpatrick held that Congress could use its power under Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment, which allows Congress to enforce the substantive terms of the Fourteenth Amendment, including the Equal Protection Clause, by positive legislation, to override state sovereign immunity. However, in 1997, in City of Boerne v. Flores, the Court limited congressional power to override state sovereign immunity using the Fourteenth Amendment. For the first time, it required "congruence and proportionality" between the constitutional wrong and the congressionally-enacted remedy to protect constitutional rights.521 U.S. 507, 520 (1997).  Boerne held that only the Supreme Court could determine what constituted a constitutional wrong, and Congress was not allowed to increase the level of constitutional protection beyond what the Court had recognized.See 521 U.S. at 528–29. Specifically, Boerne interpreted the scope of Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment, which states, "The Congress shall have power to enforce, by appropriate legislation, the provisions of this article."
The Court in Kimel based its decision in large part on Boerne. The importance of Kimel was the strict limits it placed on the ability of Congress to abrogate the states' sovereign immunity under Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Decision
Justice O'Connor wrote the majority opinion and stated that Congress, in enacting the ADEA, had properly declared its intent to subject states to suits for money damages by private individuals. The Court then noted that under its own equal protection jurisprudence, "age is not a suspect classification," and laws that classify on the basis of age need to pass only the Court's "rational basis review" test, as opposed to legal classifications based on race or gender if a "history of purposeful unequal treatment" leads the Court to apply strict scrutiny to such laws. The Court then contrasted rational basis review with the ADEA, which prohibits all employment discrimination on the basis of age except if age is a "bona fide occupational qualification."29 U.S.C. § 623(f)(1). The Court concluded that the ADEA "prohibits substantially more state employment decisions and practices than would likely be held unconstitutional under the applicable equal protection, rational basis standard."  Therefore, the ADEA's remedy failed the "congruence and proportionality" test required by Boerne and so it was not "a valid exercise of constitutional authority" under Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment.
In explaining the application of rational basis review to classifications based on age, the majority stated:
Justice Stevens wrote a dissenting opinion that stated, "There is not a word in the text of the Constitution supporting the Court's conclusion that the judge-made doctrine of sovereign immunity limits Congress' power to authorize private parties, as well as federal agencies, to enforce federal law against the States." Justice Stevens referred to the doctrine of sovereign immunity as expanded by Seminole Tribe v. Florida and Alden v. Maine as "judicial activism."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 528
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
Notes
External links
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Fourteenth Amendment, section five case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Legal history of Florida
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:Ageism case law
Category:Florida State University
"""

From "Kimmelman v. Morrison" ==> """
Kimmelman v. Morrison, 477 U.S. 365 (1986),Kimmelman v. Morrison, 477 U.S. 365 (1986) was a decision of the U.S. Supreme Court that clarified the relationship of the right to effective assistance of counsel under the Sixth Amendment to other constitutional rights in criminal procedure. In this case, evidence against the defendant was probably seized illegally, violating the Fourth Amendment, but he lost the chance to argue that point due to his lawyer's ineffectiveness. The prosecution argued that the defendant's attempt to make a Sixth Amendment argument via a habeas corpus petition was really a way to sneak his Fourth Amendment argument in through the back door. The Court unanimously disagreed, and held that the Fourth Amendment issue and the Sixth Amendment issue represented different constitutional values, and had different requirements for prevailing in court, and therefore were to be treated separately by rules of procedure. Therefore, the habeas corpus petition could go forward. In its opinion, the Court also gave guidance on how to apply its decisions in Stone v. Powell and Strickland v. Washington.
On the substance of the defendant's habeas corpus petition, the Court affirmed the decision of the Third Circuit Court of Appeals, which had said that half of Strickland's requirements were satisfied, and the other half would need to be reviewed by a trial court.
 Legal context 
In 1976, the Supreme Court decided Stone v. Powell, holding that state prisoners who claimed the exclusionary rule had been violated in their cases, but who had already had "full and fair" hearings on the issue in state court, could not have the issue re-heard via habeas corpus petitions in federal court. Part of the Court's reasoning had been that the exclusionary rule was not an individual right during trial, but a general way to protect the Fourth Amendment right against illegal searches and seizures. That meant it had less weight than individual trial rights, and its value had to weighed against the social costs of redundant litigation and limiting the effectiveness of police.
Over the next few years, there was disagreement among courts and legal scholars as to how far this ruling should apply, particularly when a defense attorney had incompetently failed to make a Fourth Amendment claim. Some felt that habeas corpus petitions should still be available, as the Sixth Amendment (incompetence) issue was separate from the Fourth Amendment issue, but others reasoned that the Fourth Amendment issue was the root cause in both scenarios, and therefore habeas corpus petitions should be barred.
 Procedural history in lower courts 
 Trial 
In 1978, Neil Morrison was indicted for raping a child, namely a 15-year-old girl who had worked for him.Morrison v. Kimmelman, 579 F. Supp. 796 (D. NJ 1984) During the six-day trial in 1979, the prosecution's evidence included testimony from the victim, the victim's mother, the detective who had handled the investigation, and laboratory technicians who had examined physical evidence recovered by the detective. That physical evidence included a bedsheet from Morrison's bed, from which the technicians had recovered incriminating hair, blood, and semen samples. When the bedsheet was introduced on the second day of trial, the defendant's lawyer objected on the grounds it had been seized without a warrant (violating the Fourth Amendment). However, New Jersey criminal procedure required that such objections be made via pre-trial motions to suppress. After the judge pointed this out, it became clear that the defense attorney had made no pre-trial investigation whatsoever. The attorney had assumed (incorrectly) that the prosecution was required to explain its case against his client without being asked. He also had believed that the victim would not press charges and there would be no trial. The judge explained that the victim's wishes no longer mattered once an indictment had been returned.
The defense attorney did put on a case, which included aggressively cross-examining the prosecution witnesses, and calling some of Morrison's friends as witnesses to establish a different version of events. Still, Morrison was convicted, and was sentenced to eight to ten years. He was also convicted on other counts, but the Appellate Court would later decide that they were redundant with the rape charge, and would merge the sentences.
 Appeals 
After his trial, Morrison replaced his attorney and appealed to the Appellate Division of the New Jersey Superior Court. Other than arguing that the separate charges should be merged (something the Appellate Division would grant), he made two arguments related to the contested evidence: 1) that his previous lawyer's failure to make an objection at the proper time was ineffective assistance of counsel, violating the Sixth Amendment, and 2) that the trial court had erred by not hearing his lawyer's objection (about the bedsheet and related testimony) during the trial, violating the Fourth Amendment. In a 1981 ruling, the Appellate division rejected both claims. To the first argument, it said that Morrison had failed to establish his lawyer's failures were significant enough to undermine the fairness of the trial. The second argument, it said, was "clearly without merit."State v. Morrison, A-4157-78 (NJ App.Div., Mar. 18, 1981). Morrison appealed to the New Jersey Supreme Court on both issues, but it declined to hear his case.State v. Morrison, 87 N.J. 368 (1981)
In 1982, Morrison made a petition for postconviction relief to the Law Division of the New Jersey Superior Court. However, because his claims were the same ones that had been raised on direct appeal, his petition was denied.
 Habeas corpus petition 
 District court 
In 1983, Morrison filed a habeas corpus petition in federal court, again arguing that his lawyer had provided ineffective assistance of counsel, and that the use of the bedsheet as evidence violated the Fourth Amendment. During oral argument, counsel for the state "admitted that on the record before the Court there was no apparent justification for the search and seizure." However, the district court observed that the 1976 Supreme Court case Stone v. Powell banned federal courts from considering claims that "evidence obtained in an unconstitutional search or seizure was introduced at trial" in habeas corpus petitions, as long as state courts had already allowed full litigation of the issue.
On the other hand, the claim of ineffective assistance of counsel was still viable. The district court relied on Third Circuit precedent (namely U.S. v. Baynes,United States v. Baynes, 687 F.2d 659 (3d Cir.1982) Moore v. U.S.,Moore v. United States, 432 F.2d 730 (3d Cir.1970) and U.S. v. SwinehartUnited States v. Swinehart, 617 F.2d 336 (3d Cir.1980)) which measured effective assistance by "the customary skill and knowledge which normally prevails at the time and place," and also required plaintiffs to show they were "prejudiced", i.e. that it was not "harmless error beyond a reasonable doubt." Calling the attorney's mistakes "unmitigated negligence," and stating that "[t]he evidence in this case was not overwhelming," the district court ruled in Morrison's favor, granting a writ of habeas corpus (i.e. the state would have to release Morrison or hold a new trial).
 Third Circuit Court of Appeals 
The state appealed. Just a few months after the district court made its ruling (February 1984), the U.S. Supreme Court issued its decision in Strickland v. Washington (May 1984), in which it reconciled competing standards for "ineffective assistance of counsel" that various federal circuits had established. This meant the Third Circuit Court of Appeals had to decide whether Morrison's Sixth Amendment claim held up under the new standard. In addition, the state of New Jersey argued that not only did Stone v. Powell block Morrison's Fourth Amendment claim (as the district court had held), but it should also block the Sixth Amendment claim, insofar as the defense attorney's error involved a Fourth Amendment issue.Morrison v. Kimmelman, 752 F. 2d 918 (3rd Cir. 1985)
Regarding Stone v. Powell, the Court noted that other Circuits had come to different conclusions about how it applied to ineffective assistance of counsel claims. The Second Circuit had blocked a Sixth Amendment claim,LiPuma v. Commissioner, 560 F.2d 84 (2d Cir.1977), cert. denied, 434 U.S. 861 (1978) but the Fourth Circuit had gone the other way,Sallie v. State of North Carolina, 587 F.2d 636 (4th Cir.1978), cert. denied, 441 U.S. 911 (1979) and district courts in other circuits similarly had differing opinions. Deciding not to use Stone v. Powell to block Morrison's Sixth Amendment claim, the Court said:
To review the Sixth Amendment claim itself, the new standard from Strickland v. Washington had two requirements: a lawyer's work would be deemed "ineffective" if 1) "counsel's representation fell below an objective standard of reasonableness," and 2) "but for counsel's unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different."Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668 (1984) The Court spent only two sentences determining that the first requirement was met. The second requirement, however, was a "mixed question of law and fact," and it was the point where the relevant legal standard had been changed the most by Strickland. Rather than review the question themselves, the Court chose to remand it to the district court. After all, the district court's ruling was only invalid because the law had changed.
The state petitioned for certiorari to the U.S. Supreme Court, which was granted.Kimmelman v. Morrison, 474 U. S. 815 (1985)
 Decision of the Supreme Court 
 Majority opinion 
The Supreme Court voted 9–0 to affirm the decision of the Third Circuit; there were only differences of opinion about how exactly to apply Stone v. Powell to future cases. The majority opinion was written by Justice Brennan and joined by five others. Brennan wrote that Fourth Amendment issues around evidence from illegal searches and seizures—which were the subject of Stone v. Powell—were fundamentally distinct from Sixth Amendment ineffective assistance of counsel issues. This meant they had to be treated differently, even when they intersected, and it would unjust to extend Stone's limitations to Sixth Amendment litigation.
 Fourth Amendment versus Sixth Amendment issues 
First, there were two distinct constitutional issues at work:
Second, the reasoning behind Stone v. Powell could not be extended to ineffective-assistance claims. Stone had given state governments a break from re-litigation of the exclusionary rule (which prevented illegally-seized evidence from being used in court), in the context of habeas corpus petitions in federal court, as long as the issue(s) had been properly litigated already in state courts.Stone v. Powell, 428 U.S. 465 (1976) The exclusionary rule was not itself a constitutional rule, but a judge-made rule that served to protect Fourth Amendment rights. That meant courts were free to reign in the exclusionary rule if it became too much of a burden. There were other exceptions to the exclusionary rule, such as grand jury hearings, and impeaching defendants who chose to testify on their own behalf.
In contrast, the right to assistance of counsel was an explicit constitutional right, and perhaps the most important right during a trial:
That meant that courts did not have freedom to curtail habeas corpus review of claims of ineffective assistance of counsel. Not only was the right a foundation of a fair trial, but most non-lawyers would not recognize that their lawyer had made errors, or grasp the severity of the errors, until they had a chance to talk to a different attorney about it. A defendant who retained their trial lawyer through all of their normal appeals therefore might be unaware of a viable ineffective-assistance claim until after those appeals, and then habeas corpus would be the only opportunity left.
Third, the majority did not buy the state's argument that allowing ineffective-assistance claims where the underlying error was a failure to press a Fourth Amendment issue would let prisoners circumvent Stone. The newly announced Strickland standard, like the standard the Third Circuit had previously used for ineffective assistance, had two requirements: 1) incompetent lawyering, and 2) prejudicial effect. Underlying Fourth Amendment issues were, at most, only relevant to the first, and only partially at that. Prisoners would also have to prove that their lawyer handled the viable Fourth Amendment incompetently at trial, and that the error was prejudicial under the "highly demanding" Strickland standard.
 Applying Strickland 
The majority opinion then turned to determining whether the requirements of Strickland were met. As to competence, the Court acknowledged that Strickland imposed a presumption in favor of attorney competence, and therefore the burden was on Morrison to establish his attorney's incompetence. Even so, the Court felt this burden was met:
With regard to the prejudicial effect requirement, the state tried to argue that the case should not be remanded for a new hearing, because the prosecution's other evidence had clearly been strong enough to convict even if the bedsheet had been excluded. The state relied on comments the trial judge had made during a post-conviction hearing for bail pending appeal, to the effect that the other evidence and witnesses had been more important than the bedsheet, and "[t]he sheet was just one small phase in this whole case." The state characterized this as "a finding of historical fact," which should presumed to be correct under the habeas corpus statute (28 U.S.C. § 2254(d)).
The Court did not find this convincing. First, it was a bail hearing, and the judge was not attempting to make factual findings. Rather, the task was to assess the reasonableness of Morrison's grounds for appeal. Furthermore, the judge's comments did not say enough to resolve the second prong of the Strickland test, so "[n]ot only was the judge not asked to answer the question presently before the federal courts, he did not answer it."
Morrison also disagreed with the decision of the Third Circuit to remand, arguing instead that the trial record was enough to show prejudice. The Court disagreed, noting 1) that there had never been an evidentiary hearing on the legality of the search and seizure, and the state had not conceded the issue, and 2) that the state still argued that the other evidence presented at trial had been enough to convict. The Court thus affirmed the Third Circuit's decision.
 Powell's concurrence 
Justice Powell, joined by Chief Justice Burger and Justice Rehnquist, agreed with the outcome the majority reached, i.e. that Stone v. Powell did not block Morrison's habeas corpus petition, and the case would be remanded to resolved the question of prejudicial effect. However, he writes,
Powell was concerned with an issue that had not been raised by the state, nor addressed by any party or court in the case so far: although illegal searches and seizures were a serious violation of the constitution, evidence obtained that way was usually reliable. The point of the right to the assistance of counsel under the Sixth Amendment was to safeguard the fairness of trials in and adversarial system, but if anything, excluding reliable evidence from a trial would tend to make it less fair. Given that this question was not properly presented to the court, Powell did not think it appropriate to make a ruling on the matter, but he felt the majority had glossed over the issue.
 Subsequent and related litigation 
 Remand 
On remand, the district court found that the prejudice requirement of Strickland was satisfied.Morisson v. Kimmelman, 650 F. Supp. 801 (Dist. N.J. 1986) The state did concede that the bedsheet was seized illegally, but it tried to argue, relying on the language of Powell's concurrence, that violations of the exclusionary rule could never be prejudicial under Strickland, but the court said the argument was "specifically rejected" by the majority. The state also made a motion to allow the trial judge to testify regarding the strength of the prosecution's case, and how he might have ruled in the absence of the bedsheet, and this was also denied, as "it is a firmly established rule in our jurisprudence that a judge may not be asked to testify about his mental processes in reaching a judicial decision." On the substance of the prejudice requirement, the Court found that the Strickland standard was fairly close to the test it had used before, and the writ of habeas corpus would be granted.
 Morrison's other case 
In 1980 (the year after the above rape trial), Morrison was tried and convicted for sexually abusing another 15-year-old girl.State v. Morrison, 522 A. 2d 473 (NJ App. Div. 1987) At first, he was represented by the same incompetent attorney (a man named Robert Goodman), and Goodman was again slow to realize that the state had seized evidence against his client. In this case, it was pantyhose recovered from the crime scene, a back room of Morrison's business. The state had a better argument for its legality, though, as the co-owner of the shop had possibly given permission for the search; it also turned out that cross-examination about the pantyhose undermined some of the victim's testimony. Given the mixed utility of the evidence at trial, when Morrison made an ineffective-assistance argument on a post-conviction petition, it was denied. That decision was appealed, and in 1987, the New Jersey Appellate Division applied the Strickland test, finding that Goodman was indeed incompetent, but the error had helped as much as it had hurt, so the prejudice requirement was not satisfied.
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of New Jersey
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment assistance of counsel case law
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:Prisoners' and ex-prisoners' rights
"""

From "Kentucky v. King" ==> """
Kentucky v. King, 563 U.S. 452 (2011), was a decision by the US Supreme Court, which held that warrantless searches conducted in police-created exigent circumstances do not violate the Fourth Amendment as long as the police did not create the exigency by violating or threatening to violate the Fourth Amendment..
 Legal background 
The Fourth Amendment requires searches and seizures be reasonable. The Court has held a search or seizure without a warrant presumptively unreasonable. However, there are many exceptions to the warrant requirement, including exigent circumstances, search incident to arrest, consent search, plain view, automobile exception, and border search exception.
Kentucky v. King involves the exigent circumstances exception to the warrant requirement. The Court has identified three exigent circumstances: emergency aid, hot pursuit, and destruction of evidence. The "emergency aid” exception allows officers to enter a home without a warrant to provide assistance to an occupant who is injured or under imminent threat of injury... The “hot pursuit” exception allows officers to pursue a fleeing suspect onto protected property without a warrant. The "destruction of evidence" exception permits warrantless entry when officers reasonably believe the occupants are destroying evidence of a crime.
Before Kentucky v. King was decided, lower courts had developed the "police-created exigency" doctrine, which stated that police may not create exigent circumstances to justify a warrantless search. The Supreme Court confronted the “police-created exigency” doctrine in Kentucky v. King.
 Facts 
Police officers in Lexington, Kentucky, set up a drug buy outside of an apartment complex using an undercover informant. After the suspect sold the informant crack cocaine, Officer Gibson, who was undercover watching the transaction from a nearby unmarked vehicle, called in uniformed officers to pursue the suspect. The officers pursued the suspect into a breezeway and lost sight of him. They heard a door close, but when they got to the end of the breezeway, they encountered two doors and did not know whether the suspect entered the apartment on the right or the left. Officer Gibson saw the suspect enter the door on the right, but the other officers did not hear his radio transmission because it went to their vehicle.
While the officers did not know which apartment the suspect was in, they could smell burning marijuana coming from inside the apartment on the left. According to the testimony of one of the officers, the officers began banging on the left door “as loud as [they] could” and announced, “‘This is the police,’” or “‘Police, police, police,’” after which they heard movements which they believed indicated evidence was going to be destroyed. They announced they were going to enter and kicked down the door. They found Hollis King, the defendant, his girlfriend, and a guest who was smoking marijuana. Upon a further search of the home, they found cash, drugs, and paraphernalia.
 Procedural posture 
King entered a conditional guilty plea in the Fayette Circuit Court, reserving his right to appeal denial of his motion to suppress evidence obtained from what he argued was an illegal search. The court sentenced King to eleven years in prison. The Kentucky Court of Appeals affirmed the conviction, holding that exigent circumstances supporting the warrantless search were not of the police's making and that police did not engage in deliberate and intentional conduct to evade the warrant requirement. In January 2010, the Kentucky Supreme Court reversed the lower court order, finding that the entry was improper. They reserved the issue of whether what the officers heard was sufficient to establish exigent circumstances. Even assuming exigent circumstances did exist, though, the Kentucky Supreme Court held that (1) officers cannot create exigent circumstances in bad faith and (2) even without bad faith, police cannot rely on exigent circumstances that are reasonably foreseeable from the officers' actions. They held the officers in this case violated the Fourth Amendment under the second theory.
 Issue 
Does the exigent circumstances rule, which allows police officers to conduct a warrantless search, apply if the police create the exigent circumstances without violating or threatening to violate the Fourth Amendment?
 Decision 
Justice Samuel Alito delivered the Court's majority opinion, holding that assuming for the purpose of argument that the exigent circumstances existed, the exigent circumstances rule applies because the officers did not create the exigency by violating or threatening to violate the Fourth Amendment.
Alito clarified the police-created exigency doctrine which had been percolating in the lower courts. He explained that the answer to that question, just as with any other Fourth Amendment question, is reasonableness: "the exigent circumstances rule justifies a warrantless search when the conduct of the police preceding the exigency is reasonable in the same sense. Where, as here, the police did not create the exigency by engaging or threatening to engage in conduct that violates the Fourth Amendment, warrantless entry to prevent the destruction of evidence is reasonable and thus allowed."
He rejected rules that impose requirements beyond lawful conduct, including bad faith; reasonable foreseeability; probable cause and time to secure a warrant; and standard or good investigative tactics. He also rejected King's proposed rule, which would prohibit officers from creating an exigency by “engag[ing] in conduct that would cause a reasonable person to believe that entry is imminent and inevitable,” for turning on "subtleties" and requiring a "nebulous and impractical test."
He explained that the police officers actions before they entered the apartment, knocking and announcing their presence, were lawful and "no more than any private citizen might do." Assuming but not deciding that there were exigent circumstances, the police actions did not violate the Fourth Amendment.
The Supreme Court reversed and remanded the lower court.
In her dissenting opinion, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg contended that the majority allowed police to “dishonor the Fourth Amendment’s warrant requirement in drug cases.” She would have ruled that the exigency must exist when the police arrive at the scene and may not be created by their own conduct. She further pointed out that the facts here are indistinguishable from Johnson v. United States, 333 U. S. 10 (1948) in which the Court held a warrantless entry and search to be unconstitutional.
 Aftermath 
In 2012, the Kentucky Supreme Court addressed the issue of whether exigency existed in the case, an issue that had been assumed by that court and the US Supreme Court. The state court decided that the prosecution had not met its burden of proving exigent circumstances to justify a warrantless entry since the police's testimony about movement inside the apartment were "indistinguishable from ordinary household sounds." The trial court's denial of King's motion to suppress was reversed, his conviction was vacated, and the case was remanded to the lower court.
See also
 Schmerber v. California, 384 U.S. 757 (1966) (5-4): “Destruction of evidence” exception to the warrant requirement allows police to draw blood from a DUI suspect without a warrant because the officer reasonably believes the blood alcohol percentage will diminish in evidentiary value in the time it will take to secure a warrant.
 Brigham City v. Stuart, 547 U.S. 398 (2006) (9-0): “Emergency aid” exception to the warrant requirement allows police to make a warrantless entry into a home when they have “an objectively reasonable basis for believing that an occupant is seriously injured or imminently threatened with such injury.”
 Illinois v. McArthur, 531 U.S. 326 (2001) (8-1): “Destruction of evidence” exception allows police to briefly seize defendant by ordering him to stay outside of his home to prevent him from destroying evidence while police obtained a search warrant for the home..
Payton v. New York, 445 U.S. 573 (1980): Absent exigent circumstances, police may not make a warrantless entry into a home in order to make a felony arrest.
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 563
References
Further reading
External links
Category:Drug control law in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:2011 in United States case law
"""

From "King v. Burwell" ==> """
King v. Burwell, 576 U.S. 473 (2015), was a 6–3 decision by the Supreme Court of the United States interpreting provisions of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA). The Court's decision upheld, as consistent with the statute, the outlay of premium tax credits to qualifying persons in all states, both those with exchanges established directly by a state, and those otherwise established by the Department of Health and Human Services.
The petitioners had argued that the plain language of the statute provided eligibility for tax credits only to those persons in states with state-operated exchanges. The Court found the plaintiffs' interpretation to be "the most natural reading of the pertinent statutory phrase." Nevertheless, the Court found the statute as a whole to be ambiguous, and that "the pertinent statutory phrase" ought to be interpreted in a manner "that is compatible with the rest of the law." The majority opinion stated: "Congress made the guaranteed issue and community rating requirements applicable in every State in the Nation. But those requirements only work when combined with the coverage requirement and tax credits. So it stands to reason that Congress meant for those provisions to apply in every State as well.", slip op. at 17-18 (2015).
 Background 
King v. Burwell, Halbig v. Burwell, Pruitt v. Burwell,The "v. Burwell" cases were  titled "v. Sebelius" until Kathleen Sebelius was replaced by Sylvia Mathews Burwell as United States Secretary of Health and Human Services on June 9, 2014. and Indiana v. IRS were federal lawsuits challenging U.S. Treasury regulation, 26 C.F.R. § 1.36B-2(a)(1), issued under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA). The challengers argued that the ACA allows for certain subsidies only on state-established exchanges, and that the regulation as implemented by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), providing for subsidies on state-run exchanges as well as federal exchanges, exceeded the authority Congress granted to it. The Competitive Enterprise Institute coordinated and funded the King and Halbig lawsuits.
Timothy Jost, a health law professor at the Washington and Lee University School of Law, wrote that if the challenges were successful, approximately 5 million Americans who obtained coverage through federal exchanges could have lost their tax credits and, in all likelihood, their health insurance coverage. According to Jost, the individual and employer mandates might also have "disappear[ed] or [been] severely undermined" in states with federal exchanges. Insurers, however, would still have been required to cover all applicants regardless of pre-existing conditions, which could have destabilized the individual insurance markets in states with federal exchanges and could have led to rapid rises in premiums and the possible collapse of one or more of those markets.
The Urban Institute estimated that a decision in favor of King would have resulted in 8.2 million more uninsured people in 34 states. Government figures released June 2, 2015 (for the period ending March 31, 2015) show that approximately 6.4 million Americans were enrolled in a federal exchange and received a supplement at that time, and thus, presumably would have lost the subsidy had the court found for the plaintiff.
On the benefits side, supporters of the plaintiffs argued that stopping unauthorized government spending was important in its own right, that issuing the subsidies was unlawfully subjecting 57 million Americans to taxes from which they were statutorily exempt, and that removing those subsidies "would lend transparency to the PPACA by revealing to millions of Exchange enrollees the full cost of the law’s mandates and regulations." The American Action Forum estimated a ruling for the plaintiffs would result in a pay increase of up to $940 per affected worker, 237,000 new jobs, and nearly 1.3 million workers added to the labor force.
As of 2015, sixteen states and the District of Columbia had set up their own exchanges.Thirteen states have a state-based exchange and use their own websites for enrollment. Had the court ruled in favor of King, one issue that would have needed to be resolved was whether the subsidies should be struck down in the three states–Nevada,  New Mexico, and Oregon–that have a state-based exchanges but used the federal healthcare.gov website for enrollment. If the subsidies and (in effect) the mandates had been struck down in the other 34 states, many thought that the economic foundation of the ACA would have been undermined, putting the entirety of the legislation at risk.  Supporters of the plaintiffs, as well as some politicians, also argued that the effects of striking down the subsidies would have been mitigated by government action (including the possibility of states setting up their own exchanges in response to a ruling in favor of the plaintiffs).
The district court in King, and the district court in Halbig both ruled against the plaintiffs. However, on July 22, 2014,  the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals in King and the D.C. Court of Appeals in Halbig came to opposite conclusions, creating a circuit split. When the D.C. appeals court decided to rehear the case en banc, however, the court vacated its initial ruling, removing the split. On September 9, 2014, in Pruitt v. Burwell, the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Oklahoma ruled for the plaintiffs, invalidating the IRS rule. On November 7, 2014, the Supreme Court granted certiorari in the King case. Oral arguments were heard on March 4, 2015, and a decision was handed down on June 25, 2015, with a win for the Obama administration preserving subsidies in states that have not established their own exchange.
Text of the law and regulation
The ACA legislation includes the language "enrolled in through an Exchange established by the State under 1311". As implemented by the IRS, ACA regulations use a more broad definition encompassing both the state exchanges and the federal exchanges set up under section 1321. The legislation includes the phrase "established by the State under 1311" in nine different locations.
Internal Revenue Code section 36B, enacted as part of the ACA, includes the following provision:
In the case of an applicable taxpayer, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this subtitle for any taxable year an amount equal to the premium assistance credit amount of the taxpayer for the taxable year.
(2) (a) the monthly premiums for such month for 1 or more qualified health plans offered in the individual market within a State which cover the taxpayer, the taxpayer's spouse, or any dependent (as defined in section 152) of the taxpayer and which were enrolled in through an Exchange established by the State under 1311  [1] of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, [...]
The IRS regulation reads:
(a) In general. An applicable taxpayer (within the meaning of paragraph (b) of this section) is allowed a premium assistance amount only for any month that one or more members of the applicable taxpayer's family (the applicable taxpayer or the applicable taxpayer's spouse or dependent)—
(1) Is enrolled in one or more qualified health plans through an Exchange [ . . . ]26 C.F.R. § 1.36B-2(a)(1).
The IRS defined the term "Exchange" as:
[ . . . ] a governmental agency or non-profit entity that meets the applicable standards of this part [part 155 of title 45 of the Code of Federal Regulations] and makes QHPs [qualified health plans] available to qualified individuals and/or qualified employers. Unless otherwise identified, this term includes an Exchange serving the individual market for qualified individuals and a SHOP [Small Business Health Options Program] serving the small group market for qualified employers, regardless of whether the Exchange is established and operated by a State (including a regional Exchange or subsidiary Exchange) or by HHS [the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services].45 C.F.R. section 155.20, by reference to 26 C.F.R. § 1.36B-1(a) and (k) and 26 C.F.R. § 1.36B-2(a)(1).
Chevron test and the Major Questions Doctrine
In Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. the Supreme Court ruled that the U.S Congress may delegate regulatory authority to an agency, and that the agency's regulations carry the weight of the law, if the regulations pass the two-part "Chevron test".
(1) "First, always, is the question whether Congress has directly spoken to the precise question at issue. If the intent of Congress is clear, that is the end of the matter; for the court as well as the agency must give effect to the unambiguously expressed intent of Congress."
"If the Court determines Congress has not directly addressed the precise question at issue, the court does not simply impose its own construction of the statute . . . Rather,
(2) [I]f the statute is silent or ambiguous with respect to the specific question, the issue for the court is whether the agency's answer is based on a permissible construction of the statute." Chevron U.S.A. v. NRDC, 467 U.S. 837, 842–843 (1984).
The Fourth Circuit's opinion had ruled that the statutory language was ambiguous and applied the Chevron doctrine, meaning that the IRS's regulatory ruling was given deference. 
However, in the Supreme Court's majority ruling, this Court remarked that "had Congress wished to assign that question to an agency, it surely would have done so expressly." For the first time, the Court invoked the major questions doctrine in step-zero of the Chevron test. This doctrine states that agencies are presumed not to have delegated authority for actions with exceptional economic and political consequence unless the statute is clear. After the court found that the agency lacked the delegated authority, it refused to apply the Chevron test altogether.
Arguments
Legislative intent
Plaintiffs argue that Congress intentionally restricted payment of subsidies to state exchanges to induce states into setting up exchanges so their citizens could receive subsidies.
The government argues that the law intends for federal exchanges to be treated identically to state exchanges (and therefore qualifying individuals are entitled to subsidies whether or not their state has set up an exchange), or, in the alternative, if the law were ambiguous, that the regulation at issue was a permissible interpretation of the law.
Lyle Denniston wrote that the parties' positions offer differing views on how to interpret legislation:
The challengers take the “literal interpretation” approach, although they also have policy reasons for reading the ACA as they do.  The Obama administration takes the “broader purpose” approach, contending that Congress would not have set up the insurance program on a basis that is as limited as the challengers contend.
In a 2009 paper published in The Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics, Timothy Jost argued that one way to avoid a commandeering issue with the ACA would be "by offering tax subsidies for insurance only in states that complied with federal requirements." Jost later published an op-ed in the Washington Post arguing that allowing subsidies for Federal exchanges is "the only way of reading the statute that makes sense." In an article on Forbes, Jost pointed out that his original law journal article proposed "several alternatives through which Congress could encourage the states to establish exchanges, one of which was to limit the availability of tax credits to states that operate exchanges.  The first alternative [proposed] was that Congress ask the states to establish exchanges, but create a federal fallback exchange in the event they failed to do so."
On January 18, 2012, Jonathan Gruber, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology economist who was a consultant on the ACA, said, "What's important to remember politically about this is if you're a state and you don't set up an exchange, that means your citizens don’t get their tax credits." On January 10, 2012, Gruber said, "... if your governor doesn’t set up an exchange, you're losing hundreds of millions of dollars of tax credits to be delivered to your citizens."
Gruber has characterized his earlier statements as "a mistake", and said that he "might have been thinking that if the federal backstop wasn't ready by 2014, and states hadn't set up their own exchange, there was a risk that citizens couldn't get the tax credits right away." Sarah Kliff of Vox cited as evidence of Gruber's comments being mistaken the fact that despite speaking "regularly to dozens of reporters during this period", he "never mentioned this idea to any of them",  and that his models always assumed that subsidies would be available on both state and federal exchanges.  In a December 2014 Congressional hearing, Gruber characterized his comments as "reflecting uncertainty about the federal exchange".  The King plaintiffs, in their briefs filed in December 2014, referred to Gruber's comments as an indication of Congressional intent supporting their position.
Though the challengers in the Supreme Court case have argued that then-Nebraska Sen. Ben Nelson, who by insisting that states take the lead in establishing the exchanges, meant that Congress had intended that tax credits go only to qualified recipients in states that had established their own insurance exchanges, Nelson has denied this interpretation in an amicus brief filed with the court, January 28, 2015. In a letter to Sen. Bob Casey who sought Nelson’s view, the former senator wrote, "I always believed that tax credits should be available in all 50 states regardless of who built the exchange, and the final law also reflects that belief as well".
Drafting error
Others have argued that the issue is due to a drafting error during the legislative process. Yale Law School Professor Abbe Gluck said that the unusual maneuver of having the ACA become law through reconciliation required a preliminary version of the bill to become law without the "usual legislative clean-up process".
Both the Senate Finance Committee and the Health Committee drafted their own versions of the ACA.Abbe R. Gluck, The Supreme Court, 2014 Term — Comment: Imperfect Statutes, Imperfect Courts: Understanding Congress's Plan in the Era of Unorthodox Lawmaking, 129 HARV. L. REV. 62 (2015). The Finance Committee bill assumed that if a state refused to participate, HHS would contract with private companies to run “state exchanges”. 111th Congress § 2225(b) (2009). The Health Committee bill provided for federally run fallback exchanges. 111th Congress (2009). When the two bills were combined the Finance Committee bill was used as the primary template but the Health Committee bill’s language was used when addressing possible holdout states. The Senate passed the bill and Congressional staff expected to clean up the language at the Conference Committee.
When Health Committee Chairman Ted Kennedy died, however, he was replaced with Republican Scott Brown, who had won a special election by promising to filibuster the ACA.  Without 60 Democrats, Majority Leader Harry Reid was deprived of his ability to invoke cloture. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi was then forced to pass the draft Senate version. Later revisions through the reconciliation process were limited to budget related provisions by the Byrd Rule.
Legal standing
Plaintiffs argue that they have standing because, without the subsidies, they would be exempt from the individual mandate because the cost of the cheapest insurance plan exceeded 8% of their income, but, with the subsidies, the subsidized cost was low enough to require plaintiffs to purchase insurance or pay a penalty.
In February 2015, The Wall Street Journal and Mother Jones investigated the four plaintiffs. Two of the plaintiffs were Vietnam War veterans, who would be eligible for free care.  Another plaintiff provided the court with a motel address, which was used to calculate the cost of insurance, as well as the amount of subsidies; a different address might result in different amounts that may cause her not to have standing.  The fourth plaintiff stated that she made $10,000 per year as a substitute teacher, an income low enough to be exempt from the individual mandate, although the Competitive Enterprise Institute suggested that she might have additional income from other work.  The investigations also suggested that some plaintiffs may lack standing because the cheapest available subsidized insurance was over 8% of their income, making them exempt from the individual mandate.
King v. Burwell
Fourth Circuit decision
The Fourth Circuit court unanimously upheld the regulation, saying that the wording in the statute was ambiguous, and that the IRS wording was a reasonable interpretation of the statute:
The plaintiffs-appellants bring this suit challenging the validity of an Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) final rule implementing the premium tax credit provision of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (the “ACA” or “Act”). The final rule interprets the ACA as authorizing the IRS to grant tax credits to individuals who purchase health insurance on both state-run insurance “Exchanges” and federally facilitated “Exchanges” created and operated by the Department of Health and Human Services (“HHS”). The plaintiffs contend that the IRS’s interpretation is contrary to the language of the statute, which, they assert, authorizes tax credits only for individuals who purchase insurance on state-run Exchanges. For reasons explained below, we find that the applicable statutory language is ambiguous and subject to multiple interpretations. Applying deference to the IRS’s determination, however, we uphold the rule as a permissible exercise of the agency’s discretion. [....]Rejecting all of the plaintiffs' arguments as to why Chevron deference is inappropriate in this case, for the reasons explained above we are satisfied that the IRS Rule is a permissible construction of the statutory language. We must therefore apply Chevron deference and uphold the IRS Rule....
Although the court ruled unanimously for the government, the opinion stated that it  "cannot ignore the common-sense appeal of the plaintiffs’ argument; a literal reading of the statute undoubtedly accords more closely with [the plaintiffs’] position," and "the [government has] the stronger position, although only slightly."
Supreme Court
On November 7, 2014, the Supreme Court granted certiorari in the plaintiff's appeal of the 4th Circuit ruling.Order list, November 7, 2014, King v. Burwell, U.S. Supreme Court, case no. 14-114 (certiorari granted). The decision to grant certiorari was unusual. It was believed that the Supreme Court would not grant certiorari given the lack of a circuit split, instead awaiting further decisions from lower courts before reviewing the issue.  University of Michigan Law School Assistant Professor Nicholas Bagley described the decision to grant certiorari as indicating that "four justices apparently think—or at least are inclined to think—that King was wrongly decided".
Amicus briefs
Alabama, Georgia, Indiana, Nebraska, Oklahoma, South Carolina, and West Virginia joined amicus briefs in support of the challengers.Brief of the States of Oklahoma, Alabama, Georgia, Nebraska, South Carolina, and West Virginia, as Amici Curiae Supporting Petitioners California, Connecticut, Delaware, the District of Columbia, Hawaii, Illinois, Iowa, Kentucky, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Mississippi, New Hampshire, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont, Virginia, and Washington filed an amicus brief in support of the government; they state in one part that, under the Pennhurst doctrine, in cooperative federalism legislation passed by Congress, if Congress wishes to impose any conditions on the States, then it must give "clear notice" of such conditions; otherwise, the conditions are invalid. They argue that the controlling phrase "an Exchange established by the State" is "buried in two sub-sections," which effectively "'hide[s] elephants in mouseholes,'" were it to mean that Congress imposed the condition on the states that they must establish their own exchanges or their residents would not receive federal subsidies; they say that because of this, the phrases "fail the Pennhurst clear-notice test," thereby making the foregoing condition invalid.Brief of the Commonwealths of Virginia, Kentucky, Massachusetts, and Pennsylvania, the States of California, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Illinois, Iowa, Maine, Maryland, Mississippi, New Hampshire, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Oregon, Rhode Island, Vermont, and Washington, and the District of Columbia as Amici Curiae in Support of Affirmance Numerous individuals and organizations filed amicus briefs in support of both sides.
The American Public Health Association and the deans of 19 schools of public health filed an amicus brief in support of the government. In the brief, the public health officials estimated that eliminating the premium tax credits in states that use the federal exchange would result in 9,800 additional deaths per year. This figure was based on earlier studies of the impact of the Massachusetts health care reform law on death rates in that state. The brief stated that residents of the 34 states that use the Federal exchange tend to be less healthy and have less access to healthcare than residents of the states that created their own exchanges. The brief argues that eliminating the subsidies will increase this disparity.Amici Curiae Brief of Public Health Deans, Chairs, and Faculty and the American Public Health Association in Support of Respondents
Halbig v. Burwell
U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit panel decision
On July 22, 2014, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit ruled 2–1 in favor of the plaintiffs.
The Court of Appeals stated:
Because we conclude that the ACA [the Affordable Care Act] unambiguously restricts the [Internal Revenue Code] section 36B subsidy to insurance purchased on Exchanges "established by the State", we reverse the district court and vacate the IRS's regulation [26 C.F.R. § 1.36B-2(a)(1)].
As part of the government's briefs, they argued that none of the plaintiffs had standing to file suit. David Klemencic, one of the plaintiffs, residing in West Virginia was found to have standing under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). Although West Virginia is geographically in the Fourth Circuit, the APA grants the D.C. Circuit shared jurisdiction over any issue involving a Federal agency based in Washington, D.C.
U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit rehearing en banc
On September 4, 2014,  the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit granted the U.S. Secretary of Health's petition for rehearing the case en banc. The order also vacates the previous July 22 judgment.
On November 12, the Court of Appeals put further proceedings in Halbig into abeyance pending the Supreme Court's ruling in King.
Pruitt v. Burwell and Indiana v. IRS
On September 9, 2014, in Pruitt v. Burwell, the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Oklahoma ruled against the IRS saying 
The court holds that the IRS Rule is arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion or otherwise not in accordance with law, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. §706(2)(A), in excess of statutory jurisdiction, authority, or limitations, or short of statutory right, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. §706(2)(C), or otherwise is an invalid implementation of the ACA, and is hereby vacated.
The government appealed the decision to the Tenth Circuit, and in November 2014, the appeal was placed in abeyance pending the Supreme Court's decision in King.  Oklahoma requested that the Supreme Court take up the Pruitt case before appellate judgment so that the Pruitt plaintiffs can present their own arguments alongside the King plaintiffs.  The government responded that the Supreme Court should not hear the Oklahoma case, stating that the states could proceed as amici curiae in the King case and that granting the Oklahoma case would raise additional jurisdictional concerns not presented in the King case.  The Supreme Court denied certiorari before judgment on January 26, 2015.
In Indiana v. IRS the state of Indiana and multiple Indiana school districts are suing the IRS claiming that the employer mandate should not apply to schools or local governments. The IRS argued that the plaintiffs did not have standing to sue, but that argument was rejected and Judge William T. Lawrence in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Indiana ruled that the case could proceed. Oral arguments occurred in  October 2014 but a ruling has not been issued.
 Opinion of the Court 
On June 25, 2015, the Supreme Court issued its ruling, written by Chief Justice Roberts, and joined by Justices Kennedy, Breyer, Ginsburg, Sotomayor, and Kagan, rejecting the challenge to the act. The Court noted that previous attempts to reform health care insurance "encouraged people to wait until they got sick to buy insurance" resulting in "an economic 'death spiral': premiums rose, the number of people buying insurance declined, and insurers left the market entirely."
It further noted that in 2006 "Massachusetts discovered a way to make the guaranteed issue and community rating requirements work—by requiring individuals to buy insurance and by providing tax credits to certain individuals to make insurance more affordable." and that "the Affordable Care Act adopts a version of the three key reforms that made the Massachusetts system successful."
The Court found that the Chevron test "does not provide the appropriate framework here." and also rejected the Court of Appeals approach of deferring to the IRS: "The tax credits are one of the Act’s key reforms and whether they are available on Federal Exchanges is a question of deep 'economic and political significance'; had Congress wished to assign that question to an agency, it surely would have done so expressly. And it is especially unlikely that Congress would have delegated this decision to the IRS, which has no expertise in crafting health insurance policy of this sort." It concluded that it is "the Court's task to determine the correct reading of Section 36B."
Citing FDA v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp, the Court noted that "when deciding whether the language is plain, the Court must read the words 'in their context and with a view to their place in the overall statutory scheme.
Having found the text ambiguous, the Court, citing United Sav. Assn. of Tex. v. Timbers of Inwood Forest Associates, (an opinion written by Justice Scalia) looked "to the broader structure of the Act to determine whether one of Section 36B's 'permissible meanings produces a substantive effect that is compatible with the rest of the law. It rejected petitioners' interpretation "because it would destabilize the individual insurance market in any State with a Federal
Exchange, and likely create the very 'death spirals' that Congress designed the Act to avoid."King v. Burwell, slip op. at 16. The Court observed that the petitioners' interpretation would make the ACA "operate quite differently in a State with a Federal Exchange. As they see it, one of the Act's three major reforms—the tax credits—would not apply. And a second major reform—the coverage requirement—would not apply in a meaningful way...[W]ithout the tax credits, the coverage requirement would apply to fewer individuals. And it would be a lot fewer...If petitioners are right, therefore, only one of the Act's three major reforms would apply in States with a Federal Exchange."King v. Burwell, slip op. at 16-17 (citation omitted).  Here, the statutory scheme compels us to reject petitioners' interpretation because it would destabilize the individual insurance market in any State with a Federal Exchange, and likely create the very "death spirals" that Congress designed the Act to avoid.King v. Burwell, slip op. at 15.
Unlike the Fourth Circuit, the Court chose not to rely on the IRS interpretation, noting the "deep 'economic and political significance'" of the question and the IRS's lack of expertise in health insurance policy. By choosing instead to resolve the ambiguous language of the statute by looking at the purpose of the statute as a whole rather than by applying the Chevron doctrine, the Court's decision precludes the possibility of the IRS reversing in the future its decision to have subsidies available on the federally run exchange.<ref>[https://www.usnews.com/news/the-report/articles/2015/06/26/how-king-v-burwell-ended-the-obamacare-wars It's All Over But the Shouting, U.S. News & World Report], Robert Schlesinger, June 26, 2015, "As a practical matter that means that a future Republican president cannot order the IRS to reinterpret the statute to exclude subsidies for those on federal exchanges."</ref>
Dissent
In a dissent joined by Justices Thomas and Alito, Justice Scalia wrote: "The Court holds that when the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act says 'Exchange established by the State it means 'Exchange established by the State or the Federal Government.' That is of course quite absurd, and the Court’s 21 pages of explanation make it no less so." He then ridiculed the decision, saying that the Affordable Care Act should be called "SCOTUScare."King v. Burwell, slip op. at 21 (Scalia, J. dissenting).
Scalia further noted that the rest of the ACA carefully distinguishes between exchanges established by states and those established by the federal government through Health and Human Services. Scalia cited differences between where the document identifies how the different exchanges receive funding, authority, and names. Scalia used this to argue that the context of the law does not allow for the phrase "established by the state" to mean "established by the state and federal government." He reminds the reader that the purpose of looking at the context of phrases is for "understanding the terms of the law, not [to make] an excuse for rewriting them."
Later, Scalia also pointed out that interpreting the phrase "by the State" as "by the state and federal government" not only eliminates all meaning from the first phrase, but causes problems of interpretation elsewhere in the ACA. "The State" is identified distinctly in the ACA with regards to the formula for calculating tax credits, for screening children for tax credit eligibility, for using a "secure electronic interface" for tax credit screening, for other agencies, for directions on operating web sites, and for guidelines around the enrollment of children. Of this, Scalia mentioned that "[i]t is bad enough for a court to cross out 'by the State' once. But seven times?"
The extensive use of the term "by the State" also contrasts against the more extensive use of more general terms. "Clause after clause of the law uses a more general term such as 'Exchange.'" Scalia pointed out that the court should defer to the specific meaning of this term, and that assuming that the "by the State" term is general does not fit appropriate rules of interpretation. Scalia also notes that the ACA knows how to equate unlike terms explicitly, as it declared that "[a] territory that...establishes...an Exchange...shall be treated as a State." The ACA does not have such an equivalency clause for exchanges established by the federal government.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 576
 National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius (2012)
 Sebelius v. Hobby Lobby'' (2014)
 Federalism in the United States
Notes
References
External links
 Oral argument audio
 Oral argument transcript
 Case docket
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit
Category:Affordable Care Act lawsuits
Category:United States Department of Health and Human Services
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2015 in United States case law
"""

From "King v. Smith" ==> """
King v. Smith, 392 U.S. 309 (1968), was a decision in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) could not be withheld because of the presence of a "substitute father" who visited a family on weekends. The issue before the US Supreme Court involved how the states could determine how to implement a federal program.  The court used the term "co-operative federalism."
Background
Mrs. Sylvester Smith was a Dallas County, Alabama resident who had four children, without a biological father providing support. The father of three of her children had died and the father of her fourth child was not in the picture.  Thus, she qualified for AFDC.  She was, however, having an affair with a Mr. Williams.  Mr. Williams had nine children of his own.  Williams, who visited on weekends, was counted as a "substitute father", thus disqualifying the family for aid according to Alabama Law. 
Decision
The Court held that the term "father" did not include substitute fathers because Williams was under no obligation to support Smith's children.
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1968 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Fatherhood
Category:Federal assistance in the United States
Category:Legal history of Alabama
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:Dallas County, Alabama
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Kingdomware Technologies, Inc. v. United States" ==> """
Kingdomware Technologies, Inc. v. United States, 579 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the Department of Veterans Affairs must apply the "Rule of Two" when considering and awarding contracts under the Veterans Benefits, Health Care, and Information Technology Act of 2006. 
By containing the word "shall" the rule becomes mandatory, not discretionary, regardless of whether the rule is being used to meet annual minimum contracting goals.SCOTUSblog coverageKingdomware Technologies, Inc. v. United States, No. 14–916, 579 U.S. ____ (2016).
 Opinion of the Court 
Associate Justice Clarence Thomas authored a unanimous opinion.
 References 
External links
 SCOTUSblog coverage
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:United States Department of Veterans Affairs
Category:Government procurement in the United States
"""

From "Kingsland v. Dorsey" ==> """
Kingsland v. Dorsey, 338 U.S. 318 (1949), like Hazel-Atlas Glass Co. v. Hartford-Empire Co., is another patent fraud decision of the United States Supreme Court growing out of the antitrust cartel case described in Hartford-Empire Co. v. United States.. Kingsland is widely quoted for its statement that the prosecution of patent applications in the Patent Office "requires the highest degree of candor and good faith" because the Patent Office "must rely upon [patent attorneys'] integrity and deal with them in a spirit of trust and confidence.338 U.S. at 319.
Background
After the Supreme Court castigated the fraud perpetrated on the Patent Office that Hazel-Atlas Glass Co. v. Hartford-Empire Co. and Hartford-Empire Co. v. United States describe,As those decisions describe, the Hartford attorneys "ghost wrote" an article praising an invention for which Hartford sought a patent, had it published under the name of a union official (to whom Hartford made a substantial payment) as its author, submitted the article to the Patent Office to overcome its otherwise "insurmountable opposition" to granting the patent, and later submitted the article to the Third Circuit to persuade it to overrule an adverse judgment in a patent infringement case. the Patent Office took disciplinary action against the Hartford patent attorneys involved, including Vernon M. Dorsey.See Hatch v. Ooms, 69 F. Supp. 788 (D.D.C. 1947), reversed, 173 F.2d 405 (D.C. Cir. 1949), reversed, 338 U.S. 318 (1949). The Patent Office found that the attorneys "connived with each other with the intention of misleading and deceiving the officials of the Patent Office . . . for the purpose of securing favorable action by the Patent Office with respect to the claims in the Peiler application." 69 F. Supp. at 791. The Office disbarred them "for gross misconduct,"69 F. Supp. at 790. and they appealed the action by suing the Patent Commissioner in the district court. The district court affirmed the order of the Patent Office, holding:
Having determined, after due notice, a fair hearing, and upon substantial evidence, that the petitioners were guilty of gross misconduct, it was in the discretion of the Commissioner to determine the proper disciplinary action in accordance with the applicable statute.  I can find no abuse of such discretion here.69 F. Supp. at 803.
Opinion of court of appeals
Dorsey appealed to the court of appeals, which reversed 2-1 the district court judgment.Dorsey v. Kingsland, 173 F.2d 405 (D.C. Cir. 1949). The majority found "indelible evidence that the conduct of the Patent Office in the whole proceeding carried out nearly two decades after the alleged commission of the offense amounts to a classic exemplification of a citizen being deprived of a valuable right (as well as honor and a means of livelihood) without due process of law or indeed without process of law of any kind except bureaucratic 'lynch law.' "173 F.2d at 406. The court of appeals did not use the "substantial evidence" test for reviewing an administrative agency. Instead, it held that the Commissioner's findings were not supported by "substantial probative evidence."173 F.2d at 410. 411, 412.
The dissenting judge stated: 
I think the proceedings were properly conducted. I think appellant's fraud was fairly charged, proved, and found. I think the proof conclusive and the result just. The public and social interests in discouraging the fraudulent procurement of patents seem to me to outweigh appellant's interest in his reputation and practice. However, that question is not before us. Where no error of law is involved, we have no authority to substitute our opinions for those of the Patent Office and the District Court. If the evidence of fraud, which I think conclusive, was so much as substantial, we must uphold their action, unless we are prepared to rule as a matter of law either that fraud in procuring a patent is too trivial to be "gross misconduct" or that success in concealing fraud for many years creates a prescriptive right to exemption from its consequences.173 F.2d at 415-16.
Ruling of the Supreme Court
The Supreme Court reversed the court of appeals 6-2 and reinstated the district court order affirming the action of the Patent Office. The majority opinion was per curiam and joined in by Chief Justice Fred Vinson and Justices Hugo Black, Stanley Reed, Harold Burton, Tom C. Clark, and Sherman Minton. Justice Robert Jackson dissented, joined by Justice Felix Frankfurter. Justice William O. Douglas took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.
The majority stated that it agreed with the Patent Office that:
By reason of the nature of an application for patent, the relationship of attorneys to the Patent Office requires the highest degree of candor and good faith.  In its relation to applicants, the Office . . . must rely upon their integrity and deal with them in a spirit of trust and confidence.338 U.S. at 319.
The Court added that Congress chose to make the Patent Office, not the courts, "primarily responsible for protecting the public from the evil consequences that might result if practitioners should betray their high trust."338 U.S. at 319-20. The Court concluded that it was "satisfied that the findings were amply supported whether the measure be 'substantial evidence' or 'substantial probative evidence' " and the charge of unfairness in the hearings was "wholly without support."338 U.S. at 320.
Justice Jackson accused the Patent Office of "a capricious self-righteousness" that "denied the essentials of a fair hearing."338 U.S. at 320 (Jackson, J., dissenting). He blamed the Patent Office for allowing Hartford's attorneys to deceive it:
One might expect that the Patent Office would have required facts on which it issued a patent to be proved by affidavits whose truthfulness is encouraged, if not assured, by sanctions against perjury; but it was content to accept unsworn publications for its purposes. The worst that can be said of Dorsey is that he took advantage of this loose practice to use a trade journal article as evidence, without disclosing that it was ghost-written for the ostensible author. 338 U.S. at 323.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States patent case law
Category:1949 in United States case law
"""

From "Kingsley Books, Inc. v. Brown" ==> """
Kingsley Books, Inc. v. Brown, 354 U.S. 436 (1957), was a Supreme Court case that addressed issues of obscenity, free speech, and due process. The case stemmed from the confiscation and destruction of books from a New York City bookstore. The court's determination was that: 
 Background 
Kingsley Books was an adult bookstore that was known for selling erotic material including graphic comic book style material, among which a fetish series entitled Nights of Horror. That particular series garnered public attention in 1954, when it was mentioned during the trial of the Brooklyn Thrill Killers gang: psychiatrist Fredric Wertham had used the book series as evidence, claiming that the gang's leader had become a criminal because he read pornographic comic books.The Incredible True Story of Joe Shuster’s NIGHTS OF HORROR, Comic book legal defense, October 3, 2012 City officials in New York City led by Peter Campbell Brown made the decision to file an injunction against Kingsley Books to both destroy any existing copies of the material but to also enjoin the future sale of the books under statute § 22-a of the New York Code. This statute allowed for officials to prevent the distribution of "lewd or obscene materials" although the action taken was actually civil and not criminal. "A complaint dated September 10, 1954 charged appellants with displaying for sale paper-covered obscene booklets, fourteen of which were annexed under the general title of "Nights of Horror." The complaint requested that appellants be enjoined from further distribution of the booklets, that they be required to surrender to the sheriff for destruction all copies in their possession, and, upon failure to do so, that the sheriff be commanded to seize and destroy those copies". The fact that the sheriff was responsible for handling this civil action was partly why the case had issues with due process. Kingsley failed to contest the filing and a judge at trial ruled that the books were indeed obscene. The judge failed to ban distribution of future issues of the series as he found that such an injunction would violate the constitutional protections against free speech, and specifically prior restraint. The ruling was appealed and eventually the case went to the Supreme Court of the United States.
 Case Issues 
The primary issue surrounding the case was the First Amendment right to free speech, and obscenity. The central issue surrounding the case was: Does imposing an injunction on the sale of obscene books and destroying the obscene material violate a bookseller's rights under the First Amendment as a prior restraint? Additionally there were minor questions related to the Fourteenth Amendment and due process that were also brought before the court. 
At no point in the appeal was there a challenge to whether the book in question was actually obscene, rather the challenge was whether the statutes themselves were actually constitutional..
 Arguments 
The case was presented to the court on April 22, 1957. Emanuel Redford represented Kingsley and Seymour B. Quel represented Brown and New York. The ACLU and the NYCLU provided briefs on behalf of Kingsley. The Attorney General Louis Lefkowitz and the assistant Attorney General Ruth K. Toch wrote briefs on behalf of Brown and New York. The members presiding over the Supreme Court were Chief Justice Earl Warren, Justice Felix Frankfurter, Justice William Douglas, Justice Hugo Black, Justice William Brennan, Justice John Marshall Harlan, Justice Charles Whittaker, Justice Harold Burton, and Justice Tom Clark.
 Decision 
The Court reached a decision on June 24, 1957. The court ruled in favor of the state in a 5–4 vote. The court's main contention was based on the civil nature of the statute: “The judicial angle of vision in testing the validity of a statute like Section 22-a is 'the operation and effect of the statute in substance.' The phrase 'prior restraint' is not a self-wielding sword. Nor can it serve as a talismanic test… Instead of requiring the bookseller to dread that the offer for sale of a book may, without prior warning, subject him to a criminal prosecution with the hazard of imprisonment, the civil procedure assures him that such consequences cannot follow unless he ignores a court order specifically directed to him for a prompt and carefully circumscribed determination of the issue of obscenity. Until then, he may keep the book for sale and sell it on his own judgment rather than steer ‘nervously among the treacherous shoals.'”  Justice Frankfurter wrote the majority opinion on the case. The court ruled that all of the procedures complied with the rules for due process ending the arguments on the Fourteenth Amendment. The major ruling, however, was the continuing adherence to the thought that the First Amendment right to free speech does not extend to obscene speech or material.
Both Justices Warren and Douglas wrote dissenting opinions on the case. Justice Warren felt that the majority opinion was incorrect because this was a civil and not criminal case. He wrote: “This is not a criminal obscenity case. Nor is it a case ordering the destruction of materials disseminated by a person who has been convicted of an offense for doing so, as would be authorized under provisions in the laws of New York and other States. It is a case wherein the New York police, under a different state statute, located books which, in their opinion, were unfit for public use because of obscenity and then obtained a court order for their condemnation and destruction.
Warren, dissenting:
  The ramifications of the ruling being upheld left Kingsley Books forced to answer and pay for the original charges.
 Significance 
The outcome of the cases led to a hard line drawn on civil liberties as it pertained to free speech and adult content. These rulings held up over many years and set the various adult content industries back for quite some time, limiting the type, amount and variety of adult content that was readily available to consumers. Although the court didn't actually have to rule on whether or not the book was actually obscene was due to it not being contested, an issue which would allow for other cases to question what actually constitutes obscene in future cases. 
This case did however empower the states to regulate what was and wasn't obscene as long as it was done in a manner that allowed the content to actually be produced and evaluated first. “Criminal enforcement and the proceeding under Section 22-a interfere with a book's solicitation of the public precisely at the same stage. In each situation the law moves after publication; the book need not in either case have yet passed into the hands of the public”.
 See also 
 Freedom of speech in the United States
 Due process in the United States
 Obscenity laws of the United States
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1957 in United States case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States obscenity case law
Category:Obscenity controversies in literature
Category:Comics censorship
Category:Comics controversies
"""

From "Kingsley v. Hendrickson" ==> """
Kingsley v. Hendrickson, 576 U.S. 389 (2015), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held in a 5–4 decision that a pretrial detainee must prove only that force used by police is excessive according to an objective standard, not that a police officer was subjectively aware that the force used was unreasonable.
 Background 
 Trial and jury instruction 
Michael Kingsley was being held in detention in a Monroe County jail in Sparta, Wisconsin in 2010, awaiting trial on drug charges. Kingsley was repeatedly ordered by officers to remove a piece of paper he had taped to the overhead light of his cell. So as to remove the paper, Kingsley was ordered to be temporarily moved to a receiving cell. Refusing to comply with officers' commands to stand against the door of his cell to be handcuffed, Kingsley was forcibly removed from the cell by four officers, one of whom was the defendant, Sergeant Stan Hendrickson, and moved to a receiving cell. All parties agreed that in the receiving cell, Sergeant Hendrickson placed his knee in Kingsley's back and Deputy Sheriff Fritz Degner eventually applied a Taser to his back. 
However, the officers testified that Kingsley resisted their attempted removal of his handcuffs. Kingsley testified that he had not resisted their attempt and alleged that after being placed in the receiving cell, officers had slammed his head into a concrete bunk, which the officers denied. After being tasered, Kingsley was left handcuffed in the cell for around 15 minutes, when the officers removed his handcuffs.
Kingsley brought a civil action suit, Kingsley v. Josvai, against Hendrickson and Degner in the U.S. District Court for the Western District of Wisconsin, alleging a use of excessive force by the officers in violation of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Judge Barbara Brandriff Crabb denied the officers' motion for a summary judgment and the case moved to trial. Judge Crabb instructed the jury before deliberation that:The jury found in favor of the officers.
 Appeal of decision 
Kingsley appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, arguing that the jury should have been instructed that a claim of the use of excessive force against a pretrial detainee should be judged not from the perspective of a reasonable officer, but from an objective standard. The Court of Appeals rejected Kingsley's argument, stating that the law required assessment of the officers' state of mind as by "subjective inquiry."
The United States Supreme Court granted certiorari in light of the lower court's decision that provoked of a circuit split..
 Judgment of the Court 
In a 5–4 decision, the Supreme Court ruled that an objective standard must be used in judging whether an officer applied excessive force, reversing the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals. Justice Breyer, joined by Justices Kennedy, Ginsburg, Sotomayor, and Kagan wrote for the majority, stating that a pretrial detainee is protected from "excessive force that amounts to punishment," even when, according to Buck v. Bell, the punishment is only "rationally related to a legitimate nonpunitive governmental purpose," rather than possessing an "express intent to punish." Therefore, in applying Bell, the plaintiff need not prove an intent to punish. As such, the instruction of the jury defining excessive force as "force applied recklessly" unacceptably requires proving a subjective state of mind of the officer. The Court rejected the respondents' arguments based on the Eighth Amendment's Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause as applying only to convicted prisoners, not pretrial detainees. The Supreme Court reversed the decision of the Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit and remanded the case.On remand, the Seventh Circuit remanded the case to the District Court for a new trial. 
Justice Scalia was joined by Chief Justice Roberts and Justice Thomas in dissent. He wrote that harm inflicted on a pretrial detainee in this manner is not "imposed for the purpose of punishment" and so does not violate the Fourteenth Amendment.
Justice Alito dissented, stating that the case should have been dismissed as improvidently granted as there remains an unsettled question of whether a "pretrial detainee can bring a Fourth Amendment claim based on the use of excessive force by a detention facility employee."
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 576
 Due Process Clause
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:United States due process case law
Category:Monroe County, Wisconsin
"""

From "Kinsella v. Krueger" ==> """
Kinsella v. Krueger, 351 U.S. 470 (1956), was a landmark United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that the Constitution supersedes international treaties ratified by the United States Senate. According to the decision, the Court recognized the supremacy of the Constitution over a treaty, although the case itself was with regard to an executive agreement, not a "treaty" in the U.S. legal sense, and the agreement itself has never been ruled unconstitutional.
Background
Colonel Aubrey Dewitt Smith was the chief of the Logistics Section of the Plans and Operations Division at the headquarters, United States Army, Japan. A graduate of the United States Military Academy at West Point, ranked 123rd in the class of 1930, he had served with distinction with the 77th Infantry Division in the Battle of Okinawa, earning two Silver Stars, the Bronze Star Medal, the Legion of Merit and the Commendation Ribbon. He later served on the headquarters of the X Corps in the Korean War. He married Dorothy Krueger, the daughter of General Walter Krueger, who had commanded the Sixth United States Army during World War II. They had two children. 
On 3 October 1952, Dorothy Smith stabbed her husband with a  long hunting knife while he slept in their Army quarters in Japan. After trying unsuccessfully to staunch the flow of blood, Colonel Smith summoned their live-in Japanese maid, Shigeko Tani, who found Dorothy Smith in her underwear and holding a knife. She took the knife from Dorothy Smith and, at Colonel Smith's request, summoned Lieutenant Colonel Joseph S. Hardin, a neighbor and fellow West Point-educated regular Army officer. Hardin found Dorothy attempting to light a pair of cigarettes. She told him: "I'm sorry I didn't get him in the heart."
Colonel Smith was taken to Tokyo Army Hospital, but died there from loss of blood at 6 am the following morning. Dorothy Smith was held in the isolation ward of the 8167th Station Hospital for observation. Major General William E. Shambora, the Surgeon General of the Far East Command, ordered a psychiatric evaluation. In December 1952, an Army Medical Board declared her fit to stand trial.
Procedural history
A military court martial was convened in Tokyo under the Uniform Code of Military Justice. A nine-member court was convened in January 1953, headed by Major General Joseph P. Sullivan. Its members, all military officers, included a Women's Army Corps lieutenant colonel. Dorothy Smith's defense lawyer, Lieutenant Colonel Howard S. Levie, initially argued that the court had no legal jurisdiction over the wife of an Army officer. When this was rejected by the court, he argued that she was not guilty due to temporary insanity. At the time of the incident, Dorothy Smith had been taking barbiturates and paraldehyde.
The court martial was told that Dorothy Smith had undergone two months' treatment for mental illness in 1951, and had attempted suicide while on the ship to Japan the year before. Her personal physician, Brigadier General Rawley E. Chambers, told the court that Dorothy Smith was subject to "neurotic explosions," that she had slashed her wrists a number of times, and that she once had assaulted another Army wife. "I believe she would be able to tell right from wrong," the general said. "But I do not believe that she had any ability to adhere to the right." By six votes to three, the court martial found Dorothy Smith guilty of first-degree murder and sentenced her "to be confined at hard labor for the rest of her natural life". A unanimous verdict of guilty would have meant a mandatory death sentence. The case was reviewed by Brigadier General Onslow S. Rolfe, the commanding officer of the Headquarters and Service Command of the Far East Command, and the Judge Advocate General. That he was junior in rank to Sullivan meant that his ability to overrule the former was constrained. Meanwhile, Dorothy Smith was flown back to the United States in a Military Air Transport Service plane, which reached Travis Air Force Base near San Francisco on 25 February 1953. She was held at the Presidio of San Francisco, and then imprisoned at the Federal Prison Camp, Alderson, in West Virginia.
Walter Krueger's lawyers filed an appeal with the United States Court of Military Appeals. Brigadier General Adam Richmond, who had been judge advocate of the Third United States Army when it had been commanded by Krueger in the early 1940s, argued that Dorothy was not sane at the time of the incident, and that the testimony that the court-martial had heard to the contrary was military rather than medical. On 30 December 1954, by a two-to-one majority, they rejected the appeal filed by Krueger's lawyers. "Since this court lacks the power to determine the weight of the evidence, even as to the issue of sanity, we are without authority to disturb the board's determination – regardless of whether we might have reached an opposite conclusion". The opinion was written by Judge Paul W. Brosman, Judge George W. Latimer concurred. Chief Judge Robert E. Quinn dissented on the grounds that the prosecution's expert witnesses testified in accordance with Army regulations rather than their knowledge and medical experience, feeling bound by the restrictive terms of the joint Air Force (AFM 160-42) and Army (TM 8–240) manual, Psychiatry in Military Law. He felt that as a consequence, "their testimony was so seriously compromised as to require, in the interests of justice a rehearing."
Krueger's attorneys filed a writ of habeas corpus with Ben Moore, Chief Judge of the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of West Virginia, in Charleston, West Virginia, on 9 December 1955, based on a decision by District Court Judge Edward A. Tamm of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia. Tamm had released Mrs. Clarice B. Covert, the wife of an Air Force Sergeant who had killed her sleeping husband with an ax in England on 9 March 1953, from Alderson on a $1,000 bond. This in turn was based on a recent ruling by the United States Supreme Court on 7 November 1955 in the case of Robert W. Toth, a former Air Force Sergeant. Toth was tried by a court martial after he had been honorably discharged from the Air Force, for a murder in Korea, committed five months before his discharge. The Supreme Court had ruled the military had no jurisdiction to try someone once they had been discharged from military service. Krueger hired Covert's lawyer, Frederick Bernays Wiener to represent Dorothy. But Moore declined to follow Tamm, and denied relief. As a result, Covert was on release while Dorothy remained incarcerated in Alderson. Krueger appealed to the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals. The case became Kinsella v. Krueger, Nina Kinsella being the prison warden at Alderson. While the appeal was pending the Government sought certiorari from the United States Supreme Court before the 4th Circuit heard the appeal. In view of the importance of the constitutional issue presented by the case, the writ was granted without action by the Circuit Court.
 Supreme Court decision 
Article One of the United States Constitution, §8, enumerates the powers of the United States Congress. These include "making rules for the government and regulation of the said land and naval forces, and directing their operations". From 1775 to 1949, the United States military exercised control over civilians under the Articles of War, under which they were subject to military courts martial. In 1916, Congress specifically extended the scope of the articles of war to cover all civilians accompanying military forces outside the United States. After World War II, the Articles of War were superseded by the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), which came into effect on 31 May 1951. It specified that civilians were subject to the UCMJ:
These were the provisions under which Dorothy Smith was tried. The United States had struck executive agreements with Great Britain and Japan allowing American citizens to be tried under the UCMJ rather than local law. Notably, the UCMJ did not require trial by a jury, as required by Article Three of the United States Constitution, §2, and the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
The Supreme Court handed down its verdict on 11 June 1956. Writing for the majority, Justice Tom C. Clark wrote:
The Supreme Court ruled that: 
On this, the court relied for precedent on the Insular Cases. The decision was five-three, with Justices Hugo Black and William O. Douglas and Chief Justice Earl Warren dissenting. Justice Charles E. Whittaker did not participate, Justice Felix Frankfurter filed a reservation, which impelled Wiener to file a petition for a rehearing despite the fact that, as he later acknowledged, "most requests for rehearing enjoy the viability of snowballs beyond the River Styx."
Rehearing
On 8 October 1956, the first order day of its 1956 term, the Supreme Court asked J. Lee Rankin, the United States Solicitor General, for a response to Wiener's petition, which was granted on 5 November 1956. Justice John M. Harlan II had changed his mind, and Justice Sherman Minton had retired. Since he had not participated in the earlier decisions, his replacement, William J. Brennan Jr., was not involved in this decision, although he would sit on the rehearing. 
On rehearing, the Supreme Court consolidated the case with Reid v. Covert.. On 10 June 1957, it reversed its previous decision. It was a stunning development; it was the first time since it had first sat in 1790 that it had reversed a decision without a major intervening change in its membership, for even without Brennan, the verdict would have been the same. Writing for the plurality, Justice Hugo Black wrote: 
Black was joined in the plurality opinion by Warren, Douglas and Brennan. Frankfurter and Harlan wrote separate concurring opinions. Only Justices Clark and Harold H. Burton dissented. The Supreme Court ruled that: 
Outcome
As a result of the ruling, Dorothy Smith was released from prison and went to live with her father in San Antonio. She enrolled in secretarial course at a business college there. She still struggled with mental illness, and had a nervous breakdown in August 1958 that resulted in her being hospitalized in John Sealy Hospital in Galveston, Texas. After her release, Dorothy became a medical secretary. She died in 1996.
On 18 January 1960, the Supreme Court handed down three more verdicts to clarify and extend Kinsella v. Krueger. In Kinsella v. United States, the Court extended the ruling to dependents for non-capital offenses. Grisham v. Hagen extended it to civilian employees of the military for capital offenses, and McElroy v. United States to civilian employees for all offenses. 
The gap in the law regarding civilians employed by or accompanying the military overseas remained for many years, until the passage of the Military Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Act, which President Bill Clinton signed into law on 22 November 2000.
 See also 
 Botiller v. Dominguez (1889)
 Reid v. Covert (1957)
 Wilson v. Girard (1957)
 United States ex rel. Toth v. Quarles (1955)
 Notes 
 References 
 External links 
Category:1957 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States foreign relations case law
Category:United States military law
Category:Court-martial cases
"""

From "Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum Co." ==> """
Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum Co., 569 U.S. 108 (2013), was a United States Supreme Court decision in which the court found that the presumption against extraterritoriality applies to claims under the Alien Tort Claims Act. According to the Court's majority opinion, "it would reach too far to say that mere corporate presence suffices" to displace the presumption against extraterritoriality when all the alleged wrongful conduct takes place outside the United States..
The Court did not rule out the possibility of corporate liability if the presumption against extraterritoriality could be overcome by acts that sufficiently "touch and concern" the United States. Lower court decisions were divided. After the Supreme Court's 2018 decision in Jesner v. Arab Bank, PLC ruled out an ATS cause of action against foreign corporate defendants, the significance of the "touch and concern" test remains unclear.
Kiobel is considered a 'foreign cubed' case in which foreign plaintiffs made a claim against a foreign company for human rights violations overseas.
Background
The plaintiffs in Kiobel were citizens of Nigeria who claimed that Dutch, British, and Nigerian oil-exploration corporations aided and abetted the Nigerian government in the 1990s to commit violations of customary international law.Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum, 621 F.3d 111 (2d Cir. 2010). The plaintiffs claimed that Royal Dutch Shell compelled Shell Nigeria its Nigerian subsidiary, in cooperation with the Nigerian government, in a brutal crushing of peaceful resistance to aggressive oil development in the Ogoni Niger River Delta.
Plaintiffs sought damages under the ATS. The defendants moved to dismiss based on a two-pronged argument. Firstly, they argued that customary international law itself provides the rules to decide whether conduct violates the law of nations where non-state actors are alleged to have committed the wrong in question. Second, they contended that no norm has ever existed between nations that imposes liability upon corporate actors.
On September 29, 2006, the district court dismissed the plaintiffs' claims for aiding and abetting property destruction; forced exile; extrajudicial killing; and violation of the rights to life, liberty, security, and association. It reasoned that customary international law did not define the violations with sufficient particularity. The court denied the defendants' motion to dismiss with respect to the remaining claims of aiding and abetting arbitrary arrest and detention; crimes against humanity; and torture or cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment. The district court then certified its entire order for interlocutory appeal to the Second Circuit based on the serious nature of the questions at issue.
In a 2–1 decision issued on September 17, 2010, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit held that corporations cannot be held liable for violations of customary international law:
Under both U.S. Supreme Court and Second Circuit precedents over the previous 30 years that address ATS suits alleging violations of customary international law, the scope of liability is determined by customary international law itself.
Under Supreme Court precedent, the ATS requires courts to apply norms of international law, not domestic law, to the scope of defendants' liabilities. The norms must be "specific, universal and obligatory".
Under international law, "corporate liability is not a discernible—much less a universally recognized—norm of customary international law," and the court could apply to the ATS. Also, the plaintiffs' ATS claims should indeed be dismissed for lack of subject matter jurisdiction.
Kiobel petitioned the Supreme Court for review of the Second Circuit's decision. It was granted on October 17, 2011. Oral arguments were held on February 28, 2012, with Kathleen Sullivan arguing for Shell and Deputy Solicitor General Edwin Kneedler arguing as a friend to Kiobel.
The arguments received considerable attention in the legal community.
Unexpectedly, the Supreme Court announced, on March 5, 2012, that it would hold additional argument on the case during the October 2012 term. It directed the parties to file new briefs on the question "Whether and under what circumstances the Alien Tort Statute, 28 U.S.C. § 1350, allows courts to recognize a cause of action for violations of the law of nations occurring within the territory of a sovereign other than the United States."
Reargument of the case occurred on October 1, 2012, with Sullivan reappearing for Shell and the United States Solicitor General Donald Verrilli now arguing as a friend to Kiobel.
Decision
The Court, in an opinion joined by five justices, held that the presumption against extraterritoriality applies to claims under the ATS, and nothing in the statute rebuts that presumption. The presumption against extraterritoriality is a canon of statutory interpretation that provides there is no extraterritorial application of a statute unless there is a clear indication otherwise.
Writing for the Court, Chief Justice Roberts observed that while the presumption applies to merits questions and the ATS is strictly jurisdictional, the presumption against extraterritoriality should still apply to the statute because of the danger of judicial interference in foreign policy.Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum Co., 569 U.S. ____(2013), Slip Opinion at 5.
The Court further reasoned that nothing in the text, history or purposes of the ATS rebuts the presumption. The common law transitory torts doctrine, which holds that causes based on a transitory action arising abroad may be considered as happening domestically, helps rebut the presumption, as the statute may have other meanings.Kiobel, Slip Op at 8.
The Court also disregarded a 1795 opinion by Attorney General William Bradford that "there can be no doubt" of tort liability for American citizens who had been plundering inside Sierra Leone.Kiobel, Slip Op at 11.  The Bradford Opinion was a response to British complaints about US citizens who violated a treaty between the United States and Britain by joining a French privateer fleet to attack a British Colony, in spite of an official US policy of neutrality. The Court said the opinion "defies a definitive reading and...hardly suffices to counter the weighty concerns underlying the presumption against extraterritoriality".Kiobel, Slip Op at 12.127 Harv. L. Rev. 308
Finally, the Court found it would be implausible to suppose that the First Congress wanted to make the United States a "uniquely hospitable forum for the enforcement of international norms."Kiobel, Slip Op. at 12.
The Court noted that all conduct at issue in the case took place outside the United States and that "it would reach too far to say that mere corporate presence suffices" to displace the presumption against extraterritoriality, unless Congress determines otherwise in a statute more specific than the ATS.
Concurrences
Justice Kennedy separately wrote a one-paragraph concurrence noting that the presumption against extraterritorial application "may require some further elaboration and explanation."
Justice Alito, joined by Justice Thomas, agreed that the statute does not apply extraterritorially and argued that it should be read to apply to only the international law violations that had been identified by William Blackstone in 1769: violation of safe conducts, infringement of the rights of ambassadors, and piracy.133 S. Ct. 1659, 1670, (Alito, J., concurring).
Justice Breyer, joined by Justices Ginsburg, Sotomayor and Kagan, concurred with the judgment but rejected the Court's reasoning. The four justices did not believe that the presumption against extraterritoriality applies to the ATS.Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum Co. (Breyer, J., concurring in judgment), Slip Opinion at 1. Instead, the concurrence sees ATS jurisdiction as limited to when the tort occurs on American soil, the defendant is an American national, or when there is an important American national interest like not providing safe harbor to , or the common enemy of mankind.Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum Co. (Breyer, J., concurring in judgment), Slip Opinion at 7.
Breyer first attacks the majority's view that the presumption is not rebutted. He notes that while the majority sees the ATS as applying to piracy on the high seas, piracy necessarily occurs aboard a ship and so is considered to occur within the territory of the ship's flag state.Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum Co. (Breyer, J., concurring in judgment), Slip Opinion at 4. He then outlines the long history of an international duty to not provide safe harbor to hostis humani generis, or the common enemy of mankind.Kiobel, (Breyer, J., concurring in judgment), Slip Op. at 8, citing, inter alia, Leval, Pierre N. "The Long Arm of International Law." 92 Foreign Affairs 16 (Mar./Apr. 2013). He then reviews thirty years of U.S. Court of Appeals cases holding for extraterritorial application of the ATS.Kiobel, (Breyer, J., concurring in judgment), Slip Op. at 9-10. The concurrence takes issue with the majority's characterization of the ATS as "uniquely hospitable" by noting that many countries permit extraterritorial suits, citing Dutch, English, International Court of Justice, and European Commission sources.Kiobel, (Breyer, J., concurring in judgment), Slip Op. at 11. The Court's concern on unwarranted judicial interference in the conduct of foreign affairs is rejected by Breyer, who notes US obligations under the Convention Against Torture, the third Geneva Convention, the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, and several other treaties.
Ultimately, however, the concurrence agrees with the Court's judgment, as the mere corporate presence of a foreign defendant does not invoke a national interest in denying safe harbor to a common enemy of mankind.Kiobel, (Breyer, J., concurring in judgment), Slip Op. at 16.
Post-Kiobel cases
Lower courts have been left to answer which ATS claims "touch and concern the territory of the United States ... with sufficient force""And even where the claims touch and concern the territory of the United States, they must do so with sufficient force to displace the presumption against extraterritorial application" to overcome the presumption against extraterritoriality, and this has been the subject of most post-Kiobel litigation in the lower courts.
Some of these cases are:
Mastafa v. Chevron Corp, 770 F.3d 170 (2d Cir. 2014)
Al Shimari v. Caci Premier Technology, 758 F.3d 516 (4th Cir. 2014), 
Doe v. Nestle S.A. 906 F.3d 1120 (9th Cir. 2018), reversed by Nestlé USA, Inc. v. Doe (2021) 
Baloco v. Drummond Co. Inc, 767  F.3d 1229 (11th Cir. 2014)
Mujica v. AirScan Inc, 771 F.3d 580 (9th Cir. 2014)
Cardona v. Chiquita Brands Int'l, Inc., 760 F.3d 1185 (11th Cir. 2014), Cert. DeniedSupreme Court Docket Files No. 14-777
See also
 Bowoto v. Chevron Corp.
 Wiwa v. Royal Dutch Shell Co.
 Jesner v. Arab Bank, PLC
References
Further reading
External links
SCOTUSblog links to the opinion and numerous discussions of the case by legal analysts, April 17, 2013.
23 April 2013 Interview with Paul L. Hoffman, who represented the plaintiffs, on the World Socialist Web Site
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Royal Dutch Shell litigation
Category:Nigeria–United States relations
Category:Alien Tort Statute case law
"""

From "Kiowa Tribe of Oklahoma v. Manufacturing Technologies, Inc." ==> """
Kiowa Tribe v. Manufacturing Technologies, 523 U.S. 751 (1998), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that an Indian Nation were entitled to sovereign immunity from contract lawsuits, whether made on or off reservation, or involving governmental or commercial activities..
Background
The Kiowa Tribe of Oklahoma entered into an agreement in 1990 to pay $285,000 for stock. The agreement indicates that it was signed on tribal land, but Manufacturing Technologies stated that it was executed in Oklahoma City on non-tribal land. The tribe defaulted and Manufacturing Technologies sued in state court.  The trial court denied the tribe's motion for summary judgment based on tribal sovereignty. The tribe then appealed to the Oklahoma Court of Civil Appeals which affirmed the trial court's decision.  The Oklahoma Supreme Court denied the tribe's request of review.  The U.S. Supreme Court then granted certiorari to hear the case.
Opinion of the Court
Reversed. Justice Anthony Kennedy delivered the opinion of the court.
Justice Kennedy noted that the contract stated that "Nothing in this Note subjects or limits the sovereign rights of the Kiowa Tribe of Oklahoma."  He then noted that unless Congress provides for the abrogation of tribal sovereignty or the tribe waives its immunity, a tribe is not subject to answering a suit in state courts.  The tribe is immune, regardless of whether the matter involves governmental or commercial activities, and regardless of whether the activity occurs on or off of tribal property.
Dissent
Justice John P. Stevens dissented, stating that a state should have the authority to regulate the conduct of tribes that occur off of tribal lands.
Subsequent developments
Subsequent cases have further defined the concept of tribal immunity. C & L Enterprises, Inc. v. Citizen Band Potawatomi Tribe of Okla. noted that while a tribe has immunity, it may waive that immunity by agreeing to an arbitration clause in a contract that the tribe itself provided..
References
External links
Category:Kiowa
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1998 in United States case law
Category:United States tribal sovereign immunity case law
"""

From "United States v. Kirby Lumber Co." ==> """
United States v. Kirby Lumber Co., 284 U.S. 1 (1931), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that when a corporation settles its debts for less than the face amount, a taxable gain has occurred..
Facts & procedural history
In 1923, the Kirby Lumber Company issued bonds which had a par value of $12,126,800.  Later that same year, the company repurchased the same bonds in the open market for a sum less than par value. The difference between the issue price of the bonds and the price at which the company repurchased them was $137,521.30. The regulations promulgated by the United States Department of the Treasury stated that such a cost savings to a corporation was to be considered taxable income. The Court of Claims, however, found in favor of the taxpayer, analogizing the situation in this case to the one in Bowers v. Kerbaugh-Empire Co., 271 U.S. 170 (1925), a case in which a loan repaid in devalued German marks was not considered to be a taxable gain for the taxpaying company.
Decision
In a brief unanimous opinion, Justice Holmes upheld the validity of the Treasury regulations. He distinguished Bowers v. Kerbaugh-Empire Co. on the grounds that the enterprise in that case had been on the whole a failure, and had lost money. In this case, the taxpayer had made a clear and obvious gain. By paying off its debts for less than the issue price, it had freed up assets to spend on other things. Justice Holmes said nothing in his opinion about the Treasury's definition of income. Later cases before the Court did however address directly the Treasury's definition in connection with related cases.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 284
References
Further reading
26 U.S.C. 108 (Section 108 of the Internal Revenue Code) and corresponding regulations, which contain the current rules on income from discharge of indebtedness.
External links
Category:1931 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
"""

From "Kirby v. Illinois" ==> """
Kirby v. Illinois, 406 U.S. 682 (1972), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States that held that the Sixth Amendment right to counsel did not attach during a pre-indictment identification.R.J. Allen, J.L. Hoffman, D.A. Livingston, and W.J. Stuntz.  Comprehensive Criminal Procedure, Second Edition.  Aspen Publishers, New York: 2005, p. 258
Factual background
On February 21, 1968 in Chicago, Willie Shard reported to police that he was robbed by two men that had taken his wallet.  The wallet contained his Social Security card and traveler's checks.  On February 22, 1968, police stopped Thomas Kirby and Ralph Bean and asked for identification.  Kirby produced a Social Security card bearing the name Willie Shard, and police noticed he also carried traveler's checks.  Kirby said he won them in a game, but he and Bean were arrested and taken to the police station.Kirby v. Illinois, 406 U.S. 682, 684 (1972)
Shard was brought to the police station, and upon seeing Kirby and Bean seated at a table identified them as the men who robbed him.  Kirby and Bean did not have counsel present, and they had not been advised of their rights.  Kirby and Bean were indicted six weeks later for the robbery of Shard, where they were appointed counsel.  A pretrial motion by Kirby to exclude the police station identification was denied.  A jury convicted both defendants of robbery.  Kirby's conviction was affirmed on appeal, where the Illinois appellate court held that the Supreme Court precedents United States v. Wade388 U.S. 218 and Gilbert v. California388 U.S. 263 did not require exclusion of the identification because it was made before the indictment.People v. Kirby, 121 Ill.App.2d 323  The Supreme Court granted certiorari to determine if Kirby had a right to counsel at that pre-indictment showup identification.402 U.S. 995
Judgment of the Court
Plurality opinion
In a plurality opinion joined by Chief Justice Burger and Justices Blackmun and Rehnquist, Justice Stewart held that Kirby did not have a Sixth Amendment right to counsel at the showup because it occurred before the beginning of the criminal prosecution.  The Court observed that Powell v. Alabama, 287 U.S. 45, held that the Sixth Amendment right to counsel only attaches during the criminal prosecution.  A pre-indictment showup, however, could not be considered within the formal  realm of the criminal proceeding, because it was a routine police procedure and not a situation where the suspect is faced with "the prosecutorial forces of organized society."Kirby, 406 U.S. at 690
The plurality observed that other protections were available to criminal suspects at the pre-indictment identification stage, and that identifications could be excluded on a case by case basis if they were overly suggestive according to Stovall v. Denno.Kirby, 406 U.S. at 691
Burger's concurrence
Chief Justice Burger's concurrence asserted that a criminal prosecution only begins once charges are formally filed against a defendant, and because that had not yet happened by the time of the identification here, Kirby had no constitutional right to counsel.Kirby, 406 U.S. at 691 (Burger, C.J., concurring)
Powell's concurrence
Justice Powell concurred because he did not want to extend the exclusionary rule of the Gilbert-Wade doctrine.Kirby, 406 U.S. at 691 (Powell, J., concurring)
Brennan's dissent
In a dissent joined by Justices Douglas and Marshall, Justice Brennan argued that Gilbert and Wade compelled a right to counsel during the pre-indictment lineup.  Brennan focused on the reasoning of Wade, noting that a pre-indictment identification without counsel seriously compromised a defendant's ability to effectively defend himself.  For the same reasons that a post-indictment lineup presented risks of suggestivity and unfairness, so too did a pre-indictment showup.  A pre-indictment showup was also as difficult for a defendant to reconstruct at trial as a post-indictment lineup.Kirby, 406 U.S. at 691-700 (Brennan, J., dissenting)
Brennan criticized the plurality's reliance on the abstract concept of the beginning of a criminal prosecution instead of examining the realities of the prejudice faced by an uncounseled criminal defendant.  Brennan also rejected the idea that Stovall provided a different standard of protection - the events in Stovall occurred before Wade and Gilbert were decided, so Wade and Gilbert were simply not applied to the facts of Stovall retroactively.Kirby, 406 U.S. at 700-705 (Brennan, J., dissenting)
White's dissent
Justice White wrote a separate dissent, asserting that Wade and Gilbert controlled, and that the lower court should be reversed.Kirby, 406 U.S. at 705
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 406
References
External links
Category:United States Sixth Amendment appointment of counsel case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1972 in United States case law
"""

From "Kirchberg v. Feenstra" ==> """
Kirchberg v. Feenstra, 450 U.S. 455 (1981), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held a Louisiana Head and Master law, which gave sole control of marital property to the husband and indicate the husband's dominance over the wife in the marriage, unconstitutional.
 Background 
In 1974, Joan Feenstra charged her husband Harold had molested their daughter. Harold hired an attorney, Karl Kirchberg, to defend himself against the charges, and mortgaged the Feenstras' home toward paying the cost of that attorney. Joan was not informed of this mortgage because Head and Master provisions of Louisiana law allowed him to do so without her consent or knowledge. She dropped the charges, and the couple separated. Joan did not learn about the mortgage until 1976, when Harold's attorney returned to demand payment and threatened foreclosure. She then filed a lawsuit arguing that Louisiana's laws giving sole control of marital property to the husband were unconstitutional.
The district court upheld Louisiana's law. On appeal, the Fifth Circuit overturned the district court, finding the law unconstitutionally violated the Equal Protection Clause, but limited the application of their ruling to future decisions. Feenstra appealed to the Supreme Court.Opinion of the Court at Justia
 Opinion of the Court 
Applying intermediate scrutiny as they had in Craig v. Boren, the court held that Louisiana's law lacked an "exceedingly persuasive justification" for its sex-based classification, and therefore was in violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
 Further developments 
In 1980, during the appeals process, Louisiana changed their laws to eliminate the Head and Master provisions.
 Obergefell v. Hodges 
In 2015, during oral arguments in the same-sex marriage case Obergefell v. Hodges U.S. Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg used the example of the Supreme Court's striking down of Louisiana's Head and Master rule in Kirchberg v. Feenstra to illustrate how "traditional" concepts of marriage had been revised over time.
 References 
External links
Category:1981 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
Category:Marriage law in the United States
Category:Legal history of Louisiana
Category:History of women in Louisiana
"""

From "Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons, Inc." ==> """
Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 568 U.S. 519 (2013), is a United States Supreme Court copyright decision in which the Court held, 6–3, that the first-sale doctrine applies to copies of copyrighted works lawfully made abroad..
Background
In 2008, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. filed suit against Thailand native Supap Kirtsaeng over the sale of foreign edition textbooks made outside of the United States marked for sale exclusively abroad which Kirtsaeng imported into the United States. When Kirtsaeng came to America in 1997 to study at Cornell University, he discovered that Wiley textbooks were considerably more expensive to buy in the United States than in his home country. Kirtsaeng asked his relatives from Thailand to buy such books at home and ship them to him to sell at a profit. He sold the imported books on eBay, making $1.2 million in revenue, although the parties disputed the net profit amount.
Wiley sued Kirtsaeng for copyright infringement and won in two lower courts. The Second Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the ban on importation of copyrighted works without the authority of the U.S. copyright owner; this set up a Circuit split with the Third Circuit and the Ninth Circuit, which had had variant approaches to the same question in other cases.
Kirtsaeng then appealed to the Supreme Court, which granted the writ of certiorari on April 16, 2012. Oral argument was held October 29, and judgment was issued March 19, 2013.
Decision
In 2013, the U.S. Supreme Court reversed the Second Circuit and held that Kirtsaeng's sale of lawfully-made copies purchased overseas was protected by the first-sale doctrine. The Court held that the first sale doctrine applies to goods manufactured outside of the United States, and the protections and exceptions offered by the Copyright Act to works "lawfully made under this title" is not limited by geography. Rather, it applies to all copies legally made anywhere, not just in the United States, in accordance with U.S. copyright law. So, wherever a copy of a book is first made and sold, it can be resold in the U.S. without permission from the publisher.
Justice Stephen Breyer wrote the opinion of the court which, was joined by five Justices (Roberts, Thomas, Alito, Sotomayor, and Kagan). Justice Elena Kagan also wrote a separate concurring opinion, signed by Samuel Alito. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg dissented, joined by Anthony Kennedy and Antonin Scalia. Kagan's concurrence suggested that Congress could change the law to reverse the decision.
Reactions
In law, Kirtsaeng has had the effect of causing a fresh look at the issue of "international exhaustion" in the patent context. The Federal Circuit in the 2001 Jazz Photo v. US International Trade Commission case had held that lawful sales of patented goods outside the US did not give rise to patent exhaustion inside the U.S. In a 2015 order in Lexmark v. Impression Products, the Federal Circuit sua sponte (unprompted) called for briefing and amicus curiae participation in an en banc consideration of whether:
In light of Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 133 S. Ct. 1351 (2012), should this court overrule Jazz Photo Corp. v. International Trade Commission, 264 F.3d 1094 (Fed. Cir. 2001), to the extent it ruled that a sale of a patented item outside the United States never gives rise to United States patent exhaustion.Lexmark Int'l, Inc. v. Impression Prods., Inc., Order of April 14, 2015 (Fed. Cir.).
Similarly, an effort by academic publisher Pearson to control after-market textbook sales on the basis of trademark was dismissed, citing Kirtsaeng.Pearson v. Liu, SDNY Oct. 22, 2013.
In educational publishing, Wiley, the Kirtsaeng plaintiff that lost the case, increased its prices for the international editions as well as the international student editions and cited Kirtsaeng.
The decision also had an outcome-determinative effect on the long-pending dispute between Omega watches (a division of Swatch) and the retailer Costco. Whereas Omega had initially prevailed in the Ninth Circuit, the same way that John Wiley had, the decision was reversed after the United States Supreme Court decided Kirtsaeng.
 See also 
 Grey market
 Quality King v. L'anza, 523 U.S. 135 (1998) – same result, but for goods that were made in the U.S., exported, then re-imported
 Parallel import
 References 
External links
 SCOTUS blog coverage of the decision (filings, briefs, decisions, etc.)
 Knowledge Ecology International (KEI), Analysis of the decision
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Kisor v. Wilkie" ==> """
Kisor v. Wilkie, No. 18-15, 588 U.S. ___ (2019), was a US Supreme Court case related to the interpretation by an executive agency of its own ambiguous regulations. The case involved a veteran who had been denied some benefits from the United States Department of Veterans Affairs due to the agency's interpretation of its regulations. The case challenges the "Auer deference" established in the 1997 case Auer v. Robbins, in which the judiciary branch of the government normally defers to an agency's own interpretation of its own regulations in resolving matters of law. Lower courts, including the Federal Appeals Circuit Courts, ruled against the veteran, acknowledging the Auer deference.
The case sought to have Auer overturned. The Court issued its decision in June 2019 that Kisor lacked sufficient motivation and rationale to overturn Auer on precedent, but did reverse and remand the veteran's case to be reheard with stricter adherence to the principles of whether the Auer deference did apply in the veteran's case.. However, the Court did state that there are times where the Auer deference may be inappropriate, and outlined rules for lower courts to use to as a metric.
 Legal background 
The 1984 case Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc.. introduced what is known as the Chevron deference, a doctrine frequently applied in federal courts. In essence, the Chevron deference is used to defer to an executive agency's interpretation of the "construction of the statute which it administers", as long as Congress has not passed any legislation to address the statute, and the interpretation is a "permissible construction" of the statute. This was further established in Auer v. Robbins in 1997, which stated the Chevron deference would also apply to interpretations of regulations established by the agency, as long as the interpretation is not inconsistent with the regulation.. The decision of Auer had been previously mirrored in Bowles v. Seminole Rock & Sand Co.,. but most of the federal courts have adopted the term Auer deference.
Since the ruling on Auer, many legal commentators, starting with John Manning, later made Dean of Harvard Law School, have expressed concern that this ruling gives executive agencies too much power, able to draw judicial power in a growing administrative state. Some have found agencies more likely to write vague regulations so that they can be interpreted as needed in future legal challenges. 
Justice Antonin Scalia, who wrote the majority opinion for Auer, later stated his regret for writing that decision, calling it "one of the worst opinions in the history of this country," and questioned it in a concurring opinion in Talk America v. Michigan Bell Telephone Co. Justice Clarence Thomas had written in his dissenting opinion on the denial of petition for United Student Aid Funds v. Bible (Docket 15–861) that members of the Court, including himself, Chief Justice John Roberts and Justices Samuel Alito, Anthony Kennedy and Antonin Scalia, had "repeatedly called for [Auer's] reconsideration in an appropriate case". Observers also identified that Justice Neil Gorsuch, while he served on the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit,  authored decisions that called for a re-evaluation of Auer.
 Case background 
James Kisor is a veteran Marine from the Vietnam War, and had been a participant in Operation Harvest Moon. In 1982, stating that he had developed posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) from his service, Kisor sought disability benefits from the United States Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). On review, the VA disagreed he had PTSD and denied him disability benefits. Kisor appealed that decision in 2006, this time with additional documentation that was not available in 1982, including his service record. The VA granted benefits with this information, but with a start date of 2006 rather than 1982. The VA interpreted its own regulations that the new documents presented were not "relevant" to his first request in 1982, despite Kisor stating that the VA affirmed his PTSD from his combat record forms. Both the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims and the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit affirmed the VA's decision, affirming that Auer gave the VA the ability to define the meaning of "relevant" in this regulation, and putting the onus on Kisor to demonstrate it was not a valid interpretation.On Petition for a Writ of Certiorari to the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit re Auer v. Robbins (June 2018) Kisor's petition for the Federal Circuit to rehear the case en banc was denied, with three judges dissenting.
 Supreme Court 
Kisor filed petition for writ of certiorari to the Supreme Court in April 2018, asking two questions. First, whether Auer, as well as the related case Bowles v. Seminole Rock & Sand Co. (1945) should be overturned, and second, whether the canon of interpretation requiring courts to construe interpretive ambiguity in favor of veterans trumps Auer deference. The Supreme Court granted the petition on the first question only, with oral arguments heard on March 27, 2019. During oral arguments, while the Court recognized the issues with allowing agencies to interpret their own policies without reasonable public input and how Auer contributed towards the administrative state, they also expressed concern that such agencies, and not the judiciary, are typically the only appropriate entities with expert knowledge in the agency's field to make appropriate interpretations, citing the example of a complex chemical requirement established under the United States Food and Drug Administration. Further, the Justices expressed concern with fractured interpretation of an agency's regulations within other agencies should Auer be overruled. Justice Stephen Breyer half-jokingly expressed concern that a poor decision in this case could be the "greatest judicial power grab since Marbury v. Madison".
The Court issued its decision, its majority decision written by Justice Elena Kagan, on June 26, 2019, reversing and remanding the case back to the Federal Circuit Court. Kagan's ruling specifically did not overrule Auer or Seminole Rock, as Kisor's case lacked the proper motivation for doing so and to overcome stare decisis, though some dissents-in-part from Justices Thomas, Alito, Gorsuch, and Kavanaugh indicated they would have ruled in favor of overturning these. 
Justice Elena Kagan, writing for the majority, issued an opinion by herself and the other liberal justices, joined partly by Chief Justice Roberts. Kagan started with reiterating the justification of Auer, namely, the court's belief of implicit Congressional intent. The court infers that the agency can best state the regulation's authorial intent, has the expertise to make what's essentially a policy decision, and can promote uniformity. Justice Kagan further stated that while the decision upholds the Auer deference, "we reinforce its limits." Kagan's opinion stated that the Auer deference is "sometimes appropriate and sometimes not," and states that the Auer deference can only be considered when "a regulation is genuinely ambiguous," the court has exhausted traditional tools of statutory construction, "the agency's construction of its rule must still be reasonable", the rule must be an authoritative statement by agency higher-up officials; it must implicate agency expertise; and it cannot create unfair surprise. 
Strikingly, the chief justice joins only the portion of the majority opinion that limited the application of Auer. He did not join the parts of the opinion which stated the justifications or Auer and declined to overrule it.
The Court did unanimously rule on the judgement of the specific matter of Kisor's case with the VA that the Federal Circuit did not use all the tools it had at hand to property analyze the interpretation of the VA's regulations, thus vacating the prior decision and remanding it for review in light of the limitations set forth for the Auer deference.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 588
References
Further reading
External links
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Post-traumatic stress disorder
Category:United States Department of Veterans Affairs
Category:United States administrative case law
"""

From "Kissinger v. Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press" ==> """
Kissinger v. Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press, 445 U.S. 136 (1980), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States involving the Freedom of Information Act.  The Supreme Court ruled that Henry Kissinger was not required under the Act to turn over transcripts of phone conversations he made as an adviser to President Richard Nixon.
By a 5–2 margin, the court overturned the decisions of two lower Federal courts and decided that Kissinger's removal of the transcripts from the State Department removed the documents from the purview of the Freedom of Information Act. In his opinion for the majority, Associate Justice William H. Rehnquist noted that once the documents had been withdrawn, "the agency has neither the custody or control necessary to enable it to withhold."
Kissinger had removed thousands of pages of the phone transcripts in the waning days of his term as Secretary of State. The documents were first stored at Nelson Rockefeller's Kykuit estate in Westchester County, New York and were later given to the Library of Congress. In a decision affirmed by the United States Court of Appeals, the United States District Court ruled that Kissinger had "wrongfully removed" the documents and ordered the Library of Congress to return the papers to the State Department so that they could be processed for disclosure.
The Supreme Court confirmed the decisions of the lower courts that Kissinger's transcripts when he was Richard Nixon's national security advisor did not fall under the purview of the Freedom of Information Act, nor would it apply to any other members of a President's executive office staff. The only documents that were legitimately covered by the request would have been from his term as Secretary of State from September 1973 to January 1977.
References
External links
Category:1980 in United States case law
Category:Freedom of information in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States National Security Council
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Nixon administration controversies
Category:Henry Kissinger
"""

From "Klaxon Co. v. Stentor Electric Manufacturing Co." ==> """
Klaxon Company v. Stentor Electric Manufacturing Company, 313 U.S. 487 (1941), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court applied the choice-of-law principles of Erie Railroad v. Tompkins to conflicts between laws of different states for cases sitting in federal court on diversity jurisdiction.  The court held that a federal court sitting in diversity must apply the choice-of-law doctrine of the forum state to choose between the forum state's law and the other state's law (as distinguished from the federal choice-of-law doctrines which had been used before Erie).Yeazell, S.C.  Civil Procedure, Seventh Edition.  Aspen Publishers, New York, NY: 2008, p. 231
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 313
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:Diversity jurisdiction case law
Category:1941 in United States case law
Category:Conflict of laws case law
"""

From "Kleindienst v. Mandel" ==> """
Kleindienst v. Mandel, 408 U.S. 753 (1972), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court, which held that the United States Attorney General has the right to refuse somebody's entry to the United States, as he has been empowered to do so in § 212(a)(28) of the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952.
This action was brought to compel Attorney General Richard Kleindienst to grant a temporary nonimmigrant visa to a Belgian journalist and Marxian theoretician whom the American plaintiff-appellees, Ernest Mandel et al., had invited to participate in academic conferences and discussions in the US. The alien had been found ineligible for admission under §§ 212(a)(28)(D) and (G)(v) of the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952, barring those who advocate or publish "the economic, international, and governmental doctrines of world communism." Kleindienst had declined to waive ineligibility as he has the power to do under § 212(d) of the Act, basing his decision on unscheduled activities engaged in by the alien on a previous visit to the United States, when a waiver was granted.
 Impact 
Kleindienst v. Mandel was cited by the 9th Circuit three-judge appeals panel on February 9, 2017, in Washington v. Trump, with regard to an executive order concerning the restriction of immigration from certain stipulated countries. In that case the government relied on language from Mandel that embraces the proposition that "when the Executive exercises immigration authority 'on the basis of a facially legitimate and bona fide reason, the courts will [not] look behind the exercise of that discretion.'" The court instead held that the Mandel Standard involved a "congressionally enumerated standard" and its application to an individual visa application rather than what it considered to be the "President's promulgation of sweeping immigration policy". They concluded that "courts can and do review constitutional challenges to the substance and implementation of immigration policy."
The Supreme Court later relied in part on Kleindienst v. Mandel in upholding the Trump immigration restriction in Trump v. Hawaii (2018), overruling the 9th Circuit.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 408
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:Belgium–United States relations
Category:Anti-communism in the United States
"""

From "Kleppe v. New Mexico" ==> """
Kleppe v. New Mexico, 426 U.S. 529 (1976), was a United States Supreme Court decision that unanimously held the Wild and Free-Roaming Horses and Burros Act of 1971, passed in 1971 by the United States Congress to protect these animals from "capture, branding, harassment, or death", to be a constitutional exercise of congressional power. In February 1974, the  New Mexico Livestock Board rounded up and sold 19 unbranded burros from Bureau of Land Management (BLM) land. When the BLM demanded the animals' return, the state filed suit claiming that the Wild Free-Roaming Horses and Burros Act was unconstitutional, claiming the federal government did not have the power to control animals in federal lands unless they were items in interstate commerce or causing damage to the public lands.
Background
In 1971, Congress passed the Wild and Free-Roaming Horses and Burros Act of 1971,  (later codified at , et seq.) (WFRHBA). The act covered the management, protection and study of "unbranded and unclaimed horses and burros on public lands in the United States.". The act requires the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture to protect and manage wild horses as a component of public property of the United States.Aksentijevich, at 403. Free ranging horses are to be protected from "capture, branding, harassment, or death.". The managing agencies are the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) for Interior and the Forest Service (USFS) for Agriculture.Roberto Iraola, Essay: The Wild Free-Roaming Horses and Burros Act Of 1971, 35  1049, 1051-52 (Fall 2005).
The state of New Mexico challenged the federal government's authority to manage wild horses within the boundaries of New Mexico.Blake Shepard, Article and Comment: The Scope Of Congress' Constitutional Power Under the Property Clause: Regulating Non-Federal Property to Further the Purposes of National Parks and Wilderness Areas, 11  479, 499 (Spring 1984). A New Mexican rancher, Kelly Stephenson, found wild burros grazing on his land and on the federal land where he had a grazing permit. Stephenson complained to BLM, and when BLM refused to remove the burros, to the New Mexico Livestock Board.Morton, 406 F. Supp.  at 1237. The New Mexico Livestock Board, acting under state lawNew Mexico Estray Law, N.M. Stat. Ann. §§ 47-14-1 to 47-14-10 (1966). then seized nineteen burros from federal land and sold them at public auction.Morton, 406 F. Supp.  at 1237; Shepard, at 499. The BLM asserted jurisdiction under the WFRHBA and demanded the return of the animals.Morton, 406 F. Supp.  at 1237; Shepard, at 499. New Mexico then filed suit in the federal district court, claiming that the federal law was unconstitutional.Morton, 406 F. Supp.  at 1237; Shepard, at 499.
District court
The case was heard by a three judge panel consisting of Oliver Seth, Edwin Mechem, and Harry Payne.Morton, 406 F. Supp. at 1237. The panel declared the WFRHBA unconstitutional, stating that its authority was derived from the "territorial clause," Article IV of the United States Constitution, art. IV, § 3, cl. 2. but that animals do not become federal property simply by being on federal land.Morton, 406 F. Supp. at 1238. Citing cases where the federal government regulated deer populations based on damage to federal lands, but arguing that the WFRHBA presented no evidence that horses or burros were inflicting damage, the court enjoined the federal government from enforcing the Act, holding that the statute unconstitutionally exceeded the federal government's authority by protecting free-roaming horses and burros, rather than the land upon which they lived.Morton, 406 F. Supp. at 1238-39.
Supreme Court
thumb|right|Justice Marshall, author of the opinion
Justice Thurgood Marshall delivered the opinion of a unanimous court. The Court interpreted the property clause broadly and found the WFRHBA a constitutional exercise of Congressional authority, holding, "the Property Clause also gives Congress the power to protect wildlife on the public lands, state law notwithstanding.". wrote that the complete power' that Congress has over public lands necessarily includes the power to regulate and protect the wildlife living there."Kleppe, 426 U.S., at 541-42. In addition, the Court said that Congress may enact legislation governing federal lands pursuant to the property clause and "when Congress so acts, federal legislation necessarily overrides conflicting state laws under the supremacy clause."Kleppe, 426 U.S. at 543
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 426
Notes
References
Further reading
 Fischman, Robert L., and Jeremiah I. Williamson. "The Story of Kleppe v. New Mexico: The Sagebrush Rebellion as Un-Cooperative Federalism." University of Colorado Law Review 83 (2011): 123+ online
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States land use case law
Category:1976 in the environment
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:Feral horses
Category:Legal history of New Mexico
Category:United States Department of the Interior
"""

From "Kloeckner v. Solis" ==> """
Kloeckner v. Solis, 568 U.S. 41 (2012), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States involving federal employee grievance procedures under the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978.. The issue was whether a so-called "mixed case" involving both wrongful termination and discrimination claims should be appealed from the Merit Systems Protection Board to a federal district court or to the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit
The Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve a circuit split on the issue and ruled unanimously, in an opinion delivered by Justice Elena Kagan, that the statute clearly provided for appeal to a district court in such cases.
Background of the case
In 2006, Carolyn Kloeckner was dismissed from her position in the United States Department of Labor in St. Louis as an employee benefits investigator. Prior to her dismissal, she had filed a complaint with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) claiming that she had suffered workplace discrimination due to her age and gender. In July 2007, the EEOC terminated proceedings without issuing a judgement and referred it back to the Department of Labor, which affirmed the termination of Kloeckner and claimed she could file an appeal within 30 days to the Merit Systems Protection Board. Kloeckner then filed an appeal with the MSPB, which was created under the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978 to deal with employment decisions of federal agencies, within the 30-day time limit in November 2007. However, the MSPB declared the appeal as untimely and dismissed it on procedural grounds.
Lower court proceedings
Kloeckner then filed a civil complaint in the District Court for the District of Columbia, as her lawyer was from there. The Federal Government then successfully had the venue changed to the federal district court in St. Louis then immediately filed for a dismissal due to lack of jurisdiction. The Civil Service Reform Act directs that cases relating to employee termination are to be heard by the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit but cases relating to discrimination are referred to a federal district court. Because Kloeckner's case had elements of both, it was classified as a "mixed case" and the federal district court judge noted that there was a circuit split on this issue but judged that jurisdiction to rule on this case was exclusively in the hands of a court of the Eighth Circuit.Kloeckner v. Solis, No. 09-804, 2010 WL 582590 (E.D. Mo. Feb. 18, 2010). The Eighth Circuit upheld this ruling on appeal stating that because the MPSB had never resolved the issue of workplace discrimination, only a Federal Circuit Court could rule on the case.Kloeckner v. Solis, 639 F.3d 834 (8th Cir. 2011).
Opinion of the Court
In a unanimous opinion delivered by Justice Elena Kagan, the Court reversed the Eighth Circuit and remanded to the district court. This applies in all cases involving discrimination issues, whether the cases were decided on merit or procedure. The Court criticized the federal government's argument as "construct[ing] such an obscure path to such a simple result", noting that "it would be hard to dream up a more roundabout way of bifurcating judicial review of the MSPB's rulings in mixed cases".Kloeckner, 568 U.S. at ___, slip op. at 10.
Reactions
Colleen M. Kelley, president of the National Treasury Employees Union, praised the ruling as "provid[ing] a much more clear and rational path" for cases that might otherwise have "ping pong[ed]" through the judicial system,. and that the Court's ruling affords discrimination plaintiffs "broader appeal rights.".
See also
 2012 term opinions of the Supreme Court of the United States
 2012 term United States Supreme Court opinions of Elena Kagan
References
Further reading
 .
 Gorman, Tricia (November 13, 2012), "Supreme Court hears arguments in MSPB ‘mixed case’ jurisdiction appeal, Thomson Reuters Blog
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2012 in United States case law
Category:United States Department of Labor
Category:Civil service in the United States
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States employment discrimination case law
"""

From "Klopfer v. North Carolina" ==> """
Klopfer v. North Carolina, 386 U.S. 213 (1967), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court involving the application of the Speedy Trial Clause of the United States Constitution in state court proceedings.  The Sixth Amendment in the Bill of Rights states that in criminal prosecutions "...the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy trial"  In this case, a defendant was tried for trespassing and the initial jury could not reach a verdict.  The prosecutor neither dismissed nor reinstated the case but used an unusual procedure to leave it open, potentially indefinitely.  Klopfer argued that this denied him his right to a speedy trial.  In deciding in his favor, the Supreme Court incorporated the speedy trial protections of the Sixth Amendment against the states.
Prior history
On January 3, 1964, Peter Klopfer, a civil rights activist and Duke University biology professor protesting segregation in a restaurant, supposedly entered the property of Austin Watts in Chapel Hill, North Carolina and refused to leave when directed.  In February of that year, the grand jury for Orange County indicted him for criminal trespass.  He pleaded not guilty and the jury was unable to reach a verdict in a short trial at the Orange Superior Court that March.  The prosecutor moved for nolle prosequi with leave, a variation of nolle prosequi that was particular to North Carolina.  The Superior Court granted the motion.
The effect of granting this motion meant that Klopfer was not completely free of charges. When a case is normally halted on a prosecutor's motion for nolle prosequi, a judge's approval is required to restart proceedings. In North Carolina at the time, a court granting a nolle prosequi with leave motion implicitly granted this permission ahead of time.  This allowed the prosecutor to restore the case for trial without seeking further permission and the statute of limitations would not be a barrier to re-instating the prosecution at any time.  Klopfer's attorney argued that this was a violation of the right to a speedy trial since it left the charges hanging over Klopfer's head indefinitely, interfering with his right to travel and his professional activity.
Klopfer made this speedy trial argument in appealing to the North Carolina Supreme Court.  That Court considered the right to a speedy trial to only apply if there was a trial.  In attempting to force the prosecutor to dispose of the case definitively, the Court held the defendant was attempting to compel prosecution by the State and interfering with the prosecutor's discretion.  It held that this discretion was within "customary procedure" and not reviewable.  It therefore affirmed the lower court's granting of the motion.
Decision
The United States Supreme Court took the case in part to decide if, contrary to the lower Court's opinion, the Sixth Amendment protections  on speedy trial applied to state court hearings.  The opinion written by Chief Justice Warren, began by reviewing the legal basis for the nolle prosequi with leave motion, calling it an "unusual North Carolina criminal procedural device" and an "extraordinary criminal procedure".  The Court found that there was nothing to sustain use of the procedure in either North Carolina statute or in the common law of that state.
In considering the application of this type of motion to Klopfer's case, it noted that the initial indictment was within a month of the supposed offense, but that the State's motion was not granted until August 9, 1965.  After waiting over a year and a half for disposition of the case, the Superior Court had then granted the State's motion over Klopfer's objections and with no justification offered by the prosecutor.  Klopfer, a professor of zoology at Duke University, complained to the Court that the indefinite suspension of the case interfered with his employment and his right to travel.
Where the North Carolina Supreme Court had dismissed Klopfer's speedy trial argument in one sentence, Warren's decision extensively reviewed the history of the right to a speedy trial.   He traced it to sources of English common law as old as the Assize of Clarendon in 1166 and the Magna Carta in 1215.  Not only was American common law heir to the English legal tradition, but Warren also found that many of the founding fathers were schooled in that tradition and had studied English law and intended its rights to apply to Americans.  The right to a speedy trial was guaranteed in the federal Constitution and in many early state constitutional documents.  By 1967, it was guaranteed in some fashion by each of the 50 states.  Warren called it "...one of the most basic rights preserved by our Constitution."
The Court also held that the Sixth Amendment's speedy trial guarantee applied to the states.  Building on , , and , the Court held that "...the right to a speedy trial is as fundamental as any of the rights secured by the Sixth Amendment"  and applied to the states through the Fourteenth Amendment.  The lower court's opinion was overturned.
Effects of the decision
This case was later cited by the Supreme Court 22 times.  This case was part of the legal history of applying the Federal Constitution's protections as enshrined in the Bill of Rights to cases arising in state courts.  In , it extended this protection to require speedy prosecutions of defendants even when held across state lines from the indicting court and in  it held the same applied to defendants held by authorities at another location in the same state.  It did not, however, define "speedy" until the case of , setting out a four-part test to be used to judge if a delay was prejudicial or not.  The North Carolina laws were changed to eliminate the nolle prosequi with leave motion in 1973, allowing prosecutors to voluntarily dismiss charges without tolling the statute of limitations.  State law allows prosecutors to file for a voluntary dismissal with leave to re-instate charges when the delay is caused by the defendant’s own actions, such as a failure to appear or incapacity to stand trial.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 386
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
State v. Klopfer 145 S.E.2d 909 (1966)-North Carolina Supreme Court opinion (South Eastern Reporter, second series)
266 N.C. 349-North Carolina Supreme Court court opinion (North Carolina Reporter)
Category:1967 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:Incorporation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Speedy Trial Clause case law
"""

From "Klor's, Inc. v. Broadway-Hale Stores, Inc." ==> """
Klor’s, Inc. v. Broadway-Hale Stores, Inc., 359 U.S. 207 (1959), is a United States Supreme Court decision holding that a retail chain's persuasion of a number of suppliers not to deal with a competitive retailer was a per se illegal boycott – under a hub-and-spoke conspiracy theory.
Background
Broadway-Hale Stores, Inc., a major California department store, induced Admiral, Emerson Radio, General Electric, Philco, RCA, Whirlpool, Zenith, and other major appliance manufacturers to stop selling to Klor's, a price-cutting retail store.The Government filed a brief as amicus curiae in the Supreme Court in support of Klor's. The brief stated that it is "consistent with the uncontradicted allegations of the complaint that petitioner was boycotted because he was the leading recognized price-cutter among San Francisco retailers of the products covered by the complaint." Brief for the United States as Amicus Curiae, p. 9. This may strain the record, which does not specifically state that. Both parties had stores in San Francisco next door to one another. Klor's brought an antitrust treble damages suit, alleging a conspiracy among Broadway-Hale and the manufacturers.359 U.S. at 208-09.
By pre-trial order the case one was limited to a single conspiracy charging a Sherman Act § 1 violation. The defendants moved for summary judgment, and the lower courts agreed that the case should be summarily dismissed, on the grounds that Klor's was only one of hundreds of stores selling such goods; therefore, its elimination as a competitive factor did not substantially lessen competition in the general market – there was no public injury. Klor's did not show or even allege "that, by any act of defendants, the price, quantity, or quality offered the public was affected, nor that there was any intent or purpose to effect a change in, or an influence on, prices, quantity, or quality."359 U.S. at 210.
The issue of whether a conspiracy existed was by-passed by the summary judgment motion, even though the allegations appear to have described only a "rimless wheel conspiracy", one without the spokes (appliance manufacturers) being connected to one another, knowing what one another were doing, or being interdependent.
Ruling of Supreme Court
thumb|right|200px|Justice Hugo Black delivered the opinion of the Court
Justice Hugo Black delivered the 8—1 opinion and unanimous judgment of the Court, reversing the lower courts' dismissal of the case, on the grounds that Klor's sufficiently pleaded a per se illegal boycott conspiracy.Group boycotts are illegal per se. See, e.g., . The Court said, "Alleged in this complaint is a wide combination consisting of manufacturers, distributors, and a retailer" that drives Klor's "out of business as a dealer in the defendants' products."359 U.S. at 212-13. It is immaterial, Black insisted, that "the victim is just one merchant whose business is so small that his destruction makes little difference to the economy":
Monopoly can as surely thrive by the elimination of such small businessmen, one at a time, as it can by driving them out in large groups. In recognition of this fact, the Sherman Act has consistently been read to forbid all contracts and combinations which "tend to create a monopoly," whether "the tendency is a creeping one" or "one that proceeds at full gallop."359 U.S. at 213-14.
Justice John Marshall Harlan II concurred in the judgment.
Commentary
Professor James Rahl sees the Klor's case as posing a dilemma for the Supreme Court, which it dodged by refusing to explain its ruling. At that time, the antitrust rule on boycotts was not clear:
Either all joint refusals to sell are illegal, or only such refusals are illegal as may "restrain free competition in the market." Adoption of the first alternative would require confession that some antitrust prohibitions do not necessarily rest upon any clear danger to economic competition. . . . [That] would be without benefit of precedent, since none of the past boycott cases cited by the Court would yield such a simple generalization. Moreover, it would endanger legitimate relationships, such as exclusive distributorships, which the Court was evidently not prepared to disturb.James A. Rahl, Per se Rules and Boycotts under the Sherman Act: Some Reflections on the Klor's Case, 45  1165, 1170 (1959).
The second alternative was quite problematic:
Adoption of the second alternative – a rule qualified by a finding of circumstances showing a real danger of appreciable restraint – would encounter embarrassment by comparison with the Northern Pacific example of [a trivial and negligible restraint of trade]. Moreover, it would require a finding that the lower court's conclusions were "clearly erroneous" as a matter of fact, and an affirmative demonstration, without benefit of anything in the record, that the alleged restraint did threaten competition.
Therefore, the Court simply did not explain why the alleged boycott was illegal: "What the Court actually did was to avoid coming to grips with the dilemma. As a consequence it is very difficult now to know what the rule on boycotts is."
Rahl explains the Court's difficulty:
The Court's difficulty in articulating an internally consistent rationale is not due to inadequate powers of expression; it is due to an attempt to simplify something that is not simple. Boycotts, concerted refusals to deal and joint refusals to sell are not homogeneous phenomena.
Rahl at 1171.
Rahl points out that some joint refusals to deal are innocuous or even beneficial. The line between exclusive dealing arrangements and boycotts is nebulous. Joint marketing agreements involve undertakings not to deal with alternative marketing channels. Joint venturers may agree to invest all their funds in one business vehicle. "All agreements to deal on specified terms mean refusal to deal on other terms." If there is no requirement as to competitive effect, a rule against boycotts becomes "completely unmanageable."Rahl at 1172. It therefore, Rahl maintains, seems "clear that any comprehensible per se rule for boycotts is also out of the question."Rahl at 1173.
Subsequent cases
In 1985 in Northwest Stationers v. Pacific Stationery & Printing Co., the Court held that not all boycotts which exclude competitors are subject to per se scrutiny. The Court ruled that the expulsion by a retail office supply purchasing cooperative of one of its members was not per se illegal absent a showing that "the cooperative possesse[d] market power or exclusive access to an element essential to effective competition.https://scholar.smu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1366&context=smulr 
References
External links
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Knetsch v. United States" ==> """
Knetsch v. United States, 364 U.S. 361 (1960), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court concerning taxation law.
The taxpayer was a saver who was convinced to buy a deferred annuity because the inside buildup on such policies is tax-deferred. However, he wanted to claim a deduction on the money he borrowed that he used to buy the annuity. The IRS won and the taxpayer was denied the deduction. An understanding of the economics would immediately reveal that the only reason the transaction had any chance of making sense for the taxpayer was the asymmetric way the-then current tax code allowed a current deduction on the loan liability at the same time allowed tax deferral on the purchased asset. Success would have legitimated tax arbitrage.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 364
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1960 in United States case law
"""

From "Knick v. Township of Scott, Pennsylvania" ==> """
Knick v. Township of Scott, Pennsylvania, No. 17-647, 588 U.S. ___ (2019), was a case before the Supreme Court of the United States dealing with compensation for private property owners when the use of that property is taken from them by state or local governments, under the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The immediate question asks if private land owners must exhaust all state-offered venues for mediation before seeking action in the federal courts. The case specifically addresses the Court's prior decision from the 1985 case Williamson County Regional Planning Commission v. Hamilton Bank of Johnson City, which had previously established that all state court venues must be exhausted first, but which has since resulted in several split decisions among circuit courts. The Supreme Court ruled in June 2019 to overturn part of Williamson County that required state venue action be taken first, allowing taking-compensation cases to be brought directly to federal court..
Background
The Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment allows federal, state, and local governments to take private property for public use under eminent domain, as long as the private landowners are justly compensated for the taking of their property.
In 1985, in Williamson County Regional Planning Commission v. Hamilton Bank of Johnson City, the Supreme Court held that in cases claiming just compensation for private property taken by state or local governments, the owner had to demonstrate that the case was ripe for litigation by exhausting state law remedies "first." As it turned out, however, courts also took the position that when property owners complied with this rule and sued "first" in state court, the state court decision would give rise to res judicata or issue preclusion, so the owner's claim of federal constitutional violation could never be heard in federal court under federal law. This decision has come under criticism as it denied property owners, and them alone, access to federal courts and to protection of the Fifth Amendment's Taking Clause. 
In the Knick case, Rose Mary Knick of Pennsylvania had purchased  of farmland within Scott Township, Lackawanna County in 1970. Around 2008, another resident of the township discovered documentation that suggested one of their relatives may have been buried in a cemetery within Knick's land. In 2008, a dispute arose between Knick, and the township which promulgated public access to the cemetery located on Knick's property. Knick asserted there was no evidence of such, her land title did not include any mention of a cemetery, nor was any cemetery registered with the state. The Township passed an ordinance in 2012 that required any cemetery operated within the Township to have right-of-way access from the nearest public road, and be open to public during daylight hours. After passing the ordinance, a Township official went onto Knick's property without permission, discovered a set of stones he deemed to be a cemetery, and determined Knick to be in violation of the ordinance. Knick eventually sued in federal court which dismissed her action.
Knick sought relief from the Pennsylvania court of common pleas, arguing that her land was being taken for public use without compensation, but the court refused to accept the case as the Township had yet to file a civil enforcement action against her. She subsequently appealed to the United States District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania, citing facial challenges based on the Township's new ordinance violating her Fourth and Fifth Amendment rights in addition to takings claims. By September 2016, the District Court dismissed the case, arguing that it was unripe for federal courts as per Williamson County. Knick appealed to the Third Circuit Appeals Court. While the Third Circuit did consider if the various tests prescribed by Williamson County were applicable to the facial challenges presented by Knick, the Court ultimately deemed that Knick's case was unripe until Knick had prosecuted a state-level lawsuit.
Supreme Court
Knick petitioned the Supreme Court for writ of certiorari. Knick's petition pointed out that there was a split in how Williamson County was applied in the Circuit Courts. The Third Circuit's decision agreed with the Sixth, Ninth, and Tenth Circuits in prior case law, but was in conflict with the First, Fourth, and Seventh Circuits. Additionally, the petition referred to Justice John Roberts' denial for writ of certiorari in Arrigoni Enterprises, LLC v. Durham (2016), a case that also sought to challenge the Williamson County decision, which had been joined by Justice Anthony Kennedy. In the denial, Roberts suggested that it was necessary for the Supreme Court to review Williamson County, due to the onus it puts on property owners, but required a proper case for that review.
The Court granted the petition in March 2018, with the first oral arguments heard on October 3, 2018, before an eight-member Supreme Court, as Justice Brett Kavanaugh had yet to be sworn into office. In November 2018, the Court announced it would hold a second argument before all nine Justices; while the Court did not provide a rationale, analysts believed that this indicated the eight Justices were deadlocked, thus requiring Justice Kavanaugh to take part in the case to break the deadlock. The second oral hearings before the full court was held January 16, 2019.
The Court issued its judgment on June 21, 2019. In its 5–4 decision along ideological lines, it vacated the Third Circuit's judgment and remanded the case to the lower court. The decision overruled the portion of Williamson County decision that required those seeking legal action for takings-compensation to seek state litigation first, finding that the original decision was poorly reasoned. Chief Justice John Roberts wrote the majority opinion, writing that "A property owner has an actionable Fifth Amendment takings claim when the government takes his property without paying for it." The opinion emphasized that unfair compensation when private land is taken is a constitutional violation, and thus ripe for the federal court system. Justice Clarence Thomas joined the majority, and in a separate opinion, wrote "Stare decisis does not compel continued adherence to this erroneous precedent." Justice Elena Kagan wrote the dissent and expressed concerns that by eliminating the need to bring such takings-compensation cases to state courts first, it could require federal courts to become involved in understanding complex state law issues. Kagan's decision also expressed concern that Knick along with other recent Court decisions such as Franchise Tax Board of California v. Hyatt shows a trend that the current Court is ready to ignore long-standing precedent and overturn past rulings. Justice Stephen Breyer had expressed similar concern in his dissent with Hyatt.
 See also 
 Janus v. AFSCME (2018), a case in which the liberal minority of the Supreme Court questioned the willingness of the conservative majority of the Supreme Court to ignore long-standing precedent and to overturn past rulings/to overrule precedent.
 Franchise Tax Board of California v. Hyatt (2019), another case in which the liberal minority of the Supreme Court questioned the willingness of the conservative majority of the Supreme Court to ignore long-standing precedent and to overturn past rulings/to overrule precedents.
References
External links
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Lackawanna County, Pennsylvania
Category:Cemeteries in Pennsylvania
Category:Takings Clause case law
"""

From "Knight v. Commissioner" ==> """
Knight v. Commissioner, 552 U.S. 181 (2008), was a United States Supreme Court case that addressed the tax deductibility of investment advisory fees paid by a trust.
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2008 in United States case law
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Knowles v. Iowa" ==> """
Knowles v. Iowa, 525 U.S. 113 (1998), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court which ruled that the Fourth Amendment prohibits a police officer from further searching a vehicle which was stopped for a minor traffic offense once the officer has written a citation for the offense. 
Background
Patrick Knowles was stopped in Newton, Iowa, driving  in a  zone. The police officer ticketed Knowles rather than arresting him, as was permitted under Iowa law. The officer then searched the car, finding marijuana and a "pot pipe." Knowles was then arrested and charged with violation of state laws dealing with controlled substances.
Before trial, Knowles argued the search was not applicable to the "search incident to arrest" exception recognized in United States v. Robinson,. because he had not been placed under arrest. At the hearing on the motion to suppress, the police officer conceded that he had neither Knowles' consent nor probable cause to conduct the search. He relied on Iowa law dealing with such searches.
Because Iowa Code § 321.485(1)(a) permits either an arrest or a citation when making a traffic stop, the Iowa Supreme Court has interpreted this provision as providing authority to officers to conduct a full-blown search of an automobile and driver in those cases where police elect not to make a custodial arrest.  The trial court denied the motion to suppress and the defendant was convicted.
A divided Iowa Supreme Court upheld the search and the conviction.
Supreme Court
The U.S. Supreme Court decided that the search was unlawful.   
Because, given the type of stop, there were no grounds for the officer to believe that his safety was in jeopardy, and thus had no probable cause to perform a search without consent of the driver.  Also, since Knowles was not "in custody", there was no custodial exception to permit a search either.  Thus the search was ruled illegal.
The Supreme Court reversed the case and remanded it for redetermination.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 525
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
Further reading
References
External links
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Legal history of Iowa
Category:1998 in United States case law
Category:Jasper County, Iowa
"""

From "Knox v. Lee" ==> """
Knox v. Lee, 79 U.S. (12 Wall.) 457 (1871), was an important case for its time in which the Supreme Court of the United States overruled Hepburn v. Griswold.. In Knox v. Lee, the Court held that making paper money legal tender through the Legal Tender Act did not conflict with Article I of the United States Constitution.
Mrs. Lee was a loyal citizen of the United States whose flock of sheep was sold by the Confederate Army, as the Confederates considered Mrs. Lee an "alien enemy". Mr. Knox purchased the sheep from the Confederate army, and Mrs. Lee brought suit for trespass and conversion. The Court instructed the jury that whatever amount they awarded could be paid with legal tender notes of the United States. Mr. Knox appealed, as he contended that this instruction was equivalent to telling the jury to add a premium for the discount of paper currency relative to specie.
Parker v. Davis was resolved in the same decision, in which Davis wished to compel specific performance requiring Parker to convey a lot to Davis in return for payment of money. The Court decreed that Davis should pay money into the Court, and Parker was to execute a deed to Davis. Davis paid United States notes, but Parker refused to execute a deed and claimed that he was entitled to receive coin.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 79
 Legal Tender Cases
 Willard v. Tayloe (1869)
 West v. Barnes (1791)
References
External links
Category:1871 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:Banknotes of the United States
"""

From "Knox v. Service Employees International Union, Local 1000" ==> """
Knox v. Service Employees International Union, 567 U.S. 298 (2012), is a United States constitutional law case.  The United States Supreme Court held in a 7–2 decision that Dianne Knox and other non-members of the Service Employees International Union did not receive the required notice of a $12 million assessment the union charged them to raise money for the union's political fund..  In a tighter 5–4 ruling, the court further held that the long-standing precedent, the First Amendment requirement that non-union members covered by union contracts be given the chance to "opt out" of special fees was insufficient.  Setting new precedent, the majority ruled that non-members shall be sent notice giving them the option to opt into special fees.
Background
Under Abood v. Detroit Board of Education (1977) states may allow unions to charge nonmember workers “fair share” fees to prevent the free rider problem of nonmembers benefiting from a union's collective bargaining gains.  Nonmembers must annually opt out of paying full union membership dues after the union sends a Hudson notice of what portion of the dues is chargeable to collective bargaining costs..  California is one of the states that allow for such an “agency shop”.
Arnold Schwarzenegger won a recall election against California Governor Gray Davis in November 2003.  Governor Schwarzenegger then proposed a broad fiscal reform agenda and called a 2005 special election to pass several ballot proposition and initiative constitutional amendments.Richard Hasen, Assessing California's Hybrid Democracy, 97 Cal. L. Rev. 1501 (2009).   One of these, Proposition 75 would have required union nonmembers to affirmatively opt into paying full union dues instead of needing to opt out.
Service Employees International Union Local 1000 is the largest labor union in California, with bargaining rights for half of all California state employees.  In June 2005 SEIU sent out its annual Hudson notice, giving nonmembers thirty days to opt out of union dues and only pay a fair share fee.  Shortly after the opt out deadline expired SEIU mailed a notice to all workers announcing an emergency fee to build a “Political Fight Back Fund”. The fee was then automatically deducted from all workers’ subsequent paychecks until after the 2006 California gubernatorial election.  On November 1, 2005 plaintiff state employees filed a class action lawsuit in Sacramento Federal District Court alleging SEIU's emergency fee compelled plaintiffs’ speech in violation of the First Amendment.
SEIU's Political Fight Back Fund along with an alliance of other public sector unions expended $24 million campaigning against Schwarzenegger's fiscal reform, with the California Teachers Association expending an additional $56 million and going so far as to mortgage its Sacramento headquarters to fund more campaign spending.  Schwarzenegger likewise spent nearly $8 million of his own fortune campaigning.  The tenor was highly divisive, with Schwarzenegger calling his opponents “stooges” and at one point Warren Beatty leading a bus full of public employees to follow the governor and shout down his events.
Proposition 75 and all Governor Schwarzenegger's other fiscal reform agenda initiatives were defeated by wide margins.  It had been the most expensive election in California history.  As the results came out in Sacramento the president of the California Professional Firefighters union waived a broom over his head while state employees chanted “sweep, sweep, sweep”.
In March 2008 District Court Judge Morrison England granted plaintiffs’ summary judgment against SEIU, finding it “hard to imagine” a clearer example of political purposes than when actually spending funds on an election campaign. On appeal the Ninth Circuit panel reversed and remanded with an order to grant summary judgment against plaintiffs, with former Chief Judge J. Clifford Wallace authoring a lengthy dissent.  Plaintiffs petitioned the United States Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari and the petition was granted.Ross Runkel, When union fees go up, must a “Hudson notice” go out?, SCOTUSblog (Jan. 5, 2012, 10:01 AM) 
Plaintiffs then filed their opening brief.  Instead of filing a reply brief, SEIU mailed a ten-page booklet to the 28,000 plaintiffs offering terms and conditions for a full refund, even including a $1 bill.  SEIU then moved to dismiss the case as moot.
Opinion of the Court
Writing for the Court in a 7-2 ruling, Justice Alito first finds the case is not moot.  Alito disregards SEIU's refund offer, finding such maneuvering “must be viewed with a critical eye”.Knox, 132 S. Ct. at 2287.  Furthermore, SEIU's refund offer contained so many “unnecessarily complicated” conditions and caveats that Alito feels it might still be improper.  As such, Alito feels he must proceed to the constitutional question.
Alito begins by correlating First Amendment protection of compelled funding with compelled speech and compelled association.  He reads precedent as allowing compulsory fees funding private speech only when a compelling state interest requires the comprehensive regulation of a mandatory association and the fees are necessary for the regulatory purpose.132 S. Ct. at 2289.
Questioning the necessity of compulsory union fees Alito writes “acceptance of the free-rider argument as a justification for compelling nonmembers to pay a portion of union dues represents something of an anomaly—one that we have found to be justified by the interest in furthering “labor peace.”132 S. Ct. at 2290 citing Clyde Summers, Book Review, Sheldon Leader, Freedom of Association: A Study in Labor Law and Political Theory, 16 Comparative Labor L.J. 262, 268 (1995).  He finds this anomaly is “a remarkable boon for unions” and that it only came about as a “historical accident”.
Alito is unwilling to extend the anomaly of compelling ordinary union dues to further compelling extraordinary union fees.  The SEIU Political Fight Back fee had, then, extracted a forced loan out of the nonmembers, coercing them to fund a political campaign they disagreed with and only offering to return the funds after the campaign had been won.132 S. Ct. at 2293.  This particularly troubles Alito with regard to Proposition 75 because “the effect of the SEIU’s procedure was to force many nonmembers to subsidize a political effort designed to restrict their own rights”.132 S. Ct. at 2292.
Finally, SEIU had argued that its Political Fight Back fee was not political because for a public employees union “lobbying the electorate” is part of contract negotiations.132 S. Ct. at 2294.  Alito is not persuaded, finding this definition of contract negotiations “would effectively eviscerate the limitation of use of compulsory fees to support unions’ controversial political activities.”132 S. Ct. at 2295.  The Court therefore holds unions cannot impose extraordinary fees on nonmembers without first receiving nonmembers’ affirmative consent.
Concurrence in Judgment
Justice Sotomayor, joined by Justice Ginsburg, concur in the judgment only.  Sotomayor agrees that the SEIU Political Fight Back fee was for political activities and that nonmembers could not be forced to pay for political activities without being provided an opportunity to opt out.132 S. Ct. at 2297.  Sotomayor cannot agree, however, that the First Amendment allows such fees only after nonmembers opt in.
Because neither the question presented, briefed, or argued disputed the constitutionality of requiring nonmembers to opt out of fees, Sotommayor does not feel the Court has the power to make affirmatively opting into fees a constitutional requirement.  Because what is chargeable and nonchargeable to nonmembers is uncertain, Sotomayor feels the “majority’s answer to its unasked constitutional question is not even clear.”132 S. Ct. at 2299.
Dissent
Justice Breyer, joined by Justice Kagan, dissent.  Breyer agrees with SEIU that “lobbying the electorate” is a contract negotiation. As support, the San Francisco native cites a California statute permitting unions to engage in political lobbying.132 S. Ct. at 2304 (Breyer, J., dissenting, citing Cal. Govt.Code Ann. Sec. 3515.8 (West 2010)). Agreeing with Sotomayor that the majority answered an unasked constitutional question, Breyer believes the majority's opt in requirement is “directly contrary to precedent.”  Finally, Breyer laments that the majority's opinion is “virtually guaranteed” to “play a central role in the ongoing, intense political debate” regarding Right to Work laws.132 S. Ct. at 2306 (Breyer, J., dissenting).
Reactions
The editors of the New York Times disliked the outcome, decrying that "the legal approach is indistinguishable from politics."  Erwin Chemerinsky called Knox the term's "biggest sleeper case".  Chermerinsky would latter write that Knox should be read to increase union political power.    Michael Dorf disliked Justice Alito's "broadly anti-union rhetoric".  Students on the Harvard Law Review called the case "undoubtedly represents a watershed moment in the field of union campaign finance" and welcomed "a restraint on government power to rig the marketplace of ideas".Leading Cases, 126  186 (2012).
The court would soon extend First Amendment protections against unions in Harris v. Quinn (2014).  California Proposition 32 again failed to limit union payroll deductions in the 2012 general election.
See also
Janus v. AFSCME
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
References
External links
 http://www.scotusblog.com/case-files/cases/knox-v-service-employees-intl-union-local-1000/
Category:2012 in United States case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States public employment trade union case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Right-to-work law
Category:Service Employees International Union litigation
Category:United States trade union case law
"""

From "Kohl v. United States" ==> """
Kohl v. United States, 91 U.S. 367 (1875), was a court case that took place in the Supreme Court of the United States. It invoked the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution and is related to the issue of eminent domain.
Facts of the case 
Eminent domain was used to seize private property, with just compensation, for the construction of a post office, a customs building, and other government buildings in Cincinnati, Ohio.  
The Court’s ruling
thumb|The Waite Court in 1876.
The court ruled that it is necessary for the government to be able to seize property for its uses, such as creating infrastructure, which ultimately are determined by the legislature and not the judiciary.  This essentially gives the government ultimate ownership over all property, because it is not viable for the government to hold out against the obstinance of private individuals to appropriate land for government uses.  This power of eminent domain is not only a privilege of the federal, but also state governments.   While the petitioners protest that no act of the United States Congress was used to determine the details of the acquisition, the Court ruled such legislation appropriate but unnecessary; it did not prevent the right to acquire land from being vested in the United States Secretary of the Treasury.  Another argument addressed is that the government can determine the value of the property, to “justly compensate” the individual property owners; the court ruled that the assessor of the property is determined by law, and as stands the property can be assessed by the government.  There was also discussion, regarding the Court’s jurisdiction in this case to be accurate.
Important quotations
Strong's opinion
“It has not been seriously contended during the argument that the United States government is without power to appropriate lands or other property within the States for its own uses, and to enable it to perform its proper functions. Such an authority is essential to its independent existence and perpetuity. These cannot be preserved if the obstinacy of a private person, or if any other authority, can prevent the acquisition of the means or instruments by which alone governmental functions can be performed.” 
“The right of eminent domain was one of those means well known when the Constitution was adopted, and employed to obtain lands for public uses. …The Constitution itself contains an implied recognition of it beyond what may justly be implied from the express grants. The fifth amendment contains a provision that private property shall not be taken for public use without just compensation. What is that but an implied assertion, that, on making just compensation, it may be taken?”
“The time of its exercise may have been prescribed by statute; but the right itself was superior to any statute.”
 Field’s dissent 
“The Federal courts have no inherent jurisdiction of a proceeding instituted for the condemnation of property; and I do not find any statute of Congress conferring upon them such authority. The Judiciary Act of 1789 only invests the circuit courts of the United States with jurisdiction, concurrent with that of the State courts, of suits of a civil nature at common law or in equity; and these terms have reference to those classes of cases which are conducted by regular pleadings between parties, according to the established doctrines prevailing at the time in the jurisprudence of England.”
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 91
Chappell v. United States, 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1875 in United States case law
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:Politics of Cincinnati
"""

From "Kohn v. McNulta" ==> """
Kohn v. McNulta, 147 U.S. 238 (1893), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a person should not receive compensation for injuries sustained when he is experienced in his work and there is no evidence of negligence or extenuating circumstances.
 Background 
Kohn began working as a switchman for McNulta, the receiver (buyer) of the Wabash, St. Louis and Pacific Railway Company on April 29, 1887.  On July 11, Kohn’s arm was crushed while trying to couple two freight cars in the Toledo, Ohio railyard.
Kohn filed his petition of intervention in the Circuit Court for the Northern District of Ohio, the court which had appointed McNulta the receiver. At first, his intervening petition was referred to a master, but afterward, on his motion, the order of reference was set aside and a jury called in. The court left to the jury the single question of the amount of damages that the intervenor should recover if entitled to recover anything. The jury responded $10,000. The court found that no cause of action was made out against the receiver, set aside the verdict of the jury, and dismissed the petition. The intervenor appealed to the Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court held that a person should not receive compensation for injuries sustained when he is experienced in his work and there is no evidence of negligence or extenuating circumstances. Kohn had argued that the Company was negligent in exposing Kohn to cars that were different from the ones he was used to handling.  The Court disagreed, reasoning that he was a mature and experienced man who should have been able to cope with the existing conditions.  The train cars were not in defective in any way, they had the double deadwoods or bumpers of unusual length and were constructed differently, but this should have been obvious even at a passing glance. Kohn had already been working there for two months, long enough to know the risks.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 147
 Lavender v. Kurn
 Wabash, St. Louis & Pacific Railway Company v. Illinois
 External links 
Category:1893 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Wabash Railroad
Category:History of Toledo, Ohio
Category:Railway safety
Category:Workers' compensation
Category:United States labor case law
"""

From "Kois v. Wisconsin" ==> """
Kois v. Wisconsin, 408 U.S. 229 (1972), was a ruling by the U.S. Supreme Court in the case of the obscenity conviction of Milwaukee editor-publisher John Kois, whose underground newspaper Kaleidoscope had published two small photographs of pictures of nudes and a sexually-oriented poem entitled "Sex Poem" in 1968.Kaleidoscope vol. 1, no. 20, pp. 16-17 The Supreme Court ruled that, in the context in which they appeared, the photographs were rationally related to a news article which they illustrated and were thus entitled to Fourteenth Amendment protection, and that the poem "bears some of the earmarks of an attempt at serious art" (whether successful or not), and thus was not obscene under the Roth v. United States test ("whether or not the 'dominant' theme of the material appeals to prurient interest"). In the words of the concurring opinion of Justice William O. Douglas, "In this case, the vague umbrella of obscenity laws was used in an attempt to run a radical newspaper out of business and to impose a two-year sentence and a $2,000 fine upon its publisher. If obscenity laws continue in this uneven and uncertain enforcement, then the vehicle has been found for the suppression of any unpopular tract. The guarantee of free expression will thus be diluted and in its stead public discourse will only embrace that which has the approval of five members of this Court.".
As alluded to in Justice Douglas' opinion, by this time Kaleidoscope had already been driven out of business.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 408
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States obscenity case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:Mass media in Milwaukee
"""

From "Kolender v. Lawson" ==> """
Kolender v. Lawson, 461 U.S. 352 (1983), is a United States Supreme Court case concerning the constitutionality of vague laws that allow police to demand that "loiterers" and "wanderers" provide "credible and reliable" identification.
 Background 
Edward Lawson was a law-abiding black man with suitable knowledge of the U.S. Constitution. Lawson was frequently subjected to police questioning and harassment in San Diego County, California, where he lived when as a pedestrian he walked in so-called "white neighborhoods". He was detained or arrested approximately 15 times by the San Diego Police within 18 months, was prosecuted twice, and was convicted once (the second charge was dismissed).
Lawson challenged California Penal Code § 647(e),California Penal Code § 647(e) read, in relevant part,
"Every person who commits any of the following acts is guilty of disorderly conduct, a misdemeanor: . . . (e) who loiters or wanders upon the streets or from place to place without apparent reason or business and who refuses to identify himself and to account for his presence when requested by any peace officer so to do, if the surrounding circumstances are such as to indicate to a reasonable man that the public safety demands such identification."
California later removed this section because of this lawsuit, replacing it with what used to be § 647(f).
which required persons who loiter or wander on the streets to identify themselves and account for their presence when requested by a peace officer to do so.
A California appellate court, in People v. Solomon  (1973), 33 Cal. App.3d 429, had construed the law to require "credible and reliable" identification that carries a "reasonable assurance" of its authenticity.In People v. Solomon (1973), the Court construed § 647(e) as requiring that a person detained under that statute’s authority produce "credible and reliable identification  carrying reasonable assurance that the identification is authentic and providing means for later getting in touch with the person who has identified himself". (33 Cal.App.3d 429, 439). The California Supreme Court denied review. Both the Ninth Circuit (658 F.2d 1362, 1364–1365, n. 3) and the U.S. Supreme Court (461 U.S. 352, 356, n. 4) used this construction in voiding § 647(e) for vagueness.
William Kolender was an appellant who was acting in his capacity as Chief of Police of San Diego, as was John Duffy who was acting in his capacity as Sheriff of San Diego County.
 Prior history 
The Ninth Circuit, in Lawson v. Kolender, 658 F.2d 1362 (1981), had additionally held that Penal Code §647(e) violated the Fourth Amendment’s prohibition of unreasonable searches and seizures because it "subverts the probable cause requirement" by authorizing arrest for conduct that is no more than suspicious. "Vagrancy statutes cannot turn otherwise innocent conduct into a crime". Id. at 1367.
The Ninth Circuit also noted that "police knowledge of the identity of an individual they have deemed 'suspicious' grants the police unfettered discretion to initiate or continue the investigation of the person long after the detention has ended. Information concerning the stop, the arrest and the individual's identity may become part of a large scale data bank." Id. at 1368.
Lawson represented himself up through the conclusion of the Federal Ninth Circuit Court appeal. He was told he could not represent himself before the Supreme Court without a law degree, so he had an ACLU lawyer represent him before the Court.
 Conclusion 
Using the construction of the California appellate court in Solomon, the Court held that the law was unconstitutionally vague because it gave excessive discretion to the police (in the absence of probable cause to arrest) whether to stop and interrogate a suspect or leave him alone.Justice O’Connor, writing for the Court, noted that the law
"... provided no standard for determining what a suspect must do to comply with [the law]", conferring on police "virtually unrestrained power to arrest and charge persons with a violation."
The Court hinted that the California statute compromised the constitutional right to freedom of movement.
Because the U.S. Supreme Court was able to resolve Kolender on the issue of vagueness, they did not decide the Fourth Amendment issue.
Subsequent history
Kolender was cited in Hiibel v. Sixth Judicial District Court of Nevada, , as an example of a "stop and identify" statute the Court had voided on vagueness grounds. In Hiibel, the Court held that a Nevada lawNev. Rev. Stat. (NRS) §171.123(3) provides that:
requiring persons detained upon reasonable suspicion of involvement in a crime to state their name to a peace officer did not violate the Fourth Amendment's prohibition of unreasonable searches and seizures. Unlike California Penal Code §647(e) as construed in Solomon, the Nevada statute was apparently interpreted by the Nevada Supreme Court as requiring only that persons detained upon involvement in a crime to state their name.See Hiibel v.  Dist. Ct., 118 Nev. 868, at 875.
Hiibel does not provide a means of arresting someone for failing or refusing to identify himself.Writing for the Court in Hiibel v. Sixth Judicial District Court of Nevada, Justice Kennedy stated,
Here the Nevada statute is narrower and more precise.  The statute in Kolender had been interpreted to require a suspect to give the officer "credible and reliable" identification. In contrast, the Nevada Supreme Court has interpreted NRS §171.123(3) to require only that a suspect disclose his name. 
Justice Kennedy continued,
As we understand it, the statute does not require a suspect to give the officer a drivers license or any other document. Provided that the suspect either states his name or communicates it to the officer by other means—a choice, we assume, that the suspect may make—the statute is satisfied and no violation occurs. 
Writing for the Nevada Supreme Court in Hiibel v. Dist. Ct., Chief Justice Young said,
The suspect is not required to provide private details about his background, but merely to state his name to an officer when reasonable suspicion exists. http://www.illinoiscourts.gov/opinions/AppellateCourt/2011/2ndDistrict/December/2100473.pdf  [See People v. Fernandez, 2011 IL App (2d) 100473]
California Penal Code §647(e) was repealed in 2008 at the request of the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department.California Penal Code §647(e) was repealed by Ch. 302, Stats. 2007 (SB 425, Margett), at the request of the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department. The analysis on 11 June 2007 by the California Assembly Committee on Public Safety noted that "The provision has served no purpose other than to cause confusion since 1983".
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 461
 Papachristou v. Jacksonville, 405 U.S. 156 (1972)
 Vagueness doctrine
Notes
References
Further reading
External links
Edward C. Lawson 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Void for vagueness case law
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of California
Category:History of San Diego
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Vagrancy laws
"""

From "Koons Buick, Inc. v. Nigh" ==> """
Koons Buick Pontiac GMC, Inc. v. Nigh, 543 U.S. 50 (2004), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that Congress's 1995 amendment of the Truth in Lending Act (TILA) left unaltered the prior minimum and maximum limits of $100 and $1000 prescribed for statutory damages awarded to plaintiffs in TILA violation suits involving personal-property loans..
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 543
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:Buick
"""

From "Koontz v. St. Johns River Water Management District" ==> """
Koontz v. St. Johns River Water Management District, 570 U.S. 595 (2013), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that land-use agencies imposing conditions on the issuance of development permits must comply with the "nexus" and "rough proportionality" standards of Nollan v. California Coastal Commission and Dolan v. City of Tigard, even if the condition consists of a requirement to pay money, and even if the permit is denied for failure to agree to the condition.Koontz v. St. Johns River Water Mgmt. Dist., .  It was the first case in which monetary exactions were found to be unconstitutional conditions.
 Background 
Petitioner Coy Koontz applied to the St. Johns River Water Management District for a permit to develop 3.7 acres of wetlands under the District's jurisdiction.Eric D. Hageman, Case Comment, The Factual Reality of Koontz v. St. Johns, 90 Notre Dame L. Rev. Online 54 (2015).  Koontz offered to mitigate the loss of wetlands by conveying to the District a conservation easement over 11 acres of adjacent land. The District declined Koontz's mitigation offer, instead proposing that Koontz either reduce the size of his development to one acre, or pay for improvements to unrelated property owned by the District several miles away. Koontz responded by filing suit against the District in state court.Koontz v. St. Johns River Water Mgmt. Dist., No. 11-1447, slip op. at 2-4.
Following an initial dismissal, appeal, and remand, the Florida Circuit Court ruled that the District's demand for offsite mitigation violated Nollan v. California Coastal Commission and Dolan v. City of Tigard, since the improvements to the District's property lacked either an essential nexus or rough proportionality to the environmental impact of Koontz's proposed development. The state appellate court affirmed, but the Supreme Court of Florida reversed, holding that Nollan and Dolan did not apply because (1) Koontz's permit was denied, rather than granted subject to the unconstitutional condition, and (2) the District sought money rather than a conveyance of real property as a condition to issuing the permit.  The Supreme Court granted certiorari to determine the applicability of Nollan and Dolan under these circumstances.Koontz v. St. Johns River Water Mgmt. Dist., .
Koontz was represented by Paul J. Beard, II, of the Pacific Legal Foundation.  Amicus briefs in support of Koontz were filed by  the American Civil Rights Union, the National Association of Home Builders, the National Federation of Independent Business Small Business Legal Center, and six other parties.Supreme Court Docket, Case No. 11-1147. (https://www.supremecourt.gov/search.aspx?filename=/docketfiles/11-1447.htm)  The St. Johns River Water Management District was represented by Paul R. Q. Wolfson. Amicus briefs in support of the District were filed by the Solicitor General of the United States, the American Planning Association, the National Governors Association, and other public entities and officials.  Deputy General Edwin Kneedler argued for the United States as amicus curiae in support of the District.
 Opinion of the Court 
Writing for the Court, Justice Alito held that conditions imposed upon the issuance of a land-use permit must conform to the requirements of Nollan and, if applicable, Dolan even when the permit is denied for failure to comply with the conditions. The unconstitutional conditions doctrine forbids governments from “pressuring someone into forfeiting a constitutional right” by “coercively withholding benefits”.Koontz, 133 S. Ct. at 2595.  Nollan and Dolan “involve a special application” of the unconstitutional conditions doctrine to the Fifth Amendment right to just compensation.133 S. Ct. at 2594, quoting Lingle v. Chevron U.S.A. Inc.  A government cannot, therefore, coerce someone applying for a permit to give away her property regardless of if the permit is approved after a successful threat or denied after a failed threat.  Because both demand an unconstitutional condition, both are forbidden.  However, the constitution only requires just compensation after a takings, and because Koontz sued under state law instead of allowing his property to be taken, the Court remands to determine if Florida law provides money damages for an unconstitutional conditions violation.
Nollan and Dolan also apply when, as here, the challenged condition amounts to a requirement to pay money, rather than to give up an easement over the property.  The Florida Supreme Court had also held that if a government demands money instead of real estate there can be no takings.  Alito observes that under this logic the Nollan and Dolan requirements “would be very easy” to avoid, especially since such development impact fees are already “utterly commonplace”.133 S. Ct. at 2599 citing Rosenberg, The Changing Culture of American Land Use Regulation: Paying for Growth with Impact Fees, 59 S.M.U. L.Rev. 177, 202-203 (2006)  The takings clause applies because the government’s demand for money here was directly linked to a specific parcel of real property, as distinguished from the benefits in Eastern Enterprises v. Apfel.
While Alito cannot explain why such monetary exactions are not merely a tax, he believes that “teasing out the difference between taxes and takings is more difficult in theory than in practice.”  The Court’s long-settled view is that takings require just compensation even if they are functionally similar to a tax and Alito sees no need to define the difference here.  Finally, Alito dismisses Kagan’s fear of disrupting local governments because courts in Texas, Illinois, and Ohio have already been applying Nollan and Dolan to monetary exactions.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Kagan dissented, joined by Justices Ginsburg, Breyer, and Sotomayor. The dissent agreed that Nollan and Dolan apply when a land-use permit is denied for failure to comply with a condition, but argued that those standards should not apply when the agency conditions a permit on the payment of money, rather than a conveyance of land.  Kagan criticizes the comprehensiveness of the Alito’s analysis, stating that the majority is adopting “a prophylaxis in search of a problem”.  She then faults the majority for deciding too little, openly wondering if the majority would agree with those states that apply higher scrutiny to adjudicative decisions than legislative decisions.133 S. Ct. 2586 at 2608 (Kagan, dissenting) citing Ehrlich v. City of Culver City, 911 P.2d 429, 12 Cal. 4th 854, 50 Cal. Rptr. 2d 242 (1996).  Believing that the Court will “rue the day” that it discouraged local governments from negotiating with developers, Kagan writes “the majority turns a broad array of local land use-regulations into federal constitutional questions.”
The dissenting justices also maintained that, on the facts of this case, the District never actually demanded anything in exchange for a permit, and no regulatory taking took place because no property changed hands.
Reactions
On remand the Florida Supreme Court remanded to the Florida Fifth District Court of Appeal, which simply readopted its 2009 decision awarding Koontz money damages.St. Johns River Water Mgmt. Dist. v. Koontz, No. 5D06-1116 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. Apr. 30, 2014).
The ruling was unpopular with some legal academicsJohn D. Echeverria, Koontz: The Very Worst Takings Decision Ever, 22 N.Y.U. Environmental Law Journal 1 (2014). but lauded by others.Illya Somin, Two Steps Forward for the "Poor Relation" of Constitutional Law: Koontz, Arkansas Game & Fish, and the Future of the Takings Clause, 2012 Cato Sup. Ct. Review 215 (2013).  Commentators encouraged localities to start denying permits without discussionSean Nolon, Bargaining for Development Post-Koontz: How the Supreme Court Invaded Local Government, 67 Florida Law Review 171 (2015). but predicted that only "strong judicial action" will effect entrenched players.Steven Eagle, Koontz in the Mansion and the Gatehouse, 46 The Urban Lawyer 1 (2014). While Koontz leaves “exactions and takings jurisprudence in a confused and unsustainable state”, scholars believe it may encourage localities to adopt more alienable and standardized fee schedules or it may even lead to the eventual collapse of Nollan and Dolan exactions into the Due Process Clause.Lee Fennel and Eduardo Peñalver, Exactions Creep, 2013 Supreme Court Review 287 (2014).
 References 
 External links 
 Coverage of the case on SCOTUSblog
 Pacific Legal Foundation victory page
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:2013 in the environment
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:United States land use case law
Category:Wetlands of Florida
"""

From "Korematsu v. United States" ==> """
Korematsu v. United States, 323 U.S. 214 (1944), was a landmark decision by the Supreme Court of the United States to uphold the exclusion of Japanese Americans from the West Coast Military Area during World War II. The decision has been widely criticized, with some scholars describing it as "an odious and discredited artifact of popular bigotry", and as "a stain on American jurisprudence". The case is often cited as one of the worst Supreme Court decisions of all time. Chief Justice John Roberts repudiated the Korematsu decision in his majority opinion in the 2018 case of Trump v. Hawaii.
In the aftermath of Imperial Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor, President Franklin D. Roosevelt had issued Executive Order 9066 on February 19, 1942, authorizing the U.S. War Department to create military areas from which any or all Americans might be excluded. Subsequently, the Western Defense Command, a U.S. Army military command charged with coordinating the defense of the West Coast of the United States, ordered "all persons of Japanese ancestry, including aliens and non-aliens" to relocate to internment camps. However, a 23-year-old Japanese-American man, Fred Korematsu, refused to leave the exclusion zone and instead challenged the order on the grounds that it violated the Fifth Amendment.
In a majority opinion joined by five other justices, Associate Justice Hugo Black held that the need to protect against espionage by Japan outweighed the rights of Americans of Japanese ancestry. Black wrote that "Korematsu was not excluded from the Military Area because of hostility to him or his race", but rather "because the properly constituted military authorities ... decided that the military urgency of the situation demanded that all citizens of Japanese ancestry be segregated from the West Coast" during the war against Japan. Dissenting justices Frank Murphy, Robert H. Jackson, and Owen J. Roberts all criticized the exclusion as racially discriminatory; Murphy wrote that the exclusion of Japanese "falls into the ugly abyss of racism" and resembled "the abhorrent and despicable treatment of minority groups by the dictatorial tyrannies which this nation is now pledged to destroy."
The Korematsu opinion was the first instance in which the Supreme Court applied the strict scrutiny standard of review to racial discrimination by the government; it is one of only a handful of cases in which the Court held that the government met that standard. Korematsu's conviction was voided by a California district court in 1983 on the grounds that Solicitor General Charles H. Fahy had suppressed a report from the Office of Naval Intelligence that held that there was no evidence that Japanese Americans were acting as spies for Japan. The Japanese-Americans who were interned were later granted reparations through the Civil Liberties Act of 1988.
Background
thumb|left|Japanese American Assembly Center at Tanforan race track, San Bruno
In the wake of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor and the report of the First Roberts Commission, President Franklin D. Roosevelt issued Executive Order 9066 on February 19, 1942, authorizing the War Department to create military areas from which any or all Americans might be excluded, and to provide for the necessary transport, lodging, and feeding of persons displaced from such areas. On March 2, 1942, the U.S. Army Lieutenant General John L. DeWitt, commander of the Western Defense Command, issued Public Proclamation No. 1, demarcating western military areas and the exclusion zones therein, and directing any "Japanese, German, or Italian aliens" and any person of Japanese ancestry to inform the U.S. Postal Service of any changes of residence.Qtd. in  Further military areas and zones were demarcated in Public Proclamation No. 2.
In the meantime, Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson mailed to Senator Robert Rice Reynolds and House Speaker Sam Rayburn draft legislation authorizing the enforcement of Executive Order 9066. By March 21, Congress had enacted the proposed legislation, which Roosevelt signed into law.  Qtd. in  On March 24, 1942, Western Defense Command began issuing Civilian Exclusion orders, commanding that "all persons of Japanese ancestry, including aliens and non-aliens" report to designated assembly points. With the issuance of Civilian Restrictive Order No. 1 on May 19, 1942, Japanese Americans were forced to move into relocation camps.
Meanwhile, Fred Korematsu was a 23-year-old Japanese-American man who decided to stay at his residence in San Leandro, California, instead of obeying the order to relocate; however, he knowingly violated Civilian Exclusion Order No. 34 of the U.S. Army, even undergoing plastic surgery in an attempt to conceal his identity. Korematsu argued that Executive Order 9066 was unconstitutional and that it violated the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The Fifth Amendment was selected over the Fourteenth Amendment due to the lack of federal protections in the Fourteenth Amendment. He was arrested and convicted. No question was raised as to Korematsu's loyalty to the United States. The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit eventually affirmed his conviction, and the Supreme Court granted certiorari.
Decision
Black's majority opinion
thumb|upright|Justice Hugo Black
The decision of the case, written by Justice Hugo Black, found the case largely indistinguishable from the previous year's Hirabayashi v. United States decision, and rested largely on the same principle: deference to Congress and the military authorities, particularly in light of the uncertainty following Pearl Harbor.  Justice Black further denied that the case had anything to do with racial prejudice: Korematsu was not excluded from the Military Area because of hostility to him or his race. He was excluded because we are at war with the Japanese Empire, because the properly constituted military authorities feared an invasion of our West Coast and felt constrained to take proper security measures, because they decided that the military urgency of the situation demanded that all citizens of Japanese ancestry be segregated from the West Coast temporarily, and, finally, because Congress, reposing its confidence in this time of war in our military leaders—as inevitably it must—determined that they should have the power to do just this.
In his diaries, Justice Felix Frankfurter reported that Justice Black told the justices as reason for deferring to the executive branch: "Somebody must run this war. It is either Roosevelt or us. And we cannot."Stephen Breyer: America’s Courts Can’t Ignore the World. In: The Atlantic, September 2018
While Korematsu is regularly described as upholding the internment of Japanese Americans, the majority opinion expressly declined to reach the issue of internment on the ground that Korematsu's conviction did not present that issue, which it said raised different questions.  The Court cross-referenced its decision the same day in Ex Parte Endo, 323 U.S. 283 (1944), in which the Court ruled that a loyal Japanese American must be released from detention.
Frankfurter's concurrence
thumb|upright|Justice Felix Frankfurter
Justice Frankfurter's concurrence reads in its entirety:
According to my reading of Civilian Exclusion Order No. 34, it was an offense for Korematsu to be found in Military Area No. 1, the territory wherein he was previously living, except within the bounds of the established Assembly Center of that area. Even though the various orders issued by General DeWitt be deemed a comprehensive code of instructions, their tenor is clear, and not contradictory. They put upon Korematsu the obligation to leave Military Area No. 1, but only by the method prescribed in the instructions, i.e., by reporting to the Assembly Center. I am unable to see how the legal considerations that led to the decision in Hirabayashi v. United States, 320 U.S. 81, fail to sustain the military order which made the conduct now in controversy a crime. And so I join in the opinion of the Court, but should like to add a few words of my own.
The provisions of the Constitution which confer on the Congress and the President powers to enable this country to wage war are as much part of the Constitution as provisions looking to a nation at peace. And we have had recent occasion to quote approvingly the statement of former Chief Justice Hughes that the war power of the Government is "the power to wage war successfully". Hirabayashi v. United States, supra, at 93, and see Home Bldg. & L. Assn. v. Blaisdell, 290 U.S. 398, 426. Therefore, the validity of action under the war power must be judged wholly in the context of war. That action is not to be stigmatized as lawless because like action in times of peace would be lawless. To talk about a military order that expresses an allowable judgment of war needs by those entrusted with the duty of conducting war as "an [p. 225] unconstitutional order" is to suffuse a part of the Constitution with an atmosphere of unconstitutionality. The respective spheres of action of military authorities and of judges are, of course, very different. But, within their sphere, military authorities are no more outside the bounds of obedience to the Constitution than are judges within theirs. "The war power of the United States, like its other powers... is subject to applicable constitutional limitations", Hamilton v. Kentucky Distilleries Co., 251 U.S. 146, 156. To recognize that military orders are "reasonably expedient military precautions" in time of war, and yet to deny them constitutional legitimacy, makes of the Constitution an instrument for dialectic subtleties not reasonably to be attributed to the hard-headed Framers, of whom a majority had had actual participation in war. If a military order such as that under review does not transcend the means appropriate for conducting war, such action by the military is as constitutional as would be any authorized action by the Interstate Commerce Commission within the limits of the constitutional power to regulate commerce. And, being an exercise of the war power explicitly granted by the Constitution for safeguarding the national life by prosecuting war effectively, I find nothing in the Constitution which denies to Congress the power to enforce such a valid military order by making its violation an offense triable in the civil courts. Compare Interstate Commerce Commission v. Brimson, 154 U.S. 447; 155 U.S. 3, and Monongahela Bridge Co. v. United States, 216 U.S. 177. To find that the Constitution does not forbid the military measures now complained of does not carry with it approval of that which Congress and the Executive did. That is their business, not ours.
Murphy's dissent
thumb|upright|Justice Frank Murphy
Justice Frank Murphy issued a vehement dissent, saying that the exclusion of Japanese "falls into the ugly abyss of racism", and resembles "the abhorrent and despicable treatment of minority groups by the dictatorial tyrannies which this nation is now pledged to destroy." Murphy argued that collective punishment for Japanese Americans was an unconstitutional response to any disloyalty that might have been found in a minority of their cohort.  He also compared the treatment of Japanese Americans with the treatment of Americans of German and Italian ancestry, as evidence that race, and not emergency alone, led to the exclusion order which Korematsu was convicted of violating: I dissent, therefore, from this legalization of racism. Racial discrimination in any form and in any degree has no justifiable part whatever in our democratic way of life. It is unattractive in any setting, but it is utterly revolting among a free people who have embraced the principles set forth in the Constitution of the United States. All residents of this nation are kin in some way by blood or culture to a foreign land. Yet they are primarily and necessarily a part of the new and distinct civilization of the United States. They must, accordingly, be treated at all times as the heirs of the American experiment, and as entitled to all the rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution.
Justice Murphy's two uses of the term "racism" in this opinion, along with two additional uses in his concurrence in Steele v. Louisville & Nashville Railway Co., decided the same day, are among the first appearances of the word "racism" in a United States Supreme Court opinion. The first appearance was in Justice Murphy's concurrence in . The term was also used in other cases, such as  and . It then disappeared from the court's lexicon for 18 years—it reappeared in . It did not appear in , even though that case did talk about racial discrimination and interracial marriages.
Justice Murphy's dissent is considered the strongest of the three dissenting opinions and, since the 1980s, has been cited as part of modern jurisprudence's categorical rejection of the majority opinion.Anita S. Krishnakumar, On the Evolution of the Canonical DISSENT Rutgers Law Review 52, no. 3 (Spring 2000): 781-826
Roberts's dissent
thumb|upright|Justice Owen Roberts
Justice Roberts's dissent also acknowledges the racism inherent in the case although he does not use the word. He recognized that the defendant was being punished based solely upon his ancestry: This is not a case of keeping people off the streets at night, as was Hirabayashi v. United States, 320 U.S. 81, [p. 226] nor a case of temporary exclusion of a citizen from an area for his own safety or that of the community, nor a case of offering him an opportunity to go temporarily out of an area where his presence might cause danger to himself or to his fellows. On the contrary, it is the case of convicting a citizen as a punishment for not submitting to imprisonment in a concentration camp, based on his ancestry, and solely because of his ancestry, without evidence or inquiry concerning his loyalty and good disposition towards the United States. If this be a correct statement of the facts disclosed by this record, and facts of which we take judicial notice, I need hardly labor the conclusion that Constitutional rights have been violated.
Jackson's dissent
thumb|upright|Justice Robert Jackson
By contrast, Justice Robert Jackson's dissent argued that "defense measures will not, and often should not, be held within the limits that bind civil authority in peace", and that it would perhaps be unreasonable to hold the military, who issued the exclusion order, to the same standards of constitutionality that apply to the rest of the government. "In the very nature of things", he wrote, "military decisions are not susceptible of intelligent judicial appraisal." He acknowledged the Court's powerlessness in that regard, writing that "courts can never have any real alternative to accepting the mere declaration of the authority that issued the order that it was reasonably necessary from a military viewpoint."
He nonetheless dissented, writing that, even if the courts should not be put in the position of second-guessing or interfering with the orders of military commanders, that does not mean that they should have to ratify or enforce those orders if they are unconstitutional. Jackson writes, "I do not think [the civil courts] may be asked to execute a military expedient that has no place in law under the Constitution. I would reverse the judgment and discharge the prisoner." Indeed, he warns that the precedent of Korematsu might last well beyond the war and the internment: A military order, however unconstitutional, is not apt to last longer than the military emergency. Even during that period, a succeeding commander may revoke it all. But once a judicial opinion rationalizes such an order to show that it conforms to the Constitution, or rather rationalizes the Constitution to show that the Constitution sanctions such an order, the Court for all time has validated the principle of racial discrimination in criminal procedure and of transplanting American citizens. The principle then lies about like a loaded weapon, ready for the hand of any authority that can bring forward a plausible claim of an urgent need. Every repetition imbeds that principle more deeply in our law and thinking and expands it to new purposes.
Jackson further warned: Of course the existence of a military power resting on force, so vagrant, so centralized, so necessarily heedless of the individual, is an inherent threat to liberty. But I would not lead people to rely on this Court for a review that seems to me wholly delusive. The military reasonableness of these orders can only be determined by military superiors. If the people ever let command of the war power fall into irresponsible and unscrupulous hands, the courts wield no power equal to its restraint. The chief restraint upon those who command the physical forces of the country, in the future as in the past, must be their responsibility to the political judgments of their contemporaries and to the moral judgments of history.
Jackson acknowledged the racial issues at hand, writing: Korematsu was born on our soil, of parents born in Japan. The Constitution makes him a citizen of the United States by nativity and a citizen of California by residence. No claim is made that he is not loyal to this country. There is no suggestion that apart from the matter involved here he is not law abiding and well disposed. Korematsu, however, has been convicted of an act not commonly a crime. It consists merely of being present in the state whereof he is a citizen, near the place where he was born, and where all his life he has lived. [...] [H]is crime would result, not from anything he did, said, or thought, different than they, but only in that he was born of different racial stock. Now, if any fundamental assumption underlies our system, it is that guilt is personal and not inheritable. Even if all of one's antecedents had been convicted of treason, the Constitution forbids its penalties to be visited upon him. But here is an attempt to make an otherwise innocent act a crime merely because this prisoner is the son of parents as to whom he had no choice, and belongs to a race from which there is no way to resign. If Congress in peace-time legislation should enact such a criminal law, I should suppose this Court would refuse to enforce it.
Subsequent history
Congressional Commission on Wartime Relocation and Internment of Civilians
In 1980, Congress established a commission to evaluate the events leading up to the issuance of Executive Order 9066 and accompanying military directives and their impact on citizens and resident aliens, charging the commission with recommending remedies.  Discussing the Korematsu decision in their 1982 report entitled Personal Justice Denied, this Congressional Commission on Wartime Relocation and Internment of Civilians (CCWRIC) concluded that "each part of the decision, questions of both factual review and legal principles, has been discredited or abandoned," and that, "Today the decision in Korematsu lies overruled in the court of history."
Conviction overturned
Korematsu challenged his conviction in 1983 by filing before the United States District Court for the Northern District of California a writ of coram nobis, which asserted that the original conviction was so flawed as to represent a grave injustice that should be reversed.  As evidence, he submitted the conclusions of the CCWRIC report as well as newly discovered internal Justice Department communications demonstrating that evidence contradicting the military necessity for the Executive Order 9066 had been knowingly withheld from the Supreme Court.  Specifically, he said Solicitor General Charles H. Fahy had kept from the Court a wartime finding by the Office of Naval Intelligence, the Ringle Report, that concluded very few Japanese represented a risk and that almost all of those who did were already in custody when the Executive Order was enacted. While not admitting error, the government submitted a counter-motion asking the court to vacate the conviction without a finding of fact on its merits.  Judge Marilyn Hall Patel denied the government's petition, and concluded that the Supreme Court had indeed been given a selective record, representing a compelling circumstance sufficient to overturn the original conviction.  She granted the writ, thereby voiding Korematsu's conviction, while pointing out that since this decision was based on prosecutorial misconduct and not an error of law, any legal precedent established by the case remained in force.
2011 DOJ admission of error
On May 20, 2011, Acting Solicitor General Neal Katyal released an unusual statement denouncing one of his predecessors, Solicitor General Charles H. Fahy. He faulted Fahy for having "suppressed critical evidence" in the Hirabayashi and Korematsu cases before the Supreme Court during World War II, specifically the Ringle Report's conclusion that there was no indication Japanese Americans were acting as spies or sending signals to enemy submarines. The rulings in the 1980s that overturned the convictions of Korematsu and Hirabayashi concluded that failure to disclose the Ringle Report, along with an initial report by General De Witt that demonstrated racist motivations behind the military orders, represented a fatal flaw in the prosecution of their cases before the Supreme Court.  Katyal noted that Justice Department attorneys had actually alerted Fahy that failing to disclose the Ringle Report's existence in the briefs or argument in the Supreme Court "might approximate the suppression of evidence". Thus, Katyal concluded that Fahy "did not inform the Court that a key set of allegations used to justify the internment" had been doubted, if not fully discredited, within the government's own agencies.
Katyal therefore announced his office's filing of a formal "admission of error". He reaffirmed the extraordinary duty of the Solicitor General to address the Court with "absolute candor," due to the "special credence" the Court explicitly grants to his court submissions.
21st century reactions
thumb|right|Fred Korematsu
Eleven lawyers who had represented Fred Korematsu, Gordon Hirabayashi, and Minoru Yasui in successful efforts in lower federal courts to nullify their convictions for violating military curfew and exclusion orders sent a letter dated January 13, 2014, to Solicitor General Donald Verrilli Jr. In light of the appeal proceedings before the U.S. Supreme Court in Hedges v. Obama, the lawyers asked Verrilli to ask the Supreme Court to overrule its decisions in Korematsu, Hirabayashi (1943) and Yasui (1943). If the Solicitor General shouldn't do this, they asked that the United States government to "make clear" that the federal government "does not consider the internment decisions as valid precedent for governmental or military detention of individuals or groups without due process of law [...]."
On February 3, 2014, Justice Antonin Scalia, during a discussion with law students at the University of Hawaii at Manoa William S. Richardson School of Law, said that "the Supreme Court's Korematsu decision upholding the internment of Japanese Americans was wrong, but it could happen again in war time." In October 2015 at Santa Clara University, Scalia told law students that Justice Jackson's dissenting opinion in Korematsu was the past court opinion he admired most, adding "It was nice to know that at least somebody on the court realized that that was wrong."
Donald Trump's Presidential election led Kansas Secretary of State Kris Kobach to advocate for Trump to implement immigration controls like the National Security Entry-Exit Registration System. One Trump supporter, Carl Higbie, said that Jimmy Carter's 1980 restriction on Iranian immigration, as well as the Korematsu decision, gives legal precedent for a registry of immigrants. Critics of Higbie argued that Korematsu should not be referenced as precedent. Constitutional lawyer Bruce Fein argued that the Civil Liberties Act of 1988 granting reparations to the Japanese Americans who were interned amounts to Korematsu having been overturned by history—outside of a potential formal Supreme Court overrule. Another critic of Higbie described Korematsu as a "stain on American jurisprudence".
According to Harvard University's Felix Frankfurter Professor of Law Noah Feldman, "a decision can be wrong at the very moment it was decided—and therefore should not be followed subsequently." Justice Anthony Kennedy applied this approach in Lawrence v. Texas to overturn Bowers v. Hardwick and thereby strike down anti-sodomy laws in 14 states.  The implication is that decisions which are wrong when decided should not be followed even before the Court reverses itself, and Korematsu has probably the greatest claim to being wrong when decided of any case which still stood. Legal scholar Richard Primus applied the term "Anti-Canon" to cases which are "universally assailed as wrong, immoral, and unconstitutional" and have become exemplars of faulty legal reasoning.  Plessy v. Ferguson is one such example, and Korematsu has joined this group—as Feldman then put it, "Korematsu's uniquely bad legal status means it's not precedent even though it hasn't been overturned."
 Rejection in Trump v. Hawaii 
Chief Justice Roberts, in writing the majority opinion of the Supreme Court in Trump v. Hawaii, stated that Korematsu v. United States was wrongly decided, essentially disavowing the decision and indicating that a majority of the court no longer finds Korematsu persuasive. Quoting Justice Robert H. Jackson's dissent from Korematsu, the Chief Justice stated:
Roberts also added: "The forcible relocation of U.S. citizens to concentration camps, solely and explicitly on the basis of race, is objectively unlawful and outside the scope of Presidential authority." Congress regards Korematsu as having been overruled by Trump v. Hawaii.
 Rejection in dissent of United States v. Zubaydah 
Justice Gorsuch, writing in his dissent of United States v. Zubaydah, reiterated the fact that Korematsu was negligent. Gorsuch criticised the court for allowing "state interest" as a justification for "suppressing judicial proceedings in the name of national security." He used Korematsu as a justification against doing such.
Justice Gorsuch dissented stating: 
See also
 Anticanon
 Commission on Wartime Relocation and Internment of Civilians
 Ex parte Endo
 Hirabayashi v. United States
 Fred Korematsu Day
 Fred T. Korematsu Institute for Civil Rights and Education
 Japanese American redress and court cases
 Mochizuki v. United States
 Trail of tears
 Yasui v. United States
References
Further reading
External links
 Of Civil Wrongs and Rights, official site (2001 P.O.V. documentary on the 1983 coram nobis case)
 A documentary on Korematsu v. United States
 "Supreme Court Landmark Case Korematsu v. United States" from C-SPAN's Landmark Cases: Historic Supreme Court Decisions
 "Civil Liberties in Times of Crisis: Japanese American Internment and America Today" with Karen Korematsu and Kermit Roosevelt, from the National Constitution Center.
  Japanese Relocation (1943 FILM- viewable for free at not-for profit- The Internet Archive)
Category:1944 in United States case law
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:Internment of Japanese Americans
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:History of San Leandro, California
Category:1944 in California
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:Race-related case law in the United States
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Kramer v. Union Free School District No. 15" ==> """
Kramer v. Union Free School District No. 15, 395 U.S. 621 (1969), was a United States Supreme Court decision in which the Court struck down a longstanding New York State statute requiring that to be eligible to vote in certain school district elections, an individual must either own or rent taxable real property within the school district, be the spouse of a property owner or lessor, or be the parent or guardian of a child attending a public school in the district. By a 5-to-3 vote, the court held that these voting requirements violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Background
Morris H. Kramer was a 31-year-old unmarried man who lived with his parents in Atlantic Beach, New York, within Union Free School District No. 15, Town of Hempstead (now the Lawrence Union Free School District).Kramer v. Union Free School Dist. No. 15, . Kramer, who was registered to vote in national and state elections, sought to register to vote in the school district's annual school board election and school budget vote.
Kramer undisputedly met the age, citizenship, and residency requirements to vote in the election. However, he was not eligible to vote in school elections under Section 2012 of the New York State Education Law, which provided that to vote in school elections, a resident must either own or lease taxable real property within the school district, be the spouse of a property owner or lessor, or be the parent or guardian of one or more children enrolled in a public school within the district.
Lower-court proceedings
Kramer filed his complaint, seeking to enjoin the school district from enforcing Section 2012 against him, in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York. He contended that the statute violated his rights under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, as it had been construed in recent Supreme Court decisions such as Harper v. Virginia State Board of Elections. The school district argued that the statute validly limited the franchise in school elections to those primarily affected by the results of the election, namely property taxpayers in the school district and parents of children attending the district's schools.
At the time, title 28 of the United States Code required that any federal lawsuit seeking to enjoin the enforcement of a state statute must be heard by a specially convened three-judge panel of the District Court, composed of one circuit judge and two district judges, rather than by a single district judge, unless the constitutional challenge was deemed so insubstantial as to be "frivolous." In a May 1966 opinion, District Judge Joseph Zavatt declined to convene a three-judge court. In rejecting Kramer's constitutional claim, Judge Zavatt wrote that "Plaintiff does not and cannot allege that his property is being taxed by the school district without his having a vote, since he owns no property in the district.  Neither does nor can he allege that the education of his children is being affected without his having a vote, because he has no children."Kramer v. Union Free School Dist. No. 15,  Judge Zavatt also observed that the constitutionality of the same statute had recently been upheld by the New York state courts.Kramer, 259 F. Supp. at 165, citing Turco v. Union Free School Dist. No. 4, 43 Misc. 2d 367, 251 N.Y.S.2d 141 (Sup. Ct. Nassau Co.), aff'd, 22 A.D.2d 1018, 256 N.Y.S.2d 553 (2d Dep't 1964), appeal dismissed, 15 N.Y.2d 967 (1965). He concluded that the "distinctions drawn by the legislature of the State in Section 2012 of the New York Education Law are so clearly reasonable and plaintiff's claim so obviously without merit, that it can only be characterized as frivolous." The District Court dismissed Kramer's complaint.
Kramer appealed the dismissal to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, which reversed Judge Zavatt's decision by a 2-to-1 vote and directed that a three-judge District Court be convened. Writing for the Second Circuit panel majority, Judge Paul R. Hays concluded that in light of then-recent Supreme Court caselaw applying the Equal Protection Clause to voter restrictions, Kramer's constitutional challenge could not be considered frivolous.Kramer v. Union Free School Dist. No. 15,  In a concurring opinion, Judge Irving R. Kaufman agreed that Kramer's challenge "cannot be said to be insubstantial on its face."Kramer, 379 F.2d at 495 (Kaufman, J., concurring). Chief Judge J. Edward Lumbard disagreed, in an opinion that began: "I dissent. There is no need for three judges to consider a claim so patently without any merit."Kramer, 379 F.2d at 495 (Lumbard, C.J., dissenting).
On remand, the three-judge District Court upheld Section 2012 by a 2-to-1 vote. Writing for the court, Circuit Judge Leonard Moore held that even in light of recent equal protection jurisprudence, "the selection of the parent and taxpayer groups [as authorized voters in school elections] would appear to be within the permissive limits of power still preserved by the state legislatures as specified by the Supreme Court and the New York Court of Appeals."Kramer v. Union Free School Dist. No. 15,  District Judge John R. Bartels joined Judge Moore's opinion. District Judge Jack Weinstein dissented, opinion that Section 2012 "impose[d] a forbidden property qualification for voting" in violation of the equal protection guarantee. Judge Weinstein observed that under Section 2012, the disqualification from voting in school elections applied not only to "young adults living with their parents," such as Kramer, but also to "older persons residing with their children, to boarders or lodgers, and to clergy, military and others living on tax exempt property."Kramer, 282 F. Supp. at 75, 82 (Weinstein, J. dissenting).
The Supreme Court noted probable jurisdiction of Kramer's appeal.Kramer v. Union Free School Dist. No. 15, . Oral argument was held on January 30, 1969. Osmond K. Fraenkel, long-time counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union, argued the case for petitioner Kramer. John P. Jehu, Associate Counsel of the New York State Education Department, argued for the school district.
Representation
 Osmond K. Fraenkel argued the cause for appellant, with Melvin L. Wulf and Murray A. Miller
 John P. Jehu argued the cause and filed briefs for appellees; Louis J. Lefkowitz (Attorney General) pro se, Samuel A. Hirshowitz (First Assistant Attorney General), Daniel M. Cohen (Assistant Attorney General), filed a brief for appellee the Attorney General of New York
Supreme Court decision
The Supreme Court reversed the District Court and held that by depriving Kramer and other would-be school election voters of the right to vote based on their lack of property ownership or parenthood, New York had violated the Equal Protection Clause.
The Court's decision was authored by Chief Justice Earl Warren and joined by Associate Justices William O. Douglas, William J. Brennan, Byron White, and Thurgood Marshall. Kramer was one of Chief Justice Warren's last opinions for the Court, handed down on June 16, 1969; Warren retired as Chief Justice one week later, following the conclusion of the Supreme Court's 1968 Term and the confirmation of his successor, Warren E. Burger. The vote in the case was 5 to 3, as no replacement for Justice Abe Fortas, who had resigned the previous month, had yet been confirmed.
Chief Justice Warren's opinion began by observing that under then-recent Equal Protection Clause caselaw, alleged infringements of the right to vote must survive careful judicial scrutiny, because "any unjustified discrimination in determining who may participate in political affairs or in the selection of public officials undermines the legitimacy of representative government." Therefore, to be upheld, a statute restricting the right to vote must survive "strict scrutiny" by being necessary to serve a "compelling state interest"; the mere "rationality" of the statute is not sufficient. Justice Warren also concluded that neither the fact that New York could have chosen to appoint rather than elect its school boards, nor the fact that school boards do not have "'general' legislative powers," affected the Court's analysis.
The Court concluded that "Section 2012 does not meet the exacting standard of precision we require of statutes which selectively distribute the franchise. The classifications of § 2012 permit inclusion of many persons who have, at best, a remote and indirect interest in school affairs and, on the other hand, exclude others who have a distinct and direct interest in the school [election] decisions."
Justice Stewart's dissent
Justice Potter Stewart, joined by Justices Hugo L. Black and John Marshall Harlan, dissented. According to Justice Stewart's dissenting opinion, a statute violates the Equal Protection Clause only if it rests on grounds wholly irrelevant to achieving the legislature's objectives. Under Lassiter v. Northampton County Board of Elections, Justice Stewart argued, states may impose restrictions on voting so long as they are reasonably designed to promote intelligent use of the franchise. Justice Stewart found that the requirements under Section 2012 were permissible under this standard, and asserted that the majority had not sufficiently explained why this case should be judged under a stricter standard.
Aftermath
In the wake of the decision, the New York State Legislature amended Education Law § 2012 to eliminate the restrictions that the Supreme Court had invalidated. Under New York law today, any United States citizen who has resided in a school district for more than 30 days is eligible to register and vote in the district's elections (except for the residents of New York's five largest cities, which do not have school board elections at all).
In the years after Kramer was handed down, the Burger Court cut back on the reach of the Kramer decision, though it has never been overruled. For example, in Salyer Land Co. v. Tulare Lake Basin Water Storage District,. the Court held that California could constitutionally limit voting in elections for boards of directors of water districts to landowners within the districts, with votes apportioned based on the assessed value of their land. In reaching this conclusion, the Court observed that the water district exercised "a special limited governmental function" that had "a disproportionate effect on landowners." In Ball v. James,. a closely divided Court reached the same conclusion with respect to elections in Arizona water reclamation districts.
Morris Kramer, now in his 70s, still lives in the same house in Atlantic Beach, New York as he did when he sued the school district more than 40 years ago, according to a recent interview in a community newspaper discussing his career as a "civic and environmental activist" on Long Island.Scott Brinton, "Voice of the people—Morris Kramer: For five decades, the civic and environmental activist has quietly protected the South Shore", Long Island Herald, Apr. 18 & May 2, 2012 part 1,
part 2.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 395
Reynolds v. Sims, 
Avery v. Midland County, 
Williams v. Rhodes, 
Benner v. Oswald, 592 F.2d 174 (3d Cir. 1974)
References
External links
Category:United States education case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:History of voting rights in the United States
Category:1969 in United States case law
Category:1969 in education
Category:Education in Nassau County, New York
Category:New York (state) elections
"""

From "KSR International Co. v. Teleflex Inc." ==> """
KSR Int'l Co. v. Teleflex Inc., 550 U.S. 398 (2007), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States concerning the issue of obviousness as applied to patent claims.KSR Int'l Co. v. Teleflex Inc., . 
Case history
Teleflex sued KSR International, claiming that one of KSR's products infringed Teleflex's patent. "Adjustable pedal assembly with electronic throttle control", 2001-05-29 on connecting an adjustable vehicle control pedal to an electronic throttle control. KSR argued that the combination of the two elements was obvious, and the claim was therefore not patentable. The district court ruled in favor of KSR, but the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit reversed in January 2005.
Oral arguments were heard by the Supreme Court on November 28, 2006. The petitioner, KSR, was represented by James W. Dabney and patent law academic John F. Duffy. Deputy solicitor general Thomas G. Hungar represented the government, which sided with the petitioner. Thomas C. Goldstein argued on behalf of the respondent, Teleflex.Oral Argument Transcript, 2006-11-28
Decision
On April 30, 2007, the Supreme Court unanimously reversed the judgment of the Federal Circuit, holding that the disputed claim 4 of the patent was obvious under the requirements of 35 U.S.C. §103, and that in "rejecting the District Court’s rulings, the Court of Appeals analyzed the issue in a narrow, rigid manner inconsistent with §103 and our precedents," referring to the Federal Circuit's application of the "teaching-suggestion-motivation" (TSM) test.
The "person having ordinary skill in the art" standard
Justice Kennedy emphasized that, while his opinion was directed at correcting the "errors of law made by the Court of Appeals in this case," it was necessary to reverse the Federal Circuit's decision in light of the Federal Circuit's misapplication of controlling Supreme Court law: "As our precedents make clear, however, the analysis need not seek out precise teachings directed to the specific subject matter of the challenged claim, for a court can take account of the inferences and creative steps that a person of ordinary skill in the art would employ." Kennedy's opinion stated, "A person of ordinary skill is also a person of ordinary creativity, not an automaton." He acknowledged that his description of a person having ordinary skill in the art (PHOSITA) does not necessarily conflict with Federal Circuit cases that described a PHOSITA as having "common sense" and who could find motivation "implicitly in the prior art."
Obviousness
When generally describing the obviousness test, the Court was largely uncontroversial:
However, when the standard was applied to the facts before the Court, the Court stated:
The court proposed several criteria that can be used to reject a patent claim for obviousness:
 Combining prior art elements according to known methods to yield predictable results
 Simple substitution of one known element for another to obtain predictable results
 Use of known technique to improve similar devices (methods, or products) in the same way
 "Obvious to try" – choosing from a finite number of identified, predictable solutions, with a reasonable expectation of success
 Known work in one field of endeavor may prompt variations of it for use in either the same field or a different one based on design incentives or other market forces if the variations are predictable to one of ordinary skill in the art.
Implications
A great deal of debate sprang up in the wake of the decision, particularly over the implications on the TSM test and concepts including "obvious to try," "person having ordinary skill in the art" and summary judgment. While not explicitly denouncing the TSM test, there is some harsh language in regard to it and the Federal Circuit's application of the test. The opinion stated that the application of the bar on patents claiming obvious subject matter "must not be confined within a test or formulation too constrained to serve its purpose." The opinion does denounce procedures that bar the use of "common sense" in multiple instances, including where "[r]igid preventative rules that deny factfinders recourse to common sense, however, are neither necessary under our case law nor consistent with it." Chief Judge Paul Michel of the Federal Circuit was quoted saying that by his interpretation, the TSM test remains part of the calculation of obviousness, "but it gives us forceful instruction on the manner in which the test is to be applied."More on the impact of KSR, Lawrence Ebert, SCOTUS blog, 2007-05-01
The KSR decision has been criticized as substituting the statutory requirement of non-obviousness for an easier-to-prove evidence of unpredictability.Christopher A. Cotropia, Predictability and Nonobviousness in Patent Law After KSR, 20 Mich. Telecomm. & Tech. L. Rev. 391 (2014)Tripathi, Shivnath, Obviousness Post KSR and Predictability (February 11, 2014). Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2394211 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2394211 or https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2394211Chi.-Kent J. Intell. Prop. 165 (2013-2014) Not All Patents are Created Equal: Bias against Predictable Arts Patents in the Post-KSR Landscape . https://heinonline.org/HOL/LandingPage?handle=hein.journals/jointpro13&div=11&id=&page= https://sughrue.gjassets.com/content/uploads/2021/03/Implementing-a-Predictable-Obviousness-Standard-Post-KSR.pdf 
A statistical studyMojibi, A. (2010). "AN EMPIRICAL STUDY OF THE EFFECT OF KSR V. TELEFLEX ON THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT’S PATENT VALIDITY JURISPRUDENCE " Albany Law Journal of Science and Technology 20(3): 559-596. noted that there was a multi-fold increase in the percentage of patents found invalid on trials both on the basis of novelty and of non-obviousness before and after the certiorari in KSR. These percentages declined to almost pre-KSR levels in the two years following KSR.
In Leapfrog Enterprises, Inc. v. Fisher-Price, Inc., the Federal Circuit began applying the KSR case, holding U.S. Patent 5,813,861 invalid as obvious. A KSR-style obviousness analysis was applied in Perfect Web Technologies, Inc. v. InfoUSA, Inc..
The USPTO Board of Patent Appeals and Interferences (BPAI) cites KSR in about 60% of its decisions related to obviousness irrespective of whether it affirms a patent examiner's rejection or reverses the rejection.Nowotarski, Mark, “Using KSR to Overcome an Obviousness Rejection”, Intellectual Property Today, September 2007 Overall reversal rates have stayed about the same, indicating that KSR has not suddenly made all inventions obvious. The BPAI is emphasizing that examiners must still give strong reasons for their rejections. The USPTO management has backed this emphasis up with a memorandum to all technology directors instructing them that when making an obviousness rejection "it remains necessary to identify the reason why a person of ordinary skill in the art would have combined the prior art elements in the manner claimed."Focarino, Margaret, Deputy Commissioner of Operations, USTPO "Supreme Court decision on KSR Int'l. Co., v. Teleflex, Inc.", internal memo to USPTO technology art unit directors, May 3, 2006
See also
 Graham v. John Deere Co. (1966)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 550
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States patent case law
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:Auto parts
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Kumho Tire Co. v. Carmichael" ==> """
Kumho Tire Co. v. Carmichael, 526 U.S. 137 (1999), is a United States Supreme Court case that applied the Daubert standard to expert testimony from non-scientists.
Background 
Patrick Carmichael was driving his minivan on July 6, 1993, when the right rear tire blew out.  One of the passengers in the vehicle died, and others were severely injured.  Three months later, the Carmichaels sued the manufacturer of the tire, claiming that the tire was defective and the defect caused the accident.  The Carmichaels' case rested largely on testimony from a tire failure expert.  
The tire failure expert relied on features of tire technology that the manufacturer did not dispute, as well as background facts about the particular tire on the Carmichaels' van.  The expert's conclusion that a defect in the tire caused the accident rested on certain observations about the tire that Kumho Tire vigorously disputed.  Kumho also disagreed with certain aspects of the tire expert's methodology, and asked the federal district court hearing the case to exclude it under Rule 702 of the Federal Rules of Evidence.  
The district court took its cue from Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, which had solidified a gatekeeping role for trial judges in admitting expert testimony.  Under Daubert, certain factors contribute to the reliability, and hence the admissibility, of expert testimony, one of which is the general validity of the expert's methods.  The district court found the tire expert's methods not to be scientifically valid, and hence excluded his testimony.  This resulted in a conclusion that Kumho Tire would prevail.  The Carmichaels appealed to the Eleventh Circuit.
The Eleventh Circuit reversed the district court's ruling.  It reasoned that Daubert was expressly limited only to scientific expert testimony and did not apply to "skill- or experience-based observation."  The tire expert's testimony rested on such unscientific "observation and experience", and so the Eleventh Circuit reasoned the district court should have made a different ruling based on their legal reasoning over Rule 702 without the Daubert gloss.  Kumho Tire asked the Supreme Court to review whether Daubert applied solely to scientific evidence.
Majority opinion
The Court found in the text of Rule 702, a codification of Daubert, a gatekeeping function for federal trial judges who had to determine whether expert scientific testimony was admissible in a federal trial.  But Rule 702 applies to "scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge."  "This language makes no relevant distinction between 'scientific' knowledge and 'technical' or 'other specialized' knowledge."  Although Daubert dealt only with scientific knowledge, that was the nature of the case, and it did not stray beyond the facts of that case.
The Court observed that the line between "scientific" and "technical" knowledge is not always clear.  "Pure scientific theory itself may depend for its development upon observation and properly engineered machinery.  And conceptual efforts to distinguish the two are unlikely to produce clear legal lines capable of application in particular cases."  If the line between "scientific" and "technical" knowledge was not clear, then it would be difficult for federal trial judges to determine when they were to perform Daubert'''s gatekeeping function and when to apply some other threshold test the Court might craft for applying Rule 702.  Furthermore, the Court saw no "convincing need" to draw a distinction between "scientific" and "technical" knowledge, because both kinds of knowledge would typically be outside the grasp of the average juror.  Accordingly, the Court held that the gatekeeping function described in Daubert applied to all expert testimony proffered under Rule 702.Daubert had mentioned four factors that district courts could take into account in making the gatekeeping assessment—whether a theory has been tested, whether an idea has been subjected to scientific peer review or published in scientific journals, the rate of error involved in the technique, and even general acceptance, in the right case.  In the context of other kinds of expert knowledge, the Court conceded, other factors might be relevant, and so it allowed district judges to take other factors into account when performing the gatekeeping function contemplated by Daubert.  These additional factors would, of course, depend on the particular kind of expert testimony involved in a particular case.  Equally as important, because federal appeals courts review the evidentiary rulings of district courts for abuse of discretion, the Court reiterated that district courts have a certain latitude to determine how they will assess the reliability of expert testimony as a subsidiary component of the decision to admit the evidence at all.
Applying that standard to the evidence proffered by the Carmichaels' tire expert, the Court concluded that the district court correctly refused to admit the expert's testimony.  The district court had to determine whether the tire expert's methods could reliably determine what had caused the tire on the Carmichaels' van to explode.  The expert's experience as a tire engineer wasn't the problem—the expert had worked for ten years at Michelin.  The fact that visual inspection of tires was generally a reliable method wasn't an issue either, because the issue before the court was specific to the tire on the Carmichaels' van.  But the expert said that his inspection of the tire led to the conclusion that a defect caused the tire to explode because he did not see evidence of other causes.  "Nothing in either Daubert or the Federal Rules of Evidence requires a district court to admit opinion evidence that is connected to existing data only by the ipse dixit'' of the expert [i.e., only by the statement of the expert himself]."  The district court acted within its discretion to exclude the evidence proffered by the tire expert in light of these concerns.  Accordingly, the Supreme Court reversed the Eleventh Circuit's decision to overrule the district court.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 526
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
External links
  Northwestern University School of Journalism
  Brief of the Solicitor General
  Amicus Brief, Washington Legal Foundation
Category:United States expert witness case law
Category:Federal Rules of Evidence case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Tires
Category:1999 in United States case law
Category:Kumho Asiana Group
"""

From "Kunz v. New York" ==> """
Kunz v. New York, 340 U.S. 290 (1951), was a United States Supreme Court case finding a requirement mandating a permit to speak on religious issues in public was unconstitutional. It was argued October 17, 1950, and decided January 15, 1951, 8–1. Chief Justice Vinson delivered the opinion for the Court. Justice Black and Justice Frankfurter concurred in the result only. Justice Jackson dissented. 
Kunz helped establish that government restrictions on speech must be narrowly tailored so that they do not inappropriately limit expression protected by the First Amendment. In Kunz, the Court held that laws giving public officials broad discretion to restrain speech about religious issues in advance are an invalid prior restraint in violation of the First Amendment. The Court reversed the 1948 conviction of Baptist minister Carl J. Kunz for violating a New York City ordinance that prohibited religious services on public streets without a permit from the police commissioner. Although the ordinance specified no grounds for refusing permission to speak, Kunz was denied permits in 1947 and 1948 after he was accused of “scurrilous attacks” on Catholics and Jews under a previous permit. Kunz was arrested for speaking without a permit in Columbus Circle.
Kunz's conviction for violating the ordinance was upheld by the Appellate Part of the Court of Special Sessions and by the New York Court of Appeals. The Supreme Court said that New York's ordinance was too broad because it provided no standards that an administrator could use to determine who ought to receive permits to speak about religious issues. 
In dissent, Justice Robert Jackson said Kunz had used “fighting words” that were not protected by the First Amendment (see unprotected speech). He also criticized the Court for striking down the permit scheme when it had, in Feiner v. New York (1951), allowed local officials the discretion to arrest volatile speakers during their presentations.
See also
Clear and present danger
Imminent lawless action
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 340
Shouting fire in a crowded theater
Threatening the president of the United States
Abrams v. United States, 
Brandenburg v. Ohio, 
Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 
Feiner v. New York, 
Hess v. Indiana, 
Korematsu v. United States, 
Masses Publishing Co. v. Patten, (1917)
Sacher v. United States,  
Schenck v. United States, 
Terminiello v. Chicago, 
Whitney v. California, 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1951 in United States case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:Baptist Christianity in New York (state)
Category:Columbus Circle
Category:Antisemitism in New York (state)
Category:Anti-Catholicism in the United States
"""

From "KVOS v. Associated Press" ==> """
KVOS v. Associated Press, 299 U.S. 269 (1936), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held an association of newspapers cannot sue collectively to raise their projected damages above the minimum damages required for federal jurisdiction when only individual newspapers are parties to unfair competition.
 References 
External links
Category:1936 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
"""

From "Kwong Hai Chew v. Colding" ==> """
Kwong Hai Chew v. Colding, 344 U.S. 590 (1953), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a lawful permanent resident, who departs from and returns to the country as a seaman on an American ship, retains procedural due process rights and cannot be deported under 8 CFR § 175.57(b) without a hearing..
Background
Kwong Hai Chew was a Chinese seaman who was admitted to the United States in 1945. He married a U.S. citizen, resided in New York, and obtained a suspension of deportation after proving his good moral character for the preceding five years. In 1949, he was admitted to permanent residence in the United States as of January 10, 1945.
Chew served with credit in the United States Merchant Marine in World War II and never had difficulty with governmental authorities. He filed a petition for naturalization in April 1950, and he was screened and passed by the Coast Guard for employment as a seaman on a merchant vessel in November 1950. That same month, he became employed as chief steward on the S.S. Sir John Franklin, a ship registered in the United States with its home port in New York City.
The S.S. Sir John Franklin set off on a voyage, which included calls at several foreign ports in Asia. Chew remained aboard the ship during the voyage. However, as the ship arrived in San Francisco in March 1951, the immigration inspector ordered him "temporarily excluded," under 8 CFR § 175.57, as an alien whose entry was deemed prejudicial to the public interest.
When the ship arrived in New York on March 29, the government continued Chew's "temporary exclusion" and did not permit him to land. On March 30, Chew petitioned the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York for a writ of habeas corpus, alleging that his detention was arbitrary and capricious and a denial of due process of law in violation of the Fifth Amendment. Attorney General J. Howard McGrath, purporting to act under 8 CFR § 175.57(b), ordered Chew's "temporary exclusion be made permanent" and denied him a hearing before a Board of Special Inquiry. After the Attorney General denied Chew all information as to the nature and cause of any accusations against him and all opportunity to be heard in opposition to the order for his "exclusion," Chew was detained at Ellis Island "for safe-keeping on behalf of the master of the S.S. Sir John Franklin."
The District Court issued but subsequently dismissed a writ of habeas corpus, and the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed the dismissal on appeal. Both of the courts relied upon Knauff v. Shaughnessy (1950) in their decisions. Both courts also denied Chew's applications for bail.
Supreme Court
Kwong Hai Chew filed for a petition for a writ of certiorari to the Supreme Court. The Court granted certiorari, agreeing to hear the case.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Harold Hitz Burton wrote the opinion of the court, issued on February 9, 1953. The ruling reversed the Second Circuit's decision and held that the Attorney General lacked the authority under 8 CFR § 175.57(b) to order the exclusion and deportation of a lawful permanent resident "without notice of the charges against him and without opportunity to be heard in opposition to them." The ruling also held that an alien who "is a lawful permanent resident of the United States and also is a seaman who has gone outside of the United States on a vessel of American registry, with its home port in the United States, and, upon completion of such voyage, has returned on such vessel to the United States and is still on board" retains his rights to procedural due process under the Fifth Amendment of the Constitution.Kwong Hai Chew v. Colding, 344 U.S. at 600.
References
External links
 Washington University Supreme Court Database
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:History of immigration to the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
"""

From "Kyles v. Whitley" ==> """
Kyles v. Whitley, 514 U.S. 419 (1995), is a United States Supreme Court case that held that a prosecutor has an affirmative duty to disclose evidence favorable to a defendant pursuant to Brady v. Maryland and United States v. Bagley.
 Background 
An elderly woman was shot in her temple after doing some food shopping at a Schwegmann Brothers in New Orleans, Louisiana. The gunman took her keys and drove away. James Joseph, an informant to the police, claimed to have purchased the car from Curtis Kyles on the day of the murder. Fearing that the car he purchased was fruit of the crime, he called the police to inform them of the circumstances. The informant’s name had changed from James Joseph in his first communication to the police to Joseph Banks, and finally to Joseph Wallace (also known as Beanie.) Also his story changed when he met with police in-person. He provided incriminating character evidence about the defendant. The defendant appealed his conviction for first degree murder claiming that the state knew of evidence favorable to him before and during trial that it failed to disclose. The state supreme court remanded the case for an evidentiary hearing on the defendant’s claims of newly discovered evidence. The trial court, after review, denied relief. 
The state supreme court denied petitioner’s application for discretionary review. A petition for habeas corpus was then filed in district court, which denied the petition. The court of appeals affirmed by a divided vote. The Supreme Court granted cert and reversed and ordered a new trial holding that the net effect of the evidence withheld by the State in this case raised a reasonable probability that its disclosure would have produced a different result. A search of his house revealed the following evidence: purse in the trash, dog food, receipt, gun by the stove, holster and bullets. The defense tried to show that Beanie had set him up and planted the evidence for the purpose of earning money and removing an obstacle from a girl of his romantic interest. Further, defense contended that police were incompetent and the eyewitnesses were mistaken and there were alibi witnesses.
Kyles was convicted of murder. Beanie was the main person who originally inculpated Kyles even though later there were many eyewitnesses who identified Kyles as the murderer. The police/state never disclosed to the defense inconsistent statements made by Beanie, statements made by Beanie where he incriminated himself, inconsistent descriptions made by the eyewitnesses, and several other pieces of potentially exculpatory evidence.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court held that Kyles should be granted a new trial. The Court noted Brady v. Maryland (1963), which held that the suppression by the prosecution of evidence favorable to an accused upon request violates due process where the evidence is material either to guilt or to punishment, irrespective of the good faith or bad faith of the prosecution. 
The Court also discussed United States v. Bagley (1985) and the reasonable probability of a different result standard. “The question is not whether the defendant would more likely than not have received a different verdict with the evidence, but whether in its absence he received a fair trial, understood as a trial resulting in a verdict worthy of confidence.” It noted that this test was not a sufficiency of the evidence test. “A defendant need not demonstrate that after discounting the inculpatory evidence in light of the undisclosed evidence, there would not have been enough left to convict." Finally, the Court noted that the evidence must be considered in whole, not piece by piece. Ultimately, the Court found that based on the evidence that was not brought to light, a reasonable juror could have found Kyles not guilty.Kyles v. Whitley, 514 U.S. 419 (1995)
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 514
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 References 
 Further reading 
External links
Category:Brady material case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1995 in United States case law
Category:20th century in New Orleans
